S/PV.7675

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7675th meeting

Monday, 25 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Mizushina
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea
Letter dated 6 April 2016 from the representatives of Angola, China and Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2016/321)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-11532 (E)
*1611532*

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

years that the Security Council has dedicated a meeting
to the subject.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf
of Guinea
Letter dated 6 April 2016 from the
representatives of Angola, China and Senegal
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2016/321)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Belgium, Brazil, Cyprus, Germany,
Greece, Kazakhstan, Italy, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Portugal, South Africa, Sweden, Thailand,
Togo and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations;
and Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/321, which contains a letter dated
6 April 2016 from the representatives of Angola, China
and Senegal to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zerihoun.
Mr. Zerihoun: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Security
Council on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. As the Council
is well aware, the issue of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea is regularly covered in the
biannual briefings by the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General for the Central and West African
regions. However, this is the first time in almost five
2/42

25/04/2016

Over the past few years, there has been a steady
decline in the number of recorded incidents of piracy,
armed robbery at sea and other illicit activities in the Gulf
of Guinea. However, insecurity at sea remains a source
of concern in the region. In the first quarter of 2016,
the International Maritime Bureau’s Piracy Reporting
Centre recorded six attacks and six attempted attacks
in the Gulf of Guinea, including nine in Nigeria, one
in Côte d’Ivoire and two within the territorial waters
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Cases of the
hijacking of vessels off the coast of Nigeria for political
purposes by the self-described Biafra militants, and
kidnappings along the coasts of Western and Central
Africa, have also recently been recorded.
The Council may recall that, following an upsurge
in incidents of piracy, armed robbery at sea and other
illicit activities in the Gulf of Guinea, its resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) encouraged the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission (GGC) to
develop a comprehensive regional anti-piracy strategy
for the Gulf with United Nations support.
As a result, the ECOWAS, ECCAS and GGC
Summit of Heads of State and Government of on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
was held in Yaoundé in June 2013, with the support
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa. During the Summit, the Heads of State
and Government committed to working towards the
promotion of peace, security and stability in the Gulf of
Guinea. Notably, the Summit adopted a memorandum
of understanding on maritime safety and security in the
Central and West African regions that set objectives and
areas of cooperation; a code of conduct; and a political
declaration on enhancing cooperation in the Gulf of
Guinea. The Summit also agreed on the creation of the
Gulf of Guinea Interregional Coordination Centre to
implement the regional strategy for maritime safety and
security, and established a clear division of labour that
charged the regional organizations with responsibility
for strategy and coordination, and the States with
responsibility for operations.
The Interregional Coordination Centre was
inaugurated in Yaoundé on 11 September 2014 to
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.7675

coordinate all operations with regard to the suppression
of piracy and other criminal activities in the Gulf of
Guinea. This marked an important and positive step
in the cooperation between West and Central Africa
in the fight against piracy and crimes at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea region. The Interregional Cooperation
Centre is expected to coordinate two regional maritime
coordination centres: the Regional Maritime Security
Centre for Central Africa (CRESMAC), located in
Pointe-Noire, Republic of the Congo, and the yet-to-be
established regional maritime security centre for West
Africa, to be located in Abidjan.

budgetary resources is expected to come from bilateral
and international partners. For that reason, the Heads
of State and Government of ECCAS, ECOWAS and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission have agreed in principle on
the organization of a future conference of partners and
third-party contributors in Yaoundé. The conference
is expected to be held immediately after the meeting
of the G7++ and Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which
is scheduled to be held on 6 and 7 June in Lisbon.
The United Nations is committed to assisting in this
endeavour through its regional offices in Central and
West Africa.

The regional maritime coordination centre for
Central Africa has been operational since its official
launch in October 2014, while the multinational and
regional maritime coordination centres are at different
stages of operationalization. However, despite its
inauguration in 2014, the Interregional Coordination
Centre itself is not fully operational due to staffing,
funding and other logistical constraints.

Tackling international crimes of trafficking, piracy
and theft requires a combination of efforts and an
understanding that suppression, while necessary, is
not sufficient. Those who commit illegal acts at sea
are highly adaptable, increasingly sophisticated in
their methods and often well-informed. This requires
national, regional and global efforts to be flexible and
proactive. Initiatives aimed at addressing socioeconomic
development and lack of job opportunities are
also required to provide prospects to marginalized
populations that may be involved in piracy activities,
most notably young people.

An extraordinary meeting of thed Heads of State
and Government of ECCAS, ECOWAS and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission was held in Yaoundé on 12 February
to address the challenges in the operationalization of
the Interregional Coordination Centre. Both the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and for Central Africa attended the meeting on
behalf of the United Nations. The meeting reviewed the
staff recruitment and procedures of the Interregional
Coordination Centre, the budget for the second half of
this year and for 2017, as well as a proposed programme
of activities.
With regard to the budget, the meeting
recommended that member States contribute 40
percent of the necessary resources, while bilateral and
international partners would contribute the rest. The
Summit also recommended that ECCAS, ECOWAS,
the Gulf of Guinea Commission and their member
States expedite the disbursement of funds to allow for
the operationalization of the International Criminal
Court between July and December this year. Moreover,
it was proposed that additional sources of funding be
explored through the taxation of beneficiaries of the
ports situated in the Gulf of Guinea region.
The mobilization of resources remains a key
priority for ensuring the effective operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, particularly
given that a significant component of the Centre’s

Ultimately, countering the current threats will
require a combination of capacities, including qualitative
improvements in the collection of intelligence; the
sharing and improved analysis of intelligence; the
enhancement of capacities in both the infrastructure and
training of local law-enforcement agencies of the Gulf
of Guinea countries; and the establishment of effective
customs and border-control systems throughout the
subregion. It is also important to avoid the duplication
of international capacity-building efforts with respect
to maritime safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea.
The G7++ and the Friends of the Gulf of Guinea groups
have been serving as useful coordination platforms in
this regard.
Finally and most importantly, the African Union
is scheduled to hold an extraordinary summit on
maritime security and development for Africa on
15 and 16 October in Lomé. We believe that the summit
will provide a unique opportunity for the countries
of the region to renew their commitment to jointly
enhancing the maritime security architecture in the
Gulf of Guinea.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

16-115323/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2016/4.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should like
to welcome the initiative of the Chinese presidency to
convene, together with the Senegalese and Angolan
delegations, this debate to discuss a topic of great
importance and scope in a global context characterized
by key threats to our collective security. Quite clearly,
the issue of privacy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea is a source of great concern to the
countries of West and Central Africa, be they coastal or
land-locked States. However, the issue necessarily has
an unquestionable international dimension, given its
underlying economic and geostrategic ramifications.
The Gulf of Guinea is among the regions of the
world that best reflects the linkages among current
global challenges. That part of the African continent’s
Atlantic coast is a crossroad of international maritime
traffic owing to its location at the heart of networks of
routes linking Africa, the Americas, Europe and Asia.
However, above all the Gulf of Guinea is an area replete
with diverse economic potential. Added to that are the
many other resources of the continent, all of which
attract the interest of both legal economic actors and the
covetousness of criminals and traffickers of all types,
who increasingly are developing various means that
very often surpass the individual national capacities of
the States of the region.
Reports available to us on this issue point to the
fact that, over the past decade, the breadth of the
phenomenon of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea has increased, thereby making it a significant
obstacle to maritime activity by the countries of the
region. Nonetheless, those activities significantly drive
the economies of those countries. In recent years, the
scope of organized maritime crime in the Gulf of Guinea
has expanded to a worrying degree, no longer being
limited to the petroleum sector. Acts of piracy, at times
taking the form of increasingly bold and sophisticated
4/42

25/04/2016

raids on the high seas, are now being compounded by
armed robbery, illicit fishing, human trafficking and
trafficking in drugs, weapons and human beings, as
well as in counterfeit medications and toxic waste. That
further complicates the increasing efforts of the States
of the region, with various international partners at their
side. That is reflected in the various initiatives taken
over the past five years in response to this challenge.
As appropriately mentioned by the Assistant
Secretary-General, whom I thank for his briefing here
today, a Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
was held at Yaoundé in June 2013 under the auspices
of the three relevant subregional organizations. The
meeting provided genuine momentum and was a
tangible reflection of the collective commitment of the
States of the region to address this growing threat. The
process that led to the meeting illustrated the various
stages of regional commitment and the international
commitment underpinning it, including through the
United Nations by way of the adoption of resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012), as well as presidential
statement S/PRST/2013/13, which the Council adopted
on the heels of the Yaoundé Summit.
The challenge before us is to establish and
implement an institutional legal framework that will
make it possible to undertake an effective, coordinated
response by the countries of the region, as clearly
emphasized at the Summit. Following the Summit,
a package of stragic documents was adopted on the
issue of maritime safety and security in the Gulf of
Guinea, including the Yaoundé Declaration of the
Heads of State and Government of Central and West
African States on Maritime Safety and Security in the
their Common Maritime Domain, the Code of Conduct
Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and
Central Africa, and the memorandum of understanding
among the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
(GGC) on maritime safety and security in the Central
and West Africa maritime space.
In view, on the one hand, of the progress made
since the Council’s previous meeting on this issue (see
S/PV.6723) and, on the other hand, the situation on the
ground, we have reason to be satisfied with the ongoing
efforts of Gulf of Guinea States and subregional
organizations, which have made substantial progress
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

in the establishment of institutions and the adoption
of legal frameworks on the security architecture
for maritime security. For example, the GGC and
ECOWAS finalized their regional maritime strategies,
respectively in August 2013 and in March 2014, under
the Yaoundé Declaration, which requested those entities
“to develop and adopt a regional strategy on the
fight against piracy, armed robbery and other illegal
activities committed at sea, in line with the African
Integrated Strategy for the Seas and Oceans 2050.
The Yaoundé process also is proceeding with the
gradual implementation of the pillars of the interregional
architecture on maritime safety and security that serve
as the axes for the coordination and harmonization
of regional policies and initiatives envisaged during
the Summit. Moreover, it must be recognized that
the operationalization of that architecture is based on
certain conditions that have yet to be met, despite the
achievements we have often emphasized. That pertains
in particular to the strengthening of coordination and
the harmonization of legislation on the subject, which
in this configuration are made to both the interstate and
interregional levels. Furthermore, we note the existence
of barriers to the delicate question, not yet fully
resolved, of the delimitation of maritime boundaries,
which can be an element of tension in the relations
among the various States bordering the Gulf.
In addition, funding is a central element in the
effectiveness and the operation of the entire undertaking.
It should therefore be noted that, in addition to the need
to mobilize and pool the resources of Gulf of Guinea
States and subregional organizations, the support of
technical and financial partners is indispensable for
the consolidation and the sustainability of the nascent
integrated maritime safety systems. In that regard, it is
appropriate to commend the assistance on the technical
and financial fronts on the prat of partners at the
bilateral and multilateral levels in support of State and
regional initiatives against piracy and armed robbery.
On that score we especially wish to acknowledge the
contributions of the Special Trust Fund for Maritime
Security in West and Central Africa, established by the
International Maritime Organization.
In spite of the persistence of many challenges,
regional mobilization in response to the threat posed
by piracy and armed robbery at sea should be seen as
a manifestation of the commitment of the States of
the Gulf of Guinea to assume their responsibilities in

S/PV.7675

the security sphere. Moreover, security in the region
must be understood holistically, as the main causes
and drivers of maritime insecurity are to be found on
dry land. In truth, maritime crime is often fuelled by
vast networks of illegal activities that are progressively
being built on a foundation of poor governance, extreme
poverty and socio-political violence. Therefore, we
consider it essential to stress the links between piracy
and transnational organized crime, given that this
scourge is one of the major challenges that threaten the
stability of countries in the region.
Moreover, given the particular security situation in
West and Central Africa, we should consider seriously
the possibility of the existence of connections between
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the financing of the
activities of terrorist groups operating in the region.
It is also essential to consider other issues related to
maritime safety and security, including the management
and control of marine resources.
In the fishing sector, pressure seems to be building
on available fishery resources — due mainly to the
increasing number of fishing vessels that are operating
and to illegal fishing. We can see that the scarcity of fish
stocks tends to push small-scale, traditional fishers to
ignore maritime borders and national State legislation.
All of those factors constitute potential sources of
conflict. It is necessary to strengthen policies and
partnerships for the rational exploitation of fishery
resources and for the governance and sharing of
transboundary marine resources, taking into account
the specificities of the States.
It is because of those various but interlinked
security issues that the second Dakar International
Forum on Peace and Security in Africa, held in 2015,
devoted a plenary session to maritime safety. That
session helped to facilitate strategic dialogue among the
participants, to deepen their reflection on an integrated
approach to threats on the continent, and to identify the
most appropriate responses to current challenges. We
are therefore of the view that the relevant guidelines
arising from the Dakar Forum deserve to be endorsed
by the African States and actively supported by the
international community. I will mention just eight of
most salient points:
First, the African approach must take into account,
over and above security, the environmental, touristic
and economic dimensions. Second, it is important to
have an inclusive development policy that benefits

16-115325/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

communities, youth and women. Third, we must
define the independent African priorities and the need
for the support of international partners. Fourth, we
must strengthen the legal and judicial capacities of
States. Fifth, support must be given to programmes
and institutions, not to mention the implementation
of the Yaoundé process. Sixth, information should be
collected and shared. Seventh, training and instruction
on maritime issues are necessary. Finally, a maritime
network should be created for a continental response and
the development of a potential maritime surveillance
and response.
As we can see, the dynamic is well under way on
the African continent. Moreover, I reiterate that the
African Union is preparing an extraordinary summit on
maritime security, to be held in Lomé in October. The
summit will, among other things, address the challenges
and threats to maritime security, drug trafficking,
money-laundering, illegal fishing and international
cooperation. Senegal, of course, will participate in the
meeting and actively work to ensure that it promotes
a qualitative leap in the implementation process of a
security architecture and operational maritime safety
in Africa, and particularly in the Gulf of Guinea.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola is very honoured to
co-sponsor, with China and Senegal, this open debate
on piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea. The insights provided by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Tayé-Brook Zerihoun were most valuable in
outlining the subject matter we are considering in this
important debate.
The Gulf of Guinea and waters beyond play a crucial
strategic role in the Atlantic. They are at the centre of
the main waterway connecting Europe and Africa and
towards the western hemisphere. Historically, they
were the key factor in the establishment in the sixteenth
century of the first economic globalization, with deepseated consequences. The roots of the problem we are
discussing today — piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea — took hold in the region for a long
period of time. In the pathway of world trade that fed
the markets of the Americas with a labour force and
supplied Europe with precious goods from the New
World and from the East, piracy emerged at that time
as a side effect of the intense trade across the region
and as a very profitable economic activity, frequently
sponsored by States.
6/42

25/04/2016

Since that time, a strategic and organic link has
been established between the two shores of the Atlantic.
Centred in the Gulf of Guinea, it has gained renewed
prominence in recent decades with the emergence in
the region of security threats and transnational crime
and criminality — a reality requiring an integrated and
collective response from States bordering the South
Atlantic. In fact, the countries of the eastern shore of
the South Atlantic, besides being the source of transit
of criminal activities, most notably drug trafficking,
that resonate in the Gulf of Guinea and beyond, also
face impending threats of the possible disruption of
trade routes.
The Gulf of Guinea is the main access to the world
for the countries at its shores, as well as for landlocked
ones behind them, in access to the Atlantic for the
import and export of goods and services. The seas of the
Gulf of Guinea currently face serious security threats.
Vulnerable maritime routes and porous land borders
allow an increase in transnational crime, piracy, armed
robbery, illegal fishing, human trafficking, illegal
immigration, the smuggling of drugs and environmental
crimes. In the current decade, such activities have
caused enormous losses to the African maritime sector,
hindering trade and the continent’s development.
Given the complex ramifications of maritime
insecurity, it is imperative that the international
community mobilize and harmonize its efforts to find
lasting solutions. By today’s adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/4, on the issue of piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea, the Security
Council is sending a strong signal of the international
community’s concern and resolve to address the
threat posed by such a phenomenon to international
navigation, security and the economic development of
the countries of the region. With respect to the potential
links with terrorists groups in West Africa and the
Sahel, and the conditions necessary for the durable
eradication of such a scourge — namely, the attainment
of regional peace and security — we need to strengthen
State institutions, promote economic and social
development, respect human rights and the rule of law,
and coordinate international assistance in support of
national and regional efforts to assist Member States in
addressing such threats.
Countries bordering the Gulf of Guinea have joined
efforts. In 2009, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) adopted a maritime security
strategy, establishing information-sharing, community
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.7675

surveillance and asset-management mechanisms, while
strengthening national legal frameworks and training.
ECCAS set up a Regional Centre for Maritime Security
for Central Africa in Yaoundé, dividing its maritime
space into zones and instituting joint patrols. However,
the limited capacity of ECCAS to respond to the growing
insecurity challenges remains a major constraint.
In 2012, a new maritime zone was established under
ECCAS supervision in order to upgrade the capacity to
face the threat.

complementary strategies among the countries of the
region through sharing information and establishing
closer regional and international cooperation. As the
Conference’s outcome, a declaration on maritime and
energy security was adopted, in which the participants
emphasized, inter alia, the importance of establishing
partnerships at the regional and international levels,
including technical assistance, training, joint exercises
and the adoption of feasible strategies and plans
of action.

Angola, with a long maritime coast that is vital
to its security and economic development, is deeply
committed to the African Union 2050 Integrated
Maritime Strategy. Designed to be operative until
2050, the strategy recognizes the potential of the
maritime sector to promote economic development,
boost trade and improve the living conditions of more
than 700 million Africans in the continent. Through its
representation in international maritime organizations,
Angola has been actively involved in discussions and
in the implementation of measures adopted by the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) to enhance
maritime security, particularly in the Gulf of Guinea.

Although tangible measures to enhance maritime
security have been adopted, much more needs to be done
by the countries bordering the Gulf of Guinea, which
still face huge challenges. We believe that, by working
in a spirit of cooperation and solidarity, it will be
possible to overcome the challenges of piracy and other
security threats affecting the Gulf of Guinea. Angola
stands ready to work with countries of the region and
with regional and international organizations towards
such endeavours.

Moreover, Angola has joined a number of
arrangements dealing with the issue, including
within the framework of ECCAS, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and the Southern African Development
Community. Angola signed the Declaration of the
Heads of State and Government of Central and West
Africa on Maritime Safety and Security in Their
Common Maritime Domain. It is also a signatory State
of the memorandum of understanding among ECCAS,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission on maritime safety and
security in Central and West Africa, and is a signatory
to the Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa, adopted
at Yaoundé. In line with resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012), in March 2015 Angola and the IMO organized a
regional meeting to advance the implementation of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct.
Still translating the importance it attaches to that
issue, Angola organized, in cooperation with other
partners, the International Conference on Maritime
and Energy Security, in October 2015. The meeting
focused on capacity-building and a holistic approach
in implementing African maritime security strategies
and highlighted the importance of integrated and

We are pleased to note the African Union’s plan to
hold an extraordinary summit on maritime security this
year in Lomé with a view to establishing an African
strategy on maritime security. Angola advocates and
promotes the adoption of maritime security strategies
consistent with the prevailing situation in the Gulf
of Guinea and Southern Africa and in response to its
international repercussions.
Finally, we are of the view that the Security
Council’s adoption of the presidential statement on
peace consolidation in West Africa and on piracy and
armed robbery at sea (S/PRST/2016/4) and the points
of view expressed in this debate by the larger United
Nations membership will positively resonate with the
aspirations of the peoples of the region for well-being
and development.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes the
fact that the Security Council is considering piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea after
some time, and we hope that today’s meeting will
provide additional impetus to the effective eradication
of that problem. The insight provided by the Assistant
Secretary-General is indeed very helpful in that regard.
The subject of our discussion has a multifaceted
nature, and it deserves our full attention, considering
its social and economic implications, as well as
legal complexities, coupled with safety and security
impacts. There is no doubt that maritime piracy poses

16-115327/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

a threat to the international peace and security in West
Africa. Therefore, the Security Council’s addressing
it constitutes an integral part of a comprehensive,
cohesive and broad-based approach by the United
Nations in dealing with this challenge.
While we fully align ourselves with the statement
to be made later on behalf of the European Union, I
would like to make the following points.
According to the International Maritime Bureau,
West African waters are among the world’s areas most
affected by piracy and armed robbery at sea. Even if the
recent official statistical data point to a decrease in the
number of attacks in the area, this problem should not
be underestimated, in particular considering that, given
the information from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, ship owners tend to withhold reports
on such accidents, owing to the risk of an increase in
insurance policy premiums.
To elaborate credible mechanisms to curb the
phenomenon, it is critical to differentiate between the
forms that the threat takes off of the East and West coasts
of the African continent. Unlike in the Gulf of Aden,
the tactics of pirates in the Gulf of Guinea have evolved
from attacking vessels on the high seas to relocating
their activities to internal and territorial waters. Under
those circumstances, international naval forces face a
legal limitation on responding to such pirate attacks.
At the same time, the authorities of coastal States are
often unable, or unwilling, to effectively prosecute
those responsible. It is in that unsettling context that for
over a decade, pirates in the Gulf of Guinea have turned
into well-armed and sophisticated criminal gangs with
floating bases for their attacks.
Moreover, piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea have close ties with other perils
threatening the region. The current situation of virtually
uncontrolled crossings of maritime borders can be
exploited by terrorist groups, as demonstrated by recent
terrorist attacks in the West African region. Piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea is, above all, an international
problem that requires a coherent national approach on
the part of each West African country.
We strongly believe that only consolidated efforts
can put an end to piracy. In that regard, Ukraine calls
upon the United Nations Member States to ensure
full compliance with the Security Council resolutions
and other documents related to the implementation
of regional strategies for ensuring maritime security.
8/42

25/04/2016

Assistance to countries in the region in implementing
an integrated strategy for maritime security, based on
existing regional mechanisms for combating piracy and
armed robbery at sea, should also be strongly promoted
by both the Security Council and the competent United
Nations bodies and agencies.
Since all coastal States of the Gulf of Guinea are
members of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO), we see particular value in the further fulfilment
by the IMO of its strategy for implementing sustainable
maritime security measures in West and Central Africa.
We also consider it necessary to expand the scope of
international assistance programmes to strengthen the
capacity of countries in the region to ensure maritime
security, improve infrastructure and carry out effective
joint actions to monitor the situation and conduct joint
patrols at sea. That requires improved coordination
among the United Nations, regional countries and
regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission in
combating piracy and armed robbery at sea.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has a direct bearing
on Ukraine. In 2015, pirates abducted two Ukrainian
citizens and demanded ransom for their release. Just
a month ago, on 26 March, pirates captured two other
citizens of Ukraine, the captain and assistant captain of
the vessel Sampatiki. Unfortunately, negotiations with
pirates on their release are still under way, and they
continue to suffer in captivity.
In the light of the outbreak of piracy, the issues
of crew protection in the shipping industry and postaccident treatment for piracy survivors continue to
be a matter of most serious concern to us. In order to
mitigate the impact of modern piracy, it is important
that Governments, ship owners, insurers and all other
stakeholders in maritime commerce treat seafarers as
their true and genuine social partners. That requires
a fresh look into the problems related to post-conflict
rehabilitation and compensation for moral damage and
material loses, as well as the recovery of physical and
mental strength and health. In many cases, seafarers
released after being held captive by pirates are left
to deal with their problems on their own. A solution
depends on different factors, such as the quality of the
seafarers’ employment agreements, the modalities of
justice with regard to protecting the rights of labourers,
and the accessibility and quality of medical and
social assistance.
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In that regard, Ukraine would like to call on United
Nations States Members to expedite the universalization
of the amendments to the Maritime Labour Convention,
2006, approved by the International Labour Conference
in 2014. The proper implementation of that instrument
will allow for the further elaboration of possible
solutions for seafarers and fishers who are victims of
piracy. We also believe that the primary responsibility
of flag States for ensuring the effective implementation
and enforcement of international instruments related to
maritime security and safety, in particular the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as for
bringing those guilty of acts of piracy or armed robbery
of ships to account, should be further strengthened.
When a person responsible for acts of piracy or
armed robbery at sea enjoys impunity, the anti-piracy
efforts of the international community are undermined.
Ensuring the prosecution and incarceration of captured
pirates must remain a priority if we are truly committed
to eradicating this evil. Effective international
mechanisms for bringing perpetrators to justice and
enhanced national criminal prosecution procedures
are needed. In that regard, Ukraine would like to recall
its initiative of 2010, which was circulated as General
Assembly document A/65/489 under agenda item 74,
entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”, namely, the
draft comprehensive convention on the suppression of
acts of piracy at sea. We invite all Member States to
look afresh at that proposal in the light of our debate.
Combating piracy and armed robbery at sea by
military means is an effective, but not the only, tool
in fighting this scourge. Developing a comprehensive
strategy of appropriate assistance to the countries of the
region to eliminate the root causes of maritime crimes
in West Africa — such as poverty, high unemployment,
a lack of rule of law, poor law enforcement and a lack of
the capabilities to effectively govern territorial waters
and promote economic development — could make a
substantial contribution to the global efforts to solve
the problem of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea.
All the relevant United Nations bodies must be
actively involved in shaping a comprehensive approach
to address the issue of piracy. In our view, the division
of tasks could take the following form. The General
Assembly could address the social and economic aspects
of piracy, while the Security Council could address its
security and military aspects, thereby making full use
of the tools available to the United Nations.

S/PV.7675

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Zerihoun for
his briefing this morning.
A single statistic suffices to explain the timeliness
of this debate: more than 20 per cent of maritime crime
takes place in the Gulf of Guinea — in all its guises,
from piracy and armed robbery to all forms of illegal
trafficking. In addition, from last year to the first few
months of this year, we have witnessed an increase in
attacks in that maritime zone. In 2015 there were 48
attacks and 33 boardings, and thus far in 2016 there
have been 30 attacks, 73 per cent of which took place
just off the coast of Nigeria. Those figures, however,
are just the tip of the iceberg because it is believed that
only half of such incidents are actually reported.
The amount of maritime traffic in that area means
that this poses a serious threat not just for Africa but
also for global security. The Security Council grasped
that point in its resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012).
Off the back of those two resolutions, in 2013 the
Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea took place
in Yaoundé, which laid the foundation for a maritime
security architecture in the Gulf of Guinea. The
Yaoundé Summit also recognized that the main players
in that architecture needed to be not just the signatory
States, but also the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
The Yaoundé process, as the development of the
agreements at the Yaoundé Summit is known, has the
support of the international community as a whole,
including of the United Nations, the European Union
and the Group of Seven Plus Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea. The participation of Spain in those three
forums is ongoing and very active. It is complemented
by intensive bilateral activity with neighbouring
countries on maritime safety. We work with them
closely in providing training, capacity-building and
police and customs cooperation, among other things.
The Spanish support is the result not just of our physical
and historical proximity to the region, but to a firm
commitment to peace, security and development in the
African continent, as expressed by His Majesty King
Felipe in January 2015 in Addis Ababa when addressing
the annual session of the African Union.
Despite the initial vigour in the direct aftermath of
the Yaoundé Summit and the international mobilization

16-115329/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

that accompanied it, the truth is that much needs to
be done, as is proved by the annual figures on the
number of incidents of maritime crime. It is essential
that cooperation among the countries of the region
and among interregional organizations run more
smoothly. Similarly, the principle of ownership is not
yet fully assumed by many of the coastal States, and
the differences among their legal systems means that
legal and police cooperation is further hampered.
With regard to the valuable concept of ownership, we
should commend such inititives as the conference on
maritime safety and energy that took place in Luanda
in October 2015. The Luanda Declaration reiterates
the important need for a comprehensive and integrated
African maritime security strategy and the need to
prioritize partnerships in Africa that promote regional
organizations.
Apart from the issue of ownership, Spain is also
a supporter of a global approach. That means not just
clamping down on attacks committed at sea, but also
working to prevent them while addressing the root
causes thereof, such as endemic poverty and insecurity.
There is no problem at sea that does not have its root
cause on dry land. For that reason, we believe that
today’s debate is extremely timely, as it gives us an
important opportunity as the Security Council to send
a clear message and signal of support to the African
Union initiative to hold an Extraordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government on maritime security
next October.
Finally, Spain aligns itself with the statement that
the observer of the European Union will deliver later.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First,
let me thank you, Mr. President, for having taking the
initiative to convene this important debate on a matter
of great concern for France. I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for his very
instructive briefing.
France also associates itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to focus on three points.
First, the security, economic and political
challenges related to maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea are major ones — for the region, for
strategic partners and for the international community
as a whole. The statistics speak for themselves. These
maritime zones extend over 6,000 kilometres of coastal
area, from Senegal to Angola. The Gulf of Guinea hosts
10/42

25/04/2016

one of the largest offshore oil fields of planet, with an
estimated reserves of 24 billion barrels. That represents
about 5 per cent of global reserves. For 10 years, more
than 600 attacks have been registered against vessels
on the high seas or in the territorial waters of coastal
States. While the number of attacks declined in 2015,
due in great in part to the mobilization of States in
the region, the threat level remains high, as evidenced
by the upsurge in acts of piracy since January of this
year. Trafficking in narcotics leads to the transfer from
South America to Europe of 20 to 40 tons of cocaine
per year through the Gulf of Guinea, with an estimated
sale price of €1.3 billion. Those are just a few examples.
The second point I want to emphasize is the
mobilization of the States in the region. Resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) call on States of the Gulf
of Guinea to develop tools, capabilities and policies
to eradicate the growing maritime insecurity in the
region. States have responded to that call. The Heads of
State of the riparian countries and the heads of regional
organizations such as the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission demonstrated clear political will to fight
maritime insecurity at the Summit of Heads of State
and Government on Maritime Safety and Security in
the Gulf of Guinea, held in Yaoundé in June 2013. At the
Summit, they adopted the Code of Conduct Concerning
the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa
and decided to establish the Interregional Coordination
Centre. The latter, inaugurated in September 2014, is
meant to sit at the top of a new interregional maritime
security architecture, and everything must be done to
enable the Centre to fulfil its role. The African Union
Summit to be held in Lomé in October and the planned
adoption on that occasion of an African Union charter
on maritime safety and security and economic and
social development will be essential in that regard.
Those are very positive developments and efforts that
should be commended. France encourages the States of
the Gulf of Guinea to continue along that path. And, as
we did during the 2013 Sommet de l’Elysée pour la Paix
et la Sécurité en Afrique, France continues to support
the Yaoundé process, which we hope will become
operational as soon as possible.
Finally, France’s strategy in the Gulf of Guinea aims
to support the initiative of the countries of West and
Central Africa. As members know, France is one of the
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

main supporters of the States of the region in their fight
against maritime insecurity. France has been present
in the area for 25 years, through Mission Corymbe
and cooperation in the area of security and defence.
Since 2011 — and until 2021 — the Gulf of Guinea
Maritime Security Sector Reform Support project
bolsters maritime security sector reform in the Gulf of
Guinea. To ensure the consistency of French initiatives
with the States of the region, a French support plan for
securing maritime areas in the Gulf of Guinea has been
developed. France also promotes maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea within international organizations.
France has actively participated in the development of
a European strategy for the Gulf of Guinea, which was
adopted in March 2014, as well as a European action
plan, which was approved in March 2015.
In conclusion, in France’s view, the strengthening
of local capacities and support for regional coordination
are the principles that should guide international efforts
in that region of the world. That approach is based on
respect for the sovereignty of the States of the region,
national ownership of solutions and, finally, the need
to ensure compliance with the law of the sea and the
freedom of maritime traffic. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/4, which we adopted today, fully reflects
that approach.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate and for bringing to
our attention, together with Angola and Senegal, the
important topic of piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf Guinea. I also thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. Zerihoun, for his
briefing. We share his concerns, as well as those set out
in the concept note (S/2016/321, annex) circulated by
the Chinese presidency.

S/PV.7675

countries in the region. Piracy creates regional maritime
insecurity that affects the livelihoods of the peoples in
the region. Hence, combating piracy will require better
coordination, a well-calibrated regional and national
strategy and international support. It will also require
the sharing of intelligence on terror networks operating
on land, as well as efforts to cripple their operations on
the high seas.
In today’s debate, Malaysia will focus on the need
for a comprehensive integrated approach to maritime
security and the importance of enhanced coordination
among the affected States and regional organizations.
Malaysia fully supports the region-led maritime security
initiative outlined in the concept note, and encourages
the international community to actively support the
initiative. As such, we welcome the various efforts
made by the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the African Union, the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the States concerned to combat piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea and to strengthen their maritime security and
cooperation. Any regional cooperation, however, should
not impinge upon the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the States concerned, nor jeopardize their
national security. We fully support the sovereign rights
of those States to determine the best means to exploit
natural resources in their economic zones, including
fisheries, in accordance with international law.

Today’s open debate provides us with an opportunity
to re-examine our past efforts to combat piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea within the context of the current
dynamics and threat of terror groups operating in the
region. It should enable us to strengthen our resolve
and to step up measures in our fight against organized
crime and terror groups that find in piracy on the high
seas a lucrative source of income with which to fund
their terror network of criminal activities.

We wish to emphasize the importance of approaching
this issue in a holistic manner, focusing simultaneously
on security, the rule of law and development. In our
view, working collectively and ensuring a balanced
and coherent strategy that addresses not only the root
causes but also the symptoms of piracy and armed
robbery is fundamental to address the issue in the long
term. Lessons learned and best practices on maritime
security and combating piracy and criminal activities
at sea should be encouraged and regularly shared by
the regional organizations and the affected States with
a view to achieving the needed maritime security and
addressing constraints in resources and assets. In that
regard, we look forward to the holding of the African
Union extraordinary summit on maritime security and
safety and development in Africa in late 2016.

As a whole, piracy remains a major concern due
to its disruptive impact on trade. Given their regional
network, organized crime and terror groups pose a
challenge that affects the security and economies of

It is our view that, through the IMO, the United
Nations plays an important coordinating role and should
continue, and intensify, its engagement when requested
to assist the States and organizations of the region to

16-1153211/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

act and mobilize international support. Studies have
shown that piracy and armed robbery at sea are among
the criminal indicators of economic constraints. In
that regard, we believe that, in developing regional
cooperation on maritime security, it is crucial to
incorporate funding and support for homegrown
solutions such as socioeconomic programming,
the rebuilding of infrastructure and the creation of
employment opportunities, especially for youth.
Sharing Malaysia’s own experience, it has stepped
up measures in line with its responsibility of ensuring
that its maritime zones, including the Strait of Malacca,
are safe and secure for navigation. As the shortest
sea route connecting the dynamic economies of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and East Asia
region with the West, any form of disruption, including
piracy and armed robbery of shipping traffic in the Strait,
would have huge consequences on the global trade and
economy, as well as on the socioeconomic well-being of
the States concerned. In addition to physical presence and
electronic monitoring capabilities, Malaysia, together
with the States concerned, constantly undertakes
coordinated patrols in the Strait of Malacca. Malaysia,
Indonesia and Singapore launched coordinated patrols
in the Malacca Strait in 2004. With the implementation
of those patrols, comprehensive arrangements for
maritime security in the Strait of Malacca has been
achieved. All of those efforts, either unilaterally or in
cooperation with the other States concerned, contribute
to the overall improvement of the maritime security
situation in the Strait of Malacca.
Those successful efforts have been acknowledged
by reports worldwide, in particular the weekly piracy
report of the International Maritime Bureau, and annual
reports. The declassification of the Strait as a high-risk
zone by the Joint War Committee of Lloyd’s Market
Association in August 2006 was another example of the
fruitful outcome of the collective efforts by Malaysia
and the other States concerned to ensure that the
security of maritime navigation in the Strait of Malacca
is successfully safeguarded.
Given that over 90 per cent of the imports and
exports of African States are conducted by sea, there
can be no doubt of the crucial need to ensure a safe
and secure maritime environment for the sustainable
development of the African States concerned. To that
end, presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, which we
have just adopted today, serves as another manifestation
of the Council’s continued support in the fight against
12/42

25/04/2016

the threat of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea.
For its part, Malaysia stands ready to assist in
sharing its experiences with the affected States to the
best of its ability.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
commends China for convening this debate. We
acknowledge Senegal and Angola for ensuring this
important issue receives the Council’s sustained
attention. We also thank Assistant Secretary-General
Zerihoun for his briefing.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a serious drag on the
economic development of the countries of the region
and a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security.
New Zealand is a maritime nation that exports to
the world. Around 99 per cent of our trade by volume is
carried by merchant shipping. As such we understand
the importance of effective maritime security to our
well-being, as well as to the stability of our region. As
highlighted by our Minister for Foreign Affairs during
last year’s open debate on the challenges facing small
island developing States (see S/PV.7469), we are a
Pacific country with a significant stake in the peace
and security of small island developing states in our
region. Many of the vulnerabilities that are faced by
countries in the Gulf of Guinea are similar to those that
small island developing States encounter in the Pacific
and elsewhere. Their capacity limitations make them
a target for transnational criminal networks, including
those involved in piracy.
One of the things we have learned from our
region in dealing with transnational organized crime
is the crucial importance of effective cooperation and
coordination between countries. Without this, criminal
networks will simply move on and exploit the weakest
link — those States that are least able to monitor and
take enforcement action against crimes committed at
sea. Such cooperation must also extend internationally.
The Royal New Zealand Navy frigates Te Mana and
Te Kaha have participated in a multinational operations
focused on counter-piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off
the eastern coast of Somalia. The Royal New Zealand
Air Force has also participated in NATO’s counterpiracy operation Ocean Shield. Last year, we also
worked closely with a number of West African countries
to share information on vessels that had been involved
in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing in the
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Southern Ocean. This cooperation with West African
coastal States was highly appreciated.
We recognize, of course, that the scale of the
problem in the Gulf of Guinea is much greater than any
that has so far arisen in our region. It is deep seated
and pervasive, and it threatens not only the economies
and security of the smaller States, but is also a major
threat to the peace and stability of larger nations,
including even Nigeria. Piracy prospers where onshore
governance is weak and the capacity of local authorities
to monitor and maintain control over their maritime
territories is limited. It is able to flourish because the
pirates at sea have collaborators and collusionists on
land. In that sense, piracy degrades the cohesion and
stability of coastal States by undermining governance,
exacerbating instability and hampering development.
As we have said many times before in this Chamber,
prevention is better than cure. In addition to enhancing
security responses to criminal activities at sea, we need
to address some of the roots causes of those issues. One
area that warrants particular attention is to ensure that
coastal States can maximize the benefits from their
natural resource bases, both at sea and on land, to ensure
that people are able to make meaningful contributions
to their own and their countries’ economic prosperity.
This requires strong institutions, effective regulatory
frameworks and strong political will. The inverse
situation inhibits sustainable economic development
and propels the marginalized to consider other options
for economic survival, such as criminal activity.
In the Gulf of Guinea, much of the piracy
problem has its roots in the long-standing grievances
of marginalized groups in the Niger Delta and in
the insidious links that have emerged between local
insurgencies and cross-border criminal activity,
particularly oil smuggling. To enjoy success in the long
term, counter-piracy efforts must be part of a more
comprehensive approach to addressing the drivers of
criminality and instability.
As we learned in Somalia and elsewhere, it is vital
that the necessary national and legal frameworks be in
place to enable effective prosecution of those directly
and indirectly involved in piracy. This means ensuring
that countries of the region have the right legislation to
prosecute and punish those who are apprehended, and
this is backed by the necessary will at the senior levels
of Government to take these steps. It also requires
frameworks for operational and legal cooperation.

S/PV.7675

Within the Gulf of Guinea, there are a number of
subregional bodies playing a positive role in tackling
piracy at sea, including the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission. We encourage further progress to
operationalize the Interregional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
in Yaoundé. This is an important step towards a joint
regional response to addressing maritime security,
including incidents of piracy at sea in what, as others
have said, is a vast geographic area.
Finally, the Council can provide an ongoing
international focus in support of the regional efforts.
For this reason, New Zealand is a strong supporter
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, which was
adopted today.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Chinese presidency and
the delegations of Senegal and Angola for convening
this important open debate. I would also like to express
my appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Zerihoun, for his briefing.
It is important to remind the international
community of the phenomenon of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea and their dangerous
security and socioeconomic implications. It is a true
threat to international trade and it negatively affects
stability and development in the countries of the Gulf
of Guinea and West Africa.
Despite the partial decrease in the prevalence of
this phenomenon, there is no time for complacency.
Criminal networks continue to operate with their basic
capacities. Egypt values the efforts of the countries
of the region to combat this phenomenon, which
include the holding of the Summit of Heads of State
and Government on Maritime Safety and Security
in the Gulf of Guinea in Yaoundé in 2013, with the
participation of 25 countries. The Summit adopted
the Yaoundé Declaration on combatting piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. It also endorsed the creation of the
Interregional Coordination Centre on Maritime Safety
and Security for Central and West Africa.
We also should not ignore the important role of
the African Union and other regional organizations,
including the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. We look

16-1153213/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

forward to the extraordinary summit of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union of Maritime
Security and Development in Africa, which will be
held in Lomé in October. Its outcomes will definitely
contribute to African cooperation in that regard.
If anti-piracy efforts are to be successful, we must
support national efforts to protect the coastlines and
to strengthen cooperation, information-sharing and
lessons learned at the regional and international levels.
It is also important to ensure that the shipping industry
is committed to best practices when sailing in high-risk
areas. Furthermore, it is important to combat impunity
by prosecuting people involved in acts of piracy and
by tracking the leaders and people who finance piracy
networks.
In that regard, Egypt would like to stress the
importance of taking into consideration the different
political and security conditions and the different
modus operandi of pirates from one region to another.
Networks of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the
coast of Somalia have taken advantage of the absence of
State authority for two decades and established a base
to launch their attacks and seize ships and their crew
for ransom. However, the perpetrators of acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea have
adopted a different approach. They have seized ships
and their cargo passing through the region. There is no
doubt that combatting these different modus operandi
require differentiated approaches.
Egypt would like to stress that the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is the legal
framework for combating acts of piracy. It is important
for all States to uphold their responsibilities under
the Convention, in particular to prosecute persons
suspected of being involved in acts of piracy. It is also
important to delineate high-risk zones that have seen
an increase in acts of piracy. It is important to delineate
such zones according to specific and clear criteria in
order to ensure the best use of resources in the fight
against piracy. These resources should be allocated
to regions that are experiencing the highest levels of
piracy. Egypt also stresses the need for the international
community, especially through the International
Maritime Organization, to hold open consultations
with the participation of all parties to promulgate
regulations that allow for the use of security personnel
aboard commercial ships.
14/42

25/04/2016

In conclusion, human and natural resources on
the African continent, if appropriately exploited,
could ensure the well-being and stability of the
peoples of Africa, while contributing positively to
the international economy. The African Union has
adopted the 2050 Africa Integrated Maritime Strategy,
which is an ambitious development vision aimed at
strengthening security in the African maritime space
and at using to good advantage the African coasts
in mining, fishing and trade, without damaging the
ecosystem and maritime life. The Strategy also aims
at developing the infrastructure of African ports and
promoting true complementarity between landlocked
and coastal countries.
Nevertheless, Africa is facing a number of
challenges that prevent it from occupying the place
it deserves. There is a link between these challenges.
Poverty and underdevelopment are fuelling armed
conflicts and undermining State authority, thereby
leading to the proliferation of terrorist networks,
transnational organized crime, smuggling and piracy.
Therefore, in order to address many of the challenges
that the African continent is facing, it is important to
make a clear diagnosis of the root causes of the problem.
The international community should support
African efforts to find timely solutions, including
security cooperation in the areas of piracy, organized
crime and terrorism. It is also necessary to strengthen
long-term programmes aimed at achieving sustainable
development and combating poverty in Africa. The
Security Council and the United Nations should also
follow up on international efforts to strengthen the
capacity of countries of the region to combat piracy.
It is also necessary to ensure continued financial and
technical support and determine the strengths and
weaknesses of current mechanisms in order to develop
them appropriately.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank China, Angola and Senegal for organizing
today’s important debate. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing.
We fully support his efforts to assist the States of the
region to combat piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea.
Earlier this month, on 11 April at 7.56 p.m., pirates
attacked a cargo vessel off the coast of Nigeria. They
had waited for darkness before ambushing the vessel
and boarded with force. The captain and crew sounded
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.7675

the alarm and hid in a protected space on the ship, only
to discover when they emerged the following day that
two of their crew were missing — a second officer from
the Philippines and an electrician from Egypt. Both are
still missing.

international organizations, industry and other entities
that have a stake in maritime security are also critical
to ensuring the full range of lawful and timely actions
to combat piracy and other maritime crime in the Gulf
of Guinea.

This is not the first pirate attack of the year, nor
even the first attack that day. Earlier on 11 April, the
very same day, pirates had attacked a Turkish cargo
ship off the coast of Nigeria, kidnapping six of the
crew, including the vessel’s captain. Those men are
also still missing. Piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea are increasing at an alarming rate, with
some industry experts recording at least 32 attacks
off the coast of Nigeria alone in 2016, affecting many
Member States, including the United States. The
economic consequences for the people of the region are
devastating. According to a Chatham House report, as
much as 400,000 barrels of crude oil are stolen each
day in the Gulf of Guinea. By some estimates, Nigeria
is losing about $1.5 billion a month due to piracy, armed
robbery at sea, smuggling and fuel supply fraud. Illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing also generates
a sizable income loss in the hundreds of millions of
dollars a year for many countries and communities that
depend on that sector to survive.

In this regard, we welcome the Yaoundé Summit
documents, which articulated a comprehensive view
of maritime safety and security, including combating
illegal fishing, trafficking of arms, people and drugs,
and maritime pollution. We commend the United
Nations Regional Offices for West Africa and Central
Africa for providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to Governments in the region, as well
as subregional organizations, including the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
urge the Member States of the regional and subregional
organizations to make the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of
Guinea fully operational.

We have spoken many times in this Chamber
about the root causes of piracy: ineffective governance
structures, weak rule of law, precarious legal
frameworks and inadequate naval, coast-guard and
maritime law enforcement. The absence of an effective
maritime-governance system, in particular, hampers
freedom of movement in the region, disrupts trade
and economic growth, and facilitates environmental
crimes. We have also acknowledged in our resolutions
and in the presidential statement adopted this morning
(S/PRST/2016/4) that the solution to these root causes
lies in greater African stewardship of maritime safety
and security at the continental, regional and Member
State level.
Strong political will from African Governments
and leaders is needed to pursue and prosecute crimes at
all levels within criminal enterprises. Maritime crime
flourishes under ineffective or complicit governance
structures, but is diminished when rule of law is
effective. Absent African ownership and action from
national and local Governments to tackle maritime
security challenges, there is little reason to believe that
attacks in the Gulf of Guinea will decline. International
cooperation and integration among regional countries,

In this context, the United States is doing its part to
support the efforts of our African partners in the Gulf
of Guinea. Our approach is based on three guiding
principles: the prevention of attacks, the response
to acts of maritime crime, and enhancing maritime
security and governance.
On prevention, we are supporting the efforts
of ECOWAS and ECCAS to strengthen regional
maritime strategies, including the completion of their
memorandum of understanding and Code of Conduct
for Central and West Africa. We are also encouraging
nations to fully implement the Yaoundé Code of Conduct
and the African Union 2050 Integrated Maritime
Strategy. We encourage States of the region to further
enhance security by establishing Maritime Pilot Zone
E, covering the coasts of Nigeria, the Niger, Benin and
Togo — an area where the majority of attacks occur.
Establishing Zone E would provide the means for an
integrated approach to coordinating joint patrols, naval
drills, training programmes and intelligence-sharing
among the naval forces of countries in the Zone.
In responding to acts of maritime crime, the
United States trains, equips and conducts exercises and
operations with African maritime forces through our
Africa Partnership Station. One month ago, the Station
held a multinational maritime exercise in which the
Gulf of Guinea, European and South American nations

16-1153215/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

worked together, shared information and refined their
tactics, techniques and procedures to monitor and
enforce their territorial waters and exclusive economic
zones in the Gulf of Guinea. Through our African
Maritime Law Enforcement Partnership, we are also
improving partner capacity to conduct maritime
security operations off the coasts of Senegal, Cape
Verde, Ghana and Cameroon.
To enhance maritime security and governance, the
United States is assisting in strengthening the judicial
sectors of Gulf of Guinea nations and regional capacity
to address impunity for piracy and related maritime
crime, such as our support for the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. Technical assistance helps those
countries put in place the criminal laws necessary to
effectively prosecute armed robbery at sea and piracy
cases.
In closing, I would like to underscore the importance
of a comprehensive regional approach to addressing
maritime insecurity. A comprehensive approach will
help reduce the loss of national revenue, support
socioeconomic development and expand environmental
protection in the region. We look forward to supporting
the plenary meeting of the Group of Seven Plus Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, to held in Lisbon in June, as well
as Togo’s hosting of the 2016 African Union Maritime
Security Summit in October. The United States sees
those engagements as an opportunity to produce
concrete timelines and actions to help form a robust
national, regional and global response to maritime
security threats across Africa.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay welcomes the convening of today’s open
debate and the concept note (S/2016/321, annex) that
was distributed by the President’s delegation in a timely
manner.
We also thank Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his in-depth
briefing to the Council on the issue. My delegation also
highly welcomes the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/4, on the matter under consideration
today.
In 1986, General Assembly resolution 41/11
created the zone of peace and co-operation of the
South Atlantic, of which Uruguay currently holds the
position of president pro tempore. All coastal States
of both the African and South American coasts of the
South Atlantic take part in the zone. In the outcome
16/42

25/04/2016

document of the seventh ministerial meeting that took
place in January 2013, paragraphs 108 through 110 of
the Montevideo declaration contain specific provisions
regarding combating piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which we decided needed to be mentioned in today’s
presidential, statement, which we support. The States
members of the South Atlantic zone remain ready to
support the Gulf of Guinea countries in any way they
may seek.
Uruguay wishes to highlight the key role played
by the Economic Community of Central African States
and the Economic Community of West African States,
which have combined their anti-piracy efforts and
coordinated their security policy. Nonetheless, we must
be aware that those efforts have fallen short. The growth
of criminal networks engaged in piracy and armed
robbery at sea has benefitted from the weaknesses of
States in terms of their maritime capacities and ability
to punish those who perpetrate crimes. That is why
maritime security measures to enhance the presence of
those nations at sea will be critical in the short term.
However, to achieve a long-term solution, we must
address the root causes of the problems in the countries
of the region and acknowledge the fact that piracy is
only a symptom of a deeper problem.
At the heart of piracy lie such structural causes as
poverty, unemployment, unequal wealth distribution
and the challenges posed by organized crime, trafficking
in arms, drugs and persons, pollution, illegal fishing
and the ever-increasing presence of extremist groups.
Uruguay therefore believes that in order to tackle
piracy, we must simultaneously reinforce actions for
institution-building in the region. The Gulf of Guinea
is one of the most unsafe maritime areas in the world
and requires targeted responses, given the resources
available to those involved in piracy.
It is worth noting that at least half of all incidents
are not reported and therefore not recorded in the
annual reports of the International Maritime Bureau.
It seems clear that the response to such crime requires
the international community to display the same
involvement and commitment that it has shown in the
fight against a similar scourge in the Indian Ocean,
which has been very successful. Without a strong naval
presence of States in the Gulf of Guinea, we can only
look forward to an endless continuous increase in
maritime crime and piracy, with an impact on countries
that today are currently least affected, risking further
destabilization in the region. It is therefore essential that
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the multilateral system, especially the United Nations,
play a key role in combating piracy and in supporting
the countries of West Africa in meeting the challenges
posed by piracy. We underscore that piracy is a global
phenomenon and therefore requires a global response.
Finally, I stress the relevance of the Security
Council and the international community response to
the issue of piracy from various angles, including the
mission carried out by the Council last month to Mali,
Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, where we made it clear
that the only way of delivering peace and stability in
Western Africa is through a frank and open dialogue in
which the United Nations plays a part.
Mr. Mizushima (Japan): Japan highly appreciates
the initiative taken by China, Angola and Senegal in
convening this important meeting. I would also like
to join others in thanking Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
informative briefing. Japan also welcomes the adoption
of the presidential statement on piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea (S/PRST/2016/4).
Since ancient times, humankind has benefited
from the many blessings that the sea provides and
maritime transportation has connected the world. It is
our significant common interest to maintain a maritime
order based upon the universally recognized principles
of international law.
Piracy is a threat to the safety of sea lanes around
the world, and countering piracy is an issue vital
to all of us as we benefit from maritime trade. The
international community as a whole should address
that issue. For its part, Japan has actively contributed
to the maintenance and stability of maritime order,
including through efforts to counter piracy and armed
robbery in the Straits of Malacca and Singapore and off
the coast of Somalia. We have seen a substantial drop
in the number of piracy cases off the coast of Somalia
recently; however, that of the Gulf of Guinea remains
high.
Resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) have
played an important role in raising international
awareness about the issue of piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. Since 2012, the Group of Seven
(G-7) has stressed the importance of the issue. The
Group of Seven Foreign Ministers, in their statement on
maritime security issued earlier this month, expressed
their determination to cooperate through capacitybuilding assistance in the area of maritime security and

S/PV.7675

safety in order to help coastal States deal with their own
vulnerabilities. They also recognized the importance
of the framework of the G7++ Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea, within which the countries concerned, together
with international organizations and the shipping
industry, exchange views about regional challenges and
needs.
We believe that coastal countries should have
primary responsibility for addressing issues in the Gulf
of Guinea, including through such regional frameworks
as the Yaoundé Code of Conduct Concerning the
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central
Africa. On the other hand, the funds and manpower
are lacking for implementing the Code of Conduct
and the maritime security strategies of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States. It is therefore
important that the international community support the
efforts of regional frameworks and countries to counter
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the region.
In that regard, Japan is supporting projects for the
implementation of the Yaoundé Code of Conduct, making
the largest contribution to the International Maritime
Organization’s West and Central Africa Maritime
Security Trust Fund. In December, Japan also provided
equipment and materials to the Regional Academy of
Maritime Sciences and Technologies in Abidjan, with the
aim of enhancing navigation technology and maritime
safety capacity for its students, and thereby creating
synergy with the assistance that France is providing to
the Interregional Maritime Security Institute in Côte
d’Ivoire. Japan is also considering providing assistance
to enable an extraordinary African Union summit on
maritime security and safety and development in Africa
to be held in Lomé in October.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
determination to work to counter piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, together with
the international community, including the Security
Council. Japan will also focus on the issue at the
Sixth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, which this year will be held in Africa for
the first time, in Kenya in August.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom) (spoke in Chinese):
Like other speakers today, Mr. President, I would like
to welcome your leadership on this issue, and I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

16-1153217/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

(spoke in English)
As my United States colleague mentioned earlier,
two ships were attacked off the coast of Nigeria earlier
this month. I would like to echo her concern about the
crew members who were kidnapped that day and to call
for their release. Those two ships were flagged to Malta
and Liberia; their cargo came from Turkey, Greece and
Nigeria; and the eight crew members whom we just heard
about came from Egypt, the Philippines and Turkey.
So on just one day on the seas off West Africa, piracy
struck at the people, property and prosperity of seven
Members of the United Nations. It should concern us all
that there were around 100 similar incidents in the Gulf
of Guinea last year. It does not take a mathematician to
see that the damage done by those acts is not isolated in
a far-off place, far removed from the Security Council’s
attention. Such attacks strike at the interests of all of us
and therefore require each of us to focus on them.
When the security of shipping and global trade
is threatened in this way, the prosperity and stability
of the regional States of West and Central Africa are
threatened, as is the security of their peoples. That threat
can and must be tackled together, through regional
leadership and coordinated international support.
The United Kingdom commends the efforts that the
region has been making so far. We fully support the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa. We
welcome the commitment shown by the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and their members. That
commitment is seen in their efforts to develop a regional
framework for countering piracy and armed robbery
at sea. Such a framework will allow the sharing of
information and the coordination of operations needed
to make a real difference on the seas in the Gulf.
But a framework is just a start. We urge those
bodies and their members to continue their efforts to
establish and fully operationalize the regional network
of maritime coordination centres, which include the
Interregional Coordination Centre in Yaoundé, the
Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central
Africa in Pointe-Noire in the Republic of the Congo,
and the Regional Centre for Maritime Safety in West
Africa in Abidjan.
18/42

25/04/2016

The United Kingdom is also playing its part. Our
resources and diplomatic efforts to tackle this threat
are carefully coordinated with the Gulf of Guinea
region, the maritime industry, the European Union and
other partners. We are an active member of the Group
of Seven Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which is
meeting again soon and is a valuable forum for experts
from regional States and donor countries to coordinate
and deploy our resources. We look forward to the next
meeting, to be held under Portugal’s chairmanship.
We recognize, however, that coordination alone will
not solve the problem. That is why the United Kingdom is
making concerted efforts to assist in building maritime
capacity across the region. We are helping to mentor
maritime police and navy units in Ghana and Sao Tome
and Principe, and we are building port facilities in
Sierra Leone to provide a platform for maritime lawenforcement operations. We have enhanced the region’s
capacity through our contributions to the International
Maritime Organization’s West and Central Africa
Maritime Security Trust Fund.
Improving regional coordination and building
maritime capacity to stop the pirates are the first steps
of the process. What comes next is just as important:
investigations and prosecutions. The knowledge that
there are long-term consequences to choosing a life of
piracy is the best way to deter those who might follow
this path. That is why we support bolstering the rule-oflaw capacity in the States of the region and why we are
currently considering other ways to develop the region’s
ability to prosecute those involved in maritime crime.
Through such steps and more, we know we can
make a difference. The incidence of hijackings for cargo
is falling, but the battle is not yet won. The first quarter
of this year has seen a marked increase in the number
of kidnaps for ransom. I would therefore like to close by
returning to the issue of the two ships attacked earlier
this month — the tanker Puli and the container ship
Turquoise. Together they lost eight crewmen in those
attacks. They are still missing, and their families and
friends are still fearful for their safety. As we debate
today how best to tackle this problem, we should do so
with all those sailors in mind.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
Mr. Tayé-Brook Zerihoun, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the challenges
that the security situation in the Gulf of Guinea poses
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

to peacebuilding. I would also like to congratulate the
Council presidency and the delegations of Angola and
Senegal for promoting today’s discussion of an issue
of such importance for peace and security in West
and Central Africa, particularly the coastal countries
on the Gulf of Guinea. We believe that the Council’s
adoption of a presidential statement on the subject
(S/PRST/2016/4) in the framework of this open debate
is very important, as it emphasizes its commitment to
keeping a watchful eye on developments in the Gulf of
Guinea and in West and Central Africa as a whole.
The coastal region of the Gulf of Guinea and the
States there have been affected by the threat of piracy,
transnational organized crime, the trafficking and
illicit use of natural resources such as oil and gas,
illegal fishing and trafficking in drugs and persons, all
promoted by criminal networks that have appreciably
affected economic growth. This has had a negative
impact on society, threatening the stability of the
countries of the subregion as well. This situation must
serve to mobilize international cooperation in support
of those States to address this issue.
The attention being accorded to this issue by the
Security Council, following the adoption of resolutions
2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012), is as pertinent as ever,
given the threat posed to the stability of countries
and peoples by the penetration and action of criminal
groups that threaten the achievements of that African
subregion in development and the strengthening of
political stability.
Venezuela appreciates the peacebuilding process
taking place in Africa, which is of great importance
to the work of the United Nations and regional and
subregional bodies that undertake them, both because
they represent a fundamental step towards achieving
sustainable and inclusive development in the region,
and because of their credibility and trust palced in
them by their peoples. It is therefore an inescapable
responsibility to promote all initiatives that pave the
way towards strengthening and promoting such efforts
in the social, economic and political spheres, as well as
in the field of security.
In this context, we recognize the efforts of the
States of the subregion of the Gulf of Guinea, with the
support of the international community, to coordinate,
through multiple initiatives and specific programmes,
the implementation of a strategy to counter piracy
and armed robbery. I highlight in particular the work

S/PV.7675

of the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the Maritime
Organization for West and Central Africa, and the
specific efforts of the maritime strategy of the African
Union, which have institutionalized the joint response
to the regional challenge.
Similarly, we strongly support the trust fund
established by the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) to strengthen the institutional capacities of
the States of the region. We recognize the technical,
operational, logistical and legal assistance provided
by the IMO to coastal States of the region, which has
been broad and important to the implementation of
a coordinated subregional strategy in various fields
related to commercial navigation, port security, and
professional training and safety, thereby encouraging
the participation of all stakeholders. Such cooperation,
led by States, is a point of reference to consider in
addressing security issues in Africa.
Similarly, we reaffirm the need for sustainable
financing methods for all public and private
institutional initiatives, with emphasis on the tasks
of inclusive social development that address the
local needs of the people of the region. Compliance
with financial commitments undertaken by various
partners, particularly international organizations and
countries, is urgent in order to successfully complete
the proposed projects, and in that sense we call for them
to be addressed in a comprehensive and timely manner.
Meeting the challenge of creating and strengthening
State post-conflict capacities is the essence of
sustainable peace, and all initiatives undertaken to
address the maintenance of security in the Gulf of
Guinea should be agreed in coordination with States on
the basis of cooperation, with respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity.
The need for an integrated strategy is urgent. It
should include formulas to prevent the manifestations
of terrorism and organized crime that have arisen in
Africa, particularly in the Sahel — all of which were
exacerbated by the intervention in Libya in 2011 — from
expanding throughout a region that, through the efforts
of its peoples and Governments, has remained immune
to that threat.
Regional anti-piracy coordination is the answer to
combatting and eradicating the phenomenon of piracy
and insecurity in the vast area of the Gulf of Guinea

16-1153219/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

basin, and has a significant impact on the economy
of the countries of the region. In that regard, we hope
that the extraordinary meeting to be held in Lomé in
October will be a significant milestone in subregional
cooperation in intergovernmental security efforts, and
we call on the international community to support it
strongly.
In the context of the United Nations, it is important
to adopt joint positions and comprehensive solutions
for preventing conflicts in politically stable countries
such as those of the subregion, whose main challenge
is oriented to sustainable development. In that regard,
we recognize the work done by the regional offices
for West and Central Africa, which still have many
challenges ahead.
Lastly, Venezuela reiterates its commitment to
peacebuilding in Africa and will continue to offer
our contributions and experiences on the basis of
interregional and international cooperation.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the delegations of China, Angola
and Senegal for their initiative to convene today’s
meeting of the Security Council on the issue of piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. We
also thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for
his contribution to today’s debate.
In the current context, we welcome the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4, which calls
additional attention to this matter.
The Russian Federation is seriously concerned
about the ongoing expansion of pirate activities along
the west coast of Africa, which have spread far beyond
the territorial waters of the countries of the region.
Beginning in 2012, the International Maritime Bureau
has regularly recorded significant incidents in the
region. The lives and safety of people are increasingly
threatened, which is of particular concern. The
hostage-taking of seafarers is a relatively new and
alarming trend in the Gulf of Guinea. Russian nationals
have been among those targeted.
Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
now clearly appear to be a highly functioning criminal
business that threatens maritime shipping and transit,
as well as the prosperity of coastal countries. According
to sources in the region, the aggregate economic losses
due to piracy come to billions of dollars. According
to available information, including reports of the
20/42

25/04/2016

International Maritime Bureau, the majority of attacks
continue to be conducted not far from the coast,
sometimes at the very edge of the territorial waters
of coastal States. Resolving this issue will therefore
require above all the enhancement of coastal controls
by strengthening coast guards and improving their
technical equipment. There is also a need to create
conditions conducive to the effective legal prosecution
of the average pirate and captains of the piracy business.
It is important to step up efforts to identify and suppress
channels of financing for piracy.
We welcome the individual initiatives of countries
of the region, as well as their efforts in the framework
of regional organizations, to improve coordination
mechanisms for combatting piracy and armed robbery at
sea. We call for the speedy drafting and implementation
of a joint anti-piracy strategy that would promote the
more effective utilization of all existing resources. We
express the hope that the Gulf of Guinea Interregional
Coordination Centre, established in Cameroon in 2014,
will become fully functional in the coming months, as
foreseen in the decisions of the high-level Summit of
the Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, which took place in
Yaoundé in February.
In conclusion, I note that Russia has fruitful
experience in participating in international efforts to
combat piracy in the north-western sector of the Indian
Ocean. We are ready to share our insight and know-how
in that regard.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.
China thanks Angola and Senegal for joining us
in the organization of this open debate. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing.
As an important international shipping route and
energy base, the Gulf of Guinea is a lifeline for the
coastal States of the region. Recent years have seen
frequent pirate attacks and armed robbery throughout
the territorial waters of the Gulf of Guinea. These
attacks are characterized by their brutality and links
to terrorism organizations, illegal armed groups
and criminal gangs. Such activities undermine the
environment for the economic and social development
of the African countries concerned, in addition
to posing a grave threat to maritime passage for
international trade, as well as for regional peace and
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.7675

security. Safeguarding safety and security in the Gulf
of Guinea is an essential part of the efforts to improve
the safety and security of global connectivity. That
constitutes an important guarantee for the development
and prosperity of coastal and regional countries; it is
a common responsibility that must be shared by the
entire international community.

ensuring the full, effective and sustainable operation
of the relevant mechanisms. China looks forward to a
positive outcome to the next AU Summit of Heads of
State and Government on Maritime Safety and Security
in the Gulf of Guinea, which will be held in October
and will further advance the regional and subregional
endeavour on counter-piracy.

Standing at the forefront of the fight against piracy,
the coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea have made
tremendous efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery
at sea. China expresses its great appreciation in that
regard. China supports the African countries concerned
in their efforts to enhance coordination, formulate a
common strategy for maritime security, create a regional
counter-piracy mechanism and conduct joint patrols at
sea. We call upon the international community to pay
attention to the difficulties faced by Gulf of Guinea
coastal States, including a lack of financial resources,
infrastructure and equipment, and to implement the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and assist
the countries of the region to build up their capacity
to fight piracy. Efforts should be focused on the four
following aspects.

Thirdly, resources should be mobilized to
strengthen international cooperation on counter-piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. International organizations,
including the United Nations and the International
Maritime Organization (IMO), should provide more
support to coastal countries. The United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa should accord greater
importance to the needs of the countries concerned and
provide regular briefings to the Security Council on the
latest developments. We call upon countries to continue
their contributions to the IMO West and Central Africa
Maritime Security Trust Fund, while drawing on the
success achieved. On the basis of full consultation with
the coastal States, the international community could
explore the possibility of joint law enforcement as a
new way to intensify counter-piracy efforts.

First, on the basis of respect for the leadership of
the Gulf of Guinea coastal countries, assistance should
be provided to the countries concerned to enhance
their capacity-building on counter-piracy efforts. Other
countries should take an active part in the construction,
operation and maintenance of their ports, among other
infrastructure, in order that they can provide better
service to ships in the areas of docking, supplies and
maintenance, as well as improve logistical support. It is
also necessary to help them to strengthen training for
their maritime security forces and to provide them with
the necessary equipment, such as vessels and radar
systems, so as to improve their operational capacity in
joint law enforcement and monitoring.
Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
should have a greater role, and a long-term mechanism
should be put in place at the regional level. The
international community should support regional and
subregional organizations — such as the African Union
(AU), the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission — in their
efforts to comprehensively implement the integrated
strategy to counter piracy and armed robbery at sea by
increasing financial and technical inputs, enhancing
institution-building in the fight against piracy and

Fourthly, development assistance to coastal States
should be scaled up. The international community
should increase assistance to the coastal States in the
light of their economic and social development plans,
help them to eradicate poverty, speed up economic and
social development and improve the situation of youth
employment. Cooperation on counter-terrorism should
be strengthened. Transnational organized crime should
be combated effectively. The links that connect pirates
with terrorist organizations and illegal armed groups
should be severed, and channels for drug trafficking
and financing should be blocked. Greater efforts
should be made to ensure legal accountability.
Thanks to the joint efforts of the members
of the Security Council, presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/4, on the fight against piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea, was adopted earlier during this meeting. That
is a positive response to the request of the coastal and
regional States for enhanced international cooperation
in the fight against piracy. It crystallizes international
consensus on the fight against piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea and proposes new ideas on joint responses to
tackle the problem. That will strongly enhance and
deepen international cooperation against piracy.

16-1153221/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

China and Africa make up a community of common
destiny and interests, sharing will and woe and seeking
a win-win outcome. Guided by the principle of sincerity,
political results, affinity and good faith and the right
approach to justice and interests, China has taken an
active part in Africa’s efforts to strengthen capacitybuilding for the maintenance of peace and security. China
has actively participated in international cooperation
against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and has provided
assistance to the coastal States for capacity-building in
the area of infrastructure. China’s naval escort fleet has
been invited to participate in join counter-piracy drills
with the navies of Nigeria and Cameroon. China has
provided the coastal States with material and equipment
for counter-piracy purposes. Chinese enterprises have
been active in building ports in the coastal States of
Nigeria, Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire. They will provide
solid support for the maritime operations of the regional
States. China will continue to implement the outcome
of the Johannesburg Summit between China and Africa,
cooperate with African countries for the maintenance
of security in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea, with a
view to creating an enabling security environment for
Africa’s economic and social development, including
supporting African countries in their efforts to achieve
lasting peace and common prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a normal speed so that interpretation may
be provided properly. I wish to inform all concerned
that, given the length of the list of speakers, we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Robert
Dussey, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
African Integration of Togo.
Mr. Dussey (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like,
first of all, to thank the People’s Republic of China,
Senegal and Angola for their initiative in organizing
this high-level open debate on the issue of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. That reflects
22/42

25/04/2016

the interest they attach to the promotion of peace,
security and stability wherever they are threatened,
and in Africa in particular. I would also like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing on the
issue under review.
I appreciate the opportunity afforded to me by
the Security Council to talk about this issue, which is
closely linked to the theme chosen for the Extraordinary
Summit of the African Union to be held in Lomé on
15 October. I would like to begin by mentioning the
great importance of the Lomé Summit following the
various other summits held on the African continent.
I assure the Security Council that, in the face of the
current concerns having to do with maritime security
and furthering development by promoting the blue
economy, the twenty-sixth Ordinary Summit of the
African Union, held in Addis Ababa, decided that the
Lomé Summit should lead to the adoption and signing
of an African charter on maritime safety and security
and development.
In the face of such a serious situation, it is important
to understand what we can expect from the twenty-sixth
Summit in Lomé, namely, the adoption of the draft
charter. Never in the history of the African continent,
in particular the history of the African Union, has there
been a charter of that nature. There have been several
African Union decisions, but this will be the first time
that the entire continent comes together to adopt a
draft charter for maritime security and development
in Africa.
Why does the African continent need such a
charter? There can be no doubt that maritime insecurity
in all its forms, as the Security Council has repeatedly
stated, constitutes a genuine threat to peace and
security in Africa. The problems with which Africans
are confronted with regard to the protection of maritime
space, which requires a collective and general response,
justifies the convening of the Lomé meeting and the
adoption of the draft charter. The draft Lomé charter
is an instrument aimed at fighting maritime insecurity
and other reprehensible acts committed on the high seas.
After several Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 2018 (2011), 2039 (2012) and 2184 (2014),
we know that it is important that Africa, which is called
upon to implement the programme entitled 2050 African
Union Integrated Maritime Strategy, also known as the
2050 AIM Strategy, be given an opportunity to take a
decision on its maritime future.
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.7675

The draft Lomé charter will also serve as an
instrument for the development of a blue economy. The
draft charter is intended to promote the development
of a flourishing blue economy that is sustainable and
environment-friendly in a well-secured space. The
proposed charter encourages the implementation
of a shared policy on fishing and aquaculture that
would promote the conservation and sustainable
management of fish stocks as well. It provides for
effective measures for tackling illegal fishing, which
has caused considerable losses for countries. Moreover,
the adoption of the draft Lomé charter should enable
African countries to stimulate economic growth
through job creation along the coast of the continent of
Africa, particularly through the promotion of artisanal
fishing and the commercialization of fish products at
the national, regional and subregional levels.

entire African continent. What we are working for is
an Africa that is free and responsible and willing and
able to take advantage of all its resources and to act
so as to develop its potential, particularly that which is
represented by maritime space and to harness that so as
to deliver development and well-being for our peoples.
That is the essential purpose, as it were, of the Lomé
Summit scheduled for 15 October.

I think it is also important to recognize the
importance of international trade and tourism in the
economic growth of States. The draft charter recalls
and encourages all the initiatives aimed at the goals
of protecting marine and coastal environment in
conformity with the international instruments dealing
with biodiversity and of promoting the sustainable
management of the marine population and the marine
species and their related ecosystems.

At the outset, we would like to thank China,
Angola and Senegal for organizing this open debate on
a subject of great importance to us all. We would also
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun for his briefing this morning.

The draft charter is also a melting pot of various
normative African regulations governing the fight
for security on the high seas. It is an instrument
of consolidation and of regional and subregional
integration aimed at uniting and strengthening existing
normative frameworks, particularly those drawn from
the Djibouti Code of Conduct of 29 January 2009, as
well as the Declaration of the Yaoundé Summit of
25 June 2013, referred to earlier this morning, and the
2050 AIM Strategy, of which I spoke. Furthermore, the
draft charter seeks to pave the way for further initiatives
and actions and the marshalling of resources to enable
us to achieve our basic goals, which are essentially
to heighten awareness and ensure that we have the
necessary legal tools for all African States to be able to
tackle the phenomenon of insecurity at sea.
The Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of State
and Government of the African Union, scheduled
to take place on 15 October in Lomé, will no doubt
mark an important milestone in the existence and the
implementation of the objectives of the pan-African
organization — the African Union — which is fully
committed to the process of a renaissance of the

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Ms. Annika Söder, State Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Söder (Sweden): It is an honour to be at the
United Nations today in the Security Council, speaking
on behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

The increase in pirate attacks off the coast of
West Africa and the steadily expanding area of their
operations affect more countries and more people
every year. That poses a threat to peace, security and
stability in an already vulnerable region. Furthermore,
the instability and the threats at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea present a major obstacle to the development and
prosperity of the region. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to increase international cooperation aimed
at curbing that trend and to find a solution to a growing
problem. How then can we join forces to tackle that
concern? We would like to highlight three areas that we
deem to be particularly important.
First, regional cooperation is key. It is therefore
very encouraging that the member States of the
Economic Community of West African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea agreed, in 2013
at their Summit in Yaoundé, on the Code of Conduct
Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activities in West
and Central Africa. The Code of Conduct and the
establishment of the necessary institutions for maritime
security in the region are important steps in the right
direction. Those institutions are not yet operational,
and they need further support.

16-1153223/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Moreover, closer cooperation among the navies
and coast guards of the region needs to be a priority.
Finding ways of patrolling each other’s waters could
also be considered and further developed. It is also
important that the right means to prosecute and
incarcerate criminals arrested at sea exist. For our part,
we are considering how we can best further support the
efforts by the countries of the region in that regard.
Secondly, the experiences of the European Union
Naval Force Somalia — Operation Atalanta — which
is pursuing counter-piracy operations off the Horn of
Africa, and to which we have contributed on several
occasions, should be capitalized on. That Security
Council-mandated operation provides a clear example
of how numerous and coordinated local, regional and
international efforts at sea and on land can collectively
reduce piracy and stabilize maritime regions.
Thirdly, we also need to keep in mind that piracy
and armed robbery at sea are complex phenomena
linked to poverty and social unrest. Addressing the root
causes requires a comprehensive and inclusive strategy
for promoting peace, stability and prosperity in the
region as a whole.
In that regard, the region’s potential to benefit
from the blue economy and harness the vast potential
of ocean resources so as to unlock growth and wealth
in the marine and maritime sectors should be pursued
further. The important work already under way in
several countries of the region aimed at increasing the
economic contribution of marine resources through
strengthened fisheries governance, reduced illegal
fishing and increased local value added to fish projects
is highly encouraging. My own Government, in
partnership with countries of the region, is currently
looking into how we, in a better and more sustainable
way, can unlock the potential of seas and oceans for
innovation and growth through capacity-building and
through collaboration.
We call for coherent and well-coordinated
intervention from local, subregional, regional and
international actors, including with a focus on bridging
the gaps between security and development. The
international community and the United Nations,
especially through the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, must continue supporting
regional actors in their specific efforts against piracy,
24/42

25/04/2016

while other United Nations entities must pursue the
goal of bringing long-term development and stability to
the region, including by investing in local and national
capacities. The role of the Peacebuilding Commission
has never been more important.
I would like to thank you once again, Mr. President,
for initiating this important discussion. We hope that
today’s debate will spur further international and
regional coordination and cooperation in the fight
against piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): It gives me
great pleasure to address the Security Council on
behalf of Portugal as part of this timely initiative by
the Chinese presidency, co-sponsored by Angola and
Senegal.
Portugal shares the view that security challenges in
the Gulf of Guinea region have to continue to be tackled
in a holistic and comprehensive manner. Although
the main focus of the international community has
been directed at the problem of maritime security, in
particular as it pertains to the safety and security of
navigation, the region faces broader security concerns
that go well beyond the coastline. In fact, the problems
of piracy and interrelated phenomena — such as armed
robbery at sea and oil bunkering — are a ramification
of the broader threat of transnational organized crime
in West Africa.
The increasing number of unlawful events in the
Gulf of Guinea during the current year is a reality.
The destabilizing effects of piracy and the corruptive
influence of transnational organized crime are being
felt widely in region. Hence, it is high time we all take
effective measures to prevent those criminal activities.
Resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) both
express the deep concern about the threat that piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea pose
to international navigation, security and the economic
development of States in the region. In 2015 in the
Gulf of Guinea, 81 per cent of the reported incidents
of unlawful acts took place within the territorial and
internal waters of coastal States. Therefore, their role in
coping with that scourge is more and more demanding.
Pirates and individuals involved in armed robbery
at sea have been developing their weaponry. In the case
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

of the Gulf of Guinea, they have increased the violence
employed in the attacks. In addition to small firearms,
pirates are now using machine guns and rocketpropelled grenade launchers. With those technologies,
their attacks can be completed much faster, sometimes
in less than 20 minutes. Preventing and avoiding those
kinds of attacks will be successful only when we
address the root causes that motivate those individuals
to put their own lives and those of others at stake.
But the Gulf of Guinea is too large, and we will
not prevail until and unless we act together. The
geopolitical features speak for themselves: 6,000
kilometres of coastline, 17 coastal States, 2 island
States and 5 landlocked States, all depending on the
Gulf of Guinea for their survival. It is therefore of
the utmost importance to continue to actively support
regional efforts in the Gulf of Guinea. Three elements
remain crucial in that endeavour. First and foremost,
there is a need for political will and engagement with
a view to achieving concrete results. Secondly, there
is a need for technological means to ensure security.
And, thirdly, there must be coordination of the different
actors and initiatives.
In line with the resolutions I just mentioned,
and considering the African Union 2050 Integrated
Maritime Strategy, several efforts have been
undertaken to promote synergies among regional and
international actors in the Gulf of Guinea. Those efforts
have had noteworthy results, namely, in the outcome
of the Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea,
held in Yaoundé in June 2013, which agreed on the
establishment of an integrated interregional maritime
architecture, with four interconnected and mutually
reinforcing layers. We believe that the interregional
framework, design and agreed to in Yaoundé, should be
the linchpin of any international approach and support
to the organizations and States in the region, with
respect for regional and local ownership. In that regard,
let me add a few thoughts on what we think the role of
the international community, and of the United Nations
in particular, should be in contributing to regional
efforts.
First and foremost, we must concentrate on
mobilizing support to the Yaoundé process, the relevant
regional organizations and the coastal States. That
encompasses the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Security in Yaoundé and the Regional Centre
for Maritime Security in Central Africa, in Pointe

S/PV.7675

Noire, Congo, and the Regional Maritime Security
Centre for West Africa , located in Abidjan, as well as
all of the planned multinational coordination centres, of
which only those located in Cotonou — Zone E — and
in Douala — Zone D — are active so far.
Secondly, we must foster cooperation among
national authorities and promote capacity-building,
while trying to make good use of all available
mechanisms. Capacity-building should entail both
the public and private sectors, which are are the main
targets of pirates and of the armed robbery incidents.
Thirdly, we must assist individual countries and
regional organizations in the creation of common legal
approaches at national and regional levels, so as to give
them the appropriate means to deal more effectively
with the ever-changing nature of threats to security and
stability in the region.
Finally, we must raise awareness of the importance
of the blue economy for coastal States and to
facilitate cooperation in the establishment of concrete
sustainable blue economy projects for the benefit of
local communities.
I would like to reiterate Portugal’s engagement
in contributing to the international efforts to help
the coastal States in the Gulf of Guinea in facing the
important challenges that have brought us here today.
Our long-established technical, military and legal
cooperation with countries in the region — namely,
with Angola, Cabo Verde and São Tomé and Príncipe;
the know-how that we have acquired in managing a
very wide exclusive economic zone and in defining
one of the largest continental shelves in the world;
and our experience in participating in and leading
piracy-fighting missions in the Gulf of Aden are good
references of our capabilities in that respect.
In conclusion, let me underscore that Portugal
currently holds the presidency of the Group of Seven
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, coinciding with Japan’s
Group of Seven chairmanship. During our presidency
of the Group, we will strive to promote synergies and
capacity-building along the lines I mentioned here, in
close coordination with the Yaoundé process members,
the Economic Community of West African States,
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and all the other
relevant international actors and initiatives.

16-1153225/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Let me first express my
delegation’s appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate, which is co-sponsored
by China, Angola and Senegal, and to all the briefers
for their insightful remarks.
As set out in the concept note (S/2016/321, annex),
the Gulf of Guinea is one of the regions that has been
most plagued by piracy and armed robbery at sea. Yet
the problem has not received due international attention.
The last time that the Security Council considered this
issue (see S/PV.6723), it adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/13. Since then, the situation has persisted
and even escalated. We welcome today’s debate as an
opportunity to remind the Council and the international
community that piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea requires sustained attention and
collective actions. I wish to highlight several of our
contributions in that regard.
First, with regard to counter-piracy measures,
resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012) encourage
States in the region to take concerted actions to counter
piracy and armed robbery at sea. They also encourage
the international community to provide assistance
to that end. That is a key message. Only through the
collective efforts of the entire international community
can the problem be effectively addressed. We must help
countries in the region, as well as the relevant regional
and subregional organizations, to enhance cooperation
on joint monitoring and patrols, and the sharing of
intelligence with a view to implementing the integrated
maritime security strategy, and to operationalizing
the relevant regional mechanisms, in particular the
Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety
and Security in the Gulf of Guinea.
We can also learn from the experience in other parts
of the world, in particular the Gulf of Aden. In that case,
two important factors contributed to the significant
reduction in incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea. The first was effective international joint naval
patrols in the designated high-risk areas. The second
factor was compliance with the best management
practices and anti-piracy guidance developed by the
shipping industry and the International Maritime
Organization. We should consider applying those
good operational practices to the situation in the Gulf
of Guinea.
26/42

25/04/2016

Secondly, with regard to compliance with
international law, it must be emphasized that any
measures taken to combat piracy and armed robbery
at sea must be consistent with international law. Due
regard should be given in particular to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which
sets out the legal framework applicable to activities in
maritime areas under national jurisdiction and beyond.
The objective should be to effectively counter piracy and
armed robbery at sea, without impairing the freedom of
navigation, the protection of the marine environment
and safe access to marine resources, in accordance with
international law.
Thirdly, with regard to addressing the root causes
of the issue and to capacity-building, while the
problem manifests itself offshore, a comprehensive
solution cannot be found without adequate onshore
measures and undertakings. As with other types of
organized crime, acts of piracy and armed robbery
at sea are largely economically motivated. Therefore,
we need to address the socioeconomic grievances
that prompt many to resort to such crimes. Creating
economic opportunities and alternative livelihoods
for local communities can contribute to the resolution
of that problem in a sustainable manner. In addition,
international assistance should be directed at helping
States in the region to strengthen their social-welfare
efforts and their law-enforcement and prosecution
capacities in relation to piracy and armed robbery
at sea.
Piracy is a challenge that concerns us all. The
Kingdom of Thailand has been working with the
international community to tackle that scourge
and ensure safety and security at sea. As part of the
Combined Maritime Forces partnership, the Royal
Thai Navy has successfully played an active role in
joint anti-Somali piracy operations. At the regional
level, we have made constructive contributions under
the frameworks of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Maritime Forum and the Regional Cooperation
Agreement on Combating Piracy and Armed Robbery
against Ships in Asia.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the Kingdom
of Thailand’s commitment to supporting the Gulf of
Guinea countries in their efforts to fight piracy and
armed robbery at sea. In particular, we are ready to
share our humble experience in maritime safety and
security, as well as in alternative development, so as to
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

improve the livelihood of the people. That experience
could be applied in the context of the Gulf of Guinea.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer for the African Union
to the United Nations.
Mr. António: Allow me to start by congratulating
the delegations of Angola, China and Senegal for
having jointly convened this timely debate on an
important issue that deserves greater attention from
the international community. I also thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Tayé-Brook
Zerihoun, for his briefing.
(spoke in French)
I would also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Robert Dussey, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation and African Integration of the Republic
of Togo, and Ms. Annika Söder, State Secretary for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden. I would especially like to
thank Mr. Dussey for shedding light on the African
Union initiatives, including thee draft charter clarifying
what is being done on the continent.
(spoke in English)
Acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea in Africa’s
Gulf of Guinea represent a major concern not only
to the region but also to the African Union and the
international community as a whole. Our concerns
are all the more acute as, over the past decade, piracy
attacks in that region have increased in severity and
scope, spreading northward and southward. Nowadays,
such attacks represent more than a quarter of all attacks
reported worldwide. There is no need to underscore the
long-range and far-reaching negative implications that
those criminal acts continue to have on the countries
concerned, given the fact that energy security and trade
in the region depend, to a large extent, on sea-based
transport. As indicated in the concept note (S/2016/321,
annex), every year such attacks inflict billions of
dollars of economic losses on the countries concerned
in the region.
Despite those facts, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
has only recently gained international attention. We
all remember the efforts made by African delegations,
especially the delegation of the Republic of Benin, to
draw the Council’s attention and concern to that issue.
Unfortunately, little concrete action has been taken
since the adoption of resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012), regarding acts of piracy and armed robbery in

S/PV.7675

the Gulf of Guinea. The resolutions have therefore had
only minimal impact on the number of incidents of
piracy in the region. Moreover, the technical assistance
requested from the international community has yet to
be deployed in full.
National, regional, continental and international
coordination appear to be a sine qua non if we want
to effectively fight maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea and beyond. The African Union continues to
cooperate closely with subregional actors in taking all
the appropriate measures to combat maritime crime and
insecurity and to address the underlying factors so as
to foster long-term security and stability in the region.
It is in that context that the African Union adopted,
at its twenty-second Summit, the 2050 African Union
Integrated Maritime Strategy and Plan of Action, which
should be viewed as a complement and support to
regional efforts on the continent. It is also in that context
that the African Union plans to hold an Extraordinary
Summit in Lomé, as mentioned by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Togo, on the issue of maritime security.
As we already stated, his participation in this meeting
is another demonstration of not only the engagement,
but also the awareness on the part of the leadership
in Africa.
At the regional level, countries of the region and
concerned regional organizations have taken numerous
steps to combat piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. It is unnecessary, therefore, to underscore
what many delegations have already said with regard
to the importance of the Summit of Heads of State and
Government of Central and West Africa on Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, held in June
2013 in Yaoundé. That Summit led to an ambitious
memorandum of understanding that established
the Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression of
Piracy, Armed Robbery Against Ships, and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa and the
Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety
and Security in the Gulf of Guinea. The memorandum
also established the International Conference on
Maritime and Energy Security, which was sponsored
by Angola, the United States of America and Italy,
and held in Luanda. The key question remains how
adequately and effectively we have supported all of
those initiatives. The coordination of those initiatives is
important as well. Also of paramount importance is the
use of established bodies, such as the Gulf of Guinea

16-1153227/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

25/04/2016

Commission and the Gulf of Guinea Interregional
Coordination Centre.

Republic of Togo, Mr. Robert Dussey, who represents
one of the countries most affected by this crisis.

Regional and continental efforts need to be fully
supported and enabled by the international community,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012). We also need to strengthen the
collective efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. These
efforts must also include other neighbouring regional
and international bodies, namely the Southern Africa
Development Community and the zone of peace and
cooperation of the South Atlantic, which includes 21
African countries and three countries from Latin
America, namely, Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, the
latter being the current President of the zone, as already
stated by the Uruguayan delegation.

Maritime piracy is a deadly threat to the lives of
all men and women working at sea. It is a threat to
the maritime industry and international trade. It has
links with organized and transnational crimes. It fuels
conflicts. Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea in particular undermine the consolidation of
peace in Western Africa and the economic development
of the region to the benefit of its people. Italy therefore
remains concerned about the continuing pirate and
armed attacks in the Gulf of Guinea and notes with
concern their most recent rise in number, violence and
geographic extension. It is particularly worrisome that
these attacks occur both in international and national
waters, undermining freedom and the security of
navigation, which are essential to trade and economic
development. Italy reiterates its commitment to halting
this trend through a multidimensional approach
based on prevention, diplomacy, training, security
and addressing the root causes. Let me share with the
Council some concrete examples beyond our active
participation in the EU strategy for the Gulf of Guinea
in support of the Yaoundé process.

Maritime security is closely linked to security
on land, as well as to the conditions of stability and
development of the concerned nations. The concerned
countries need to be supported to achieve long-term
prosperity, including for the development of the maritime
domain to enable greater trade, cooperation and job
creation. We must also ensure that our interventions in
the fields of development, including the development of
the blue economy, which was already well stated by the
Minister of Togo; cooperation; peacebuilding; conflict
prevention and international security are mutually
reinforcing.
For its part, the African Union will continue to
support all efforts of the region and its coastal States to
address the many challenges of maritime security and
organized crime that peoples of this region are facing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union (EU) and adds the following remarks
in its national capacity.
We thank China, Angola and Senegal for bringing
this issue back to the Security Council after the debates
in 2011 and 2012 and the adoption of resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/13 in August 2013. We also welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
28/42

First of all, my country is an active member of the
Group of Seven Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea
aimed at facilitating the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and of the Yaoundé Summit
declarations on maritime security and safety in the Gulf
of Guinea. We look forward to the upcoming meeting
under the Portuguese presidency. Italy will be attending
and working to advance the implementation of the
decision to establish, by 2016, a full-fledged maritime
security and safety architecture and to promote police
and judicial cooperation in the region.
In the same spirit of international engagement
and cooperation, my country officially supported
Angola in convening last November in Luanda the
International Conference on Maritime and Energy
Security. Our Deputy Minister for Defence attended
the meeting, which ended with the adoption of the
Luanda Declaration on information-sharing and
raising maritime situational awareness. On this basis,
the Italian and the Angolan navies are negotiating a
technical follow-up arrangement.
Secondly, local ownership and national leadership
are essential to complement international support and
direct it where it is most needed and effective. In this
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

regard, I stress the important role played by regional
and subregional organizations.The Yaoundé Code
of Conduct has chosen three regional organizations
to steer the process — the Economic Community
of West African States, the Economic Community
of Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission — and we look forward to cooperating with
them. We welcome in particular the high-level meeting
held in February and underscore the importance of the
Interregional Coordination Centre on Maritime Safety
and Security for Central and West Africa, based in
Cameroon, which we are actively supporting through a
grant. The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel can also play a facilitating role as part of its
overall action in the region.
Thirdly, training and capacity-building are
crucial and we have been focusing on this. During the
circumnavigation of Africa in the first half of 2014, the
Italian navy carried out specific training activities on
maritime security and the fight against piracy on our
flagship, the Nave Cavour. Over 20 African countries
and 21 ports were touched during this campaign,
including those in the Gulf of Guinea, and maritime
capacity-building initiatives were carried out very
successfully. In the same spirit, Italy is currently
supporting the maritime programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which promotes
capacity-building to address and eradicate crimes
committed at sea, including acts of piracy, armed
robbery and illicit trafficking.

S/PV.7675

2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution
70/1) and the African Union’s Agenda 2063 will play
a pivotal role to this end. The African Union summit
on maritime security and safety and development in
Africa, to be held in Lomé on 15 October, will offer an
excellent opportunity to advance the agenda regarding
the Gulf of Guinea and we look forward to its outcome
and concrete deliverables. We will further discuss the
way to strengthen our joint efforts with African partners
on security and development issues in the Italy-Africa
ministerial conference to be held in Rome on 18 May.
Finally, allow me to make a very short personal
remark. I was born 200 metres from the Mediterranean
Sea in a house that still proudly stands on the shore of
one of the most ancient maritime cities in the world,
Naples. Generations of my family have lived and
prospered with the sea. The sea brings one food, money,
culture and an open-minded future. That is one of the
reasons why we are so active in the Mediterranean to
the point of risking our lives, because we know that the
sea can bring a better life for everyone in the future. We
are really committed to ensuring the pacific use of the
sea in the Gulf of Guinea and in all of the open seas and
oceans in every corner of the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Let me thank
China, Angola and Senegal for proposing this debate,
as well as Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

This is part of our comprehensive effort to help
West Africa and Sahel countries enhance their overall
capacities in tackling illicit flows of arms, natural
resources, goods and persons. The Italian navy has
bilateral training programmes with its counterparts
in the Gulf of Guinea and beyond. Through our
Carabinieri and Guardia di Finanza, Italy has developed
a wide range of cooperation activities with the region’s
countries in this field. Let me name three examples:
border and custom management programmes;
investigative techniques and counter-terrorism training
courses; and information sharing.

Piracy and armed robbery at sea are serious crimes.
They involve not only the theft of private property,
but also a disrespect of many fundamental rights and
obligations, since in some cases deaths, kidnapping
and the demand for ransom are present. In the Gulf
of Guinea, this constitutes a challenge that needs to
be addressed by the countries in the region with the
support of the international community. In order to face
this challenge, we need to understand the situation in
the Gulf of Guinea by analysing recent statistics, as
well as the specific characteristics of piracy and armed
robbery in the area.

My last point is that, in order to tackle the
phenomenon effectively, we must go beyond piracy
and armed robbery and address their root causes on
land. Socioeconomic development; job opportunities;
inequalities; education; youth engagement; and
women’s empowerment must all be factored into our
decision-making on this issue. The implementation of the

According to the International Maritime
Organization, there has been a decrease in the number
of incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea over the past years. There were 45 and 54
incidents in 2014 and 2013, compared to 64 and 61 in
2012 and 2011. In 2015, the International Maritime
Bureau (IMB) of the International Chamber of

16-1153229/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Commerce (ICC), a non-profit organization established
to act as a focal point in the fight against all types of
maritime crimes, registered 31 actual or attempted
attacks in the area.
It is also important to underline that other regions
recorded significantly more incidents in the same
period. The ICC-IMB, for instance, recorded, in 2015,
147 cases of this kind in South-East Asia. In the Horn of
Africa, during the peak of their activity in 2011, Somali
pirates attacked 286 ships and hijacked 33 of them.
There are also significant differences in the nature of
incidents when we compare piracy and armed robbery
in the Horn of Africa and in the Gulf of Guinea.
Somali pirates were usually involved in kidnapping
and demand for ransom. Their activities took place
mostly in international waters and are therefore legally
considered piracy, according to article 101 of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which
defines piracy as occurring “on the high seas” or “in a
place outside the jurisdiction of any State”.
The majority of the incidents in the Gulf of Guinea,
on the other hand, were aimed at cargo robbery,
especially oil, and mostly took place in territorial
waters or in port areas, therefore are considered armed
robbery, according to international law. Accordingly,
problems regarding piracy and armed robbery on the
West and East coasts of the African continent are
distinct and therefore require different solutions.
The Security Council adopted resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012) on piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. In 2013, the Yaoundé Summit
of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea adopted a
Declaration, a memorandum of understanding between
the Economic Community of West African States,
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, and the Code of
Conduct Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed
Robbery Against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in
West and Central Africa. It also decided on the creation
of the Interregional Coordination Centre, which was
opened in 2015.
Brazil believes that the countries in the region should
play the leading role in addressing the issue of piracy
and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. Any regional
strategy in this direction should be comprehensive and
take into consideration not only security questions, but
30/42

25/04/2016

also the strengthening of institutions and the sustainable
development of the region.
The international community should support
the region with cooperation activities that respect
national ownership. This is what my country has been
trying to do. Brazil has signed military cooperation
agreements with nine countries on the west coast of
Africa — Namibia, Cabo Verde, South Africa, GuineaBissau, Sao Tome and Príncipe, Nigeria, Senegal,
Angola and Equatorial Guinea. A naval mission in
Namibia has been maintained by Brazil since 1994 and
has so far helped to train more than 2,000 members of
the Namibian navy. New missions have recently been
opened in Cabo Verde and in Sao Tome and Principe.
Officers and other members of the armed forces from
the region have studied at Brazilian military academies.
The cooperation offered by Brazil is concentrated
in capacity-building, training, military doctrine
and maritime exercises. In recent years, Brazil has
conducted exercises with Benin, Cabo Verde, Sao Tome
and Principe and Nigeria. Since 2013, the Brazilian navy
has taken part in an international maritime exercise
designed to improve cooperation among participating
nations in order to increase maritime safety and security
in the Gulf of Guinea. The latest edition of the exercise
ended last month. These are the kinds of initiatives that
we believe to be necessary for improving cooperation
with the countries in the region and for enhancing their
capacity to combat piracy and armed robbery.
Any initiative in the region of the Gulf of Guinea
must to be in harmony with the objectives of the
zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
(ZPCSA). I would like to recall that the zone comprises
24 countries, including all the countries situated on the
west coast of Africa, from Cabo Verde and Senegal,
in the north, to South Africa, as well as three South
American countries across the ocean — Argentina,
Uruguay, and my own country, Brazil.
In this regard, the members of the ZPCSA have
agreed to consolidate the region as a zone of peace and
cooperation to ensure that it remains free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, as well
as to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of its countries. The Montevideo
Declaration, adopted in 2013 at the ministerial level by
the ZPCSA, directly mentioned the problem posed by
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea.
The Declaration recognized the leadership role that the
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

States of the Gulf of Guinea should play in this regard
and the need for regional coordination of efforts to
counter activities of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
It also urged international partners to assist States and
organizations in the region in the enhancement of their
capabilities to counter this kind of threat.
Since 1986, the General Assembly has adopted
22 resolutions on the ZPCSA. In the most recent
resolution, adopted in 2015, the General Assembly
stressed the role of the ZPCSA as a forum for increased
interaction and support among its member States and
recalled with appreciation the holding of the seventh
ministerial meeting of the ZPCSA and the adoption of
the Montevideo Declaration (resolution 69/322).
Considering that the issue of piracy and armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea is primarily a matter
of cooperation among States, we believe that the
General Assembly is the appropriate forum to lead the
discussion. Consistent with the statement made earlier
by the State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden,
we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission also
has a role to play. Brazil stands ready to continue to
cooperate with the region in order to face this challenge.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegations of Senegal and
Angola, for having taken the initiative to hold today’s
debate. I also thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union. I wish now to
make the following remarks in my national capacity.
Today, as the risk of piracy seems to be decreasing
in the Horn of Africa, maritime insecurity is growing
in the Gulf of Guinea. This development is worrying
because it carries instability at a time when the West
Africa is facing other challenges posed by illicit
trafficking and the proximity of the terrorist threat in
the Sahel. Given that the Gulf of Guinea is a place of
intense economic activity and trade, the fight against
maritime insecurity there is a challenge that goes beyond
the sphere of purely security matters. Ownership of this
issue by the coastal States is therefore crucial. Just as
important is the establishment of regional cooperation
structures that will allow for greater effectiveness in
the fight against the various forms of maritime crime.

S/PV.7675

We welcome in this respect the establishment, in
Yaoundé, pursuant to the decision taken at the Summit
of the West African and Central African Heads of
State in June 2013, of the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf
of Guinea. It is our hope that this important tool for
regional cooperation becomes fully operational as soon
as possible. As for Belgium, we stand alongside the
West African States and are committed to supporting
them in their fight against maritime crime. My country
is a member of the Group of Seven Plus Friends of the
Gulf of Guinea, whose action is aimed at coordinating
maritime capacity-building initiatives undertaken by
various international partners.
Belgium has also actively participated in the
development of the European Union Maritime Security
Strategy and its related Gulf of Guinea 2015-2020
Action Plan. Furthermore, Belgian bilateral initiatives
are in line with the Action Plan. Accordingly, Belgium is
active in strengthening the national maritime, military
and civilian capabilities of several coastal States in the
Gulf of Guinea through training activities it sponsors.
A particularly fruitful partnership example is the one
developed with Benin in which Belgium is currently
cooperating in the training of personnel for three new
patrol boats and in the training of marines.
Belgium also regularly provides ships from its
navy as part of the international initiative “Africa
Partnership Station” which aims to develop military,
coast-guard and marine expertise of African coastal
nations. That was the case, for example, in 2014, with
a logistics support ship and, in 2015, a frigate. During
the latter deployment, the Belgian frigate trained on
board sailors from Togo, Gabon, Congo and Benin. It
also participated in the exercise Obangame Express,
conducted in the Gulf of Guinea to help local forces
develop their capacity to fight illegal maritime activities.
Belgium is studying the possibility of deploying again
this year a logistics support ship as part of the Africa
Partnership Station.
In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the need
for consistency in the fight against maritime crime
with the improvement of the living conditions of local
populations. Any lasting solution will indeed include a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
of the problem, taking into account the factors that fuel
them, such as governance gaps and poverty. Treating
the causes of the problem is to act in order to prevent
their exacerbation or re-emergence. Belgium therefore

16-1153231/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

welcomes the Council’s adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/4, which contains a set of
concrete recommendations on the means to that end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): Threats to maritime safety
have become an issue of increased international concern.
The Gulf of Guinea in particular is greatly affected by
piracy and armed robbery at sea, inflicting billions of
dollars of economic losses and threatening maritime
safety. Acts of piracy are often committed with extreme
violence. The countries of the region have recognized
this threat. The Yaoundé process, established by Heads
of State and Government in 2013, underscores the need
for joint action. Allow me to stress the following three
points.
First, without strong local and regional ownership
we will not be able to tackle this issue successfully.
Focused and relevant regional support is therefore
needed at the political and financial levels, as well
as through the human resources of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
its Yaoundé process. Germany has contributed more
than €1 million in an effort to strengthen regional
cooperation under the Yaoundé process, most notably
through communication equipment designed to improve
surveillance operations in the Gulf. Germany stands
ready to increase its support in the context of its longstanding partnership with ECOWASand the Yaoundé
process.
Secondly, the scope of the existing partnerships
has to be widened. We therefore welcome efforts
made by the private sector to ensure greater security
in the Gulf of Guinea. We also appreciate the private
sector’s repeated calls for transparent and pragmatic
cooperation between all stakeholders of the Yaoundé
process.
Thirdly, maritime security is more than ever a
global challenge. Under the auspices of the German
presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7) last year, foreign
ministers collectively agreed in the Lübeck declaration
to make maritime security and effective maritime
governance a priority. The Lübeck declaration calls for
a cooperative, rules-based, cross-sector approach to
maritime security and stresses the importance of the
relevant legal frameworks, such as the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
32/42

25/04/2016

Let me add that we fully support the commitment
of Japan’s G-7 2016 presidency to maritime security,
and we welcome the efforts made by the Portuguese
presidency of the G-7 Group of Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I give the floor
to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; and Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia.
Let me start by thanking the Chinese presidency
for organizing this open debate, and Angola, China and
Senegal for the thoughtful concept note (S/20116/321,
annex). Allow me also to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
The European Union and its member States remain
concerned about the continued incidents of piracy and
armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. According
to the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the
Gulf of Guinea accounts for nearly 40 per cent of all
piracy and armed robbery at sea reported worldwide
so far this year. In 2015 the Gulf of Guinea represented
the third-most dangerous maritime area of the globe.
Since the beginning of this year, there has been a
36 per cent increase in reported incidents as compared
to the same period last year, and the number of people
kidnapped from ships already matches the total for
the whole of 2015, with several particularly violent
incidents being a source of particular concern. On
average, there are approximately 40 European Union
member State-flagged or owned vessels at any one time
in the waters of the Gulf of Guinea. The constant risk
of criminal attacks in the Gulf of Guinea is therefore a
widely shared international concern. The risk of piracy
and armed robbery at sea exists both in international
waters and in the territorial waters of the countries
in the region, especially at anchorage sites and in the
Niger Delta.
Safe waters and safe passage at sea are of paramount
importance for the economic and human development
of the countries of the Gulf of Guinea. The maritime
domain is an enabler of prosperity and sustainable
development. The growing threat of piracy and armed
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea is therefore in
the first place a threat against the coastal States of the
region and to their development. Beyond the immediate
threat against the shipping industry, it is also the
complex, interconnected and often cross-border nature
of the threat that is worrying, as it has the potential to
endanger the authority and stability of some States in
the region.
From the outset, the European Union has been
fully supportive of regional and international efforts to
stem piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea.
Following the adoption of resolution 2018 (2011) and
resolution 2039 (2012), as well as the interregional
Summit in Yaoundé in June 2013 by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
(GGC), in March 2014 the European Union adopted
its own strategy for the Gulf of Guinea, in support
of the Yaoundé process. Just like the Yaoundé Code
of Conduct, the EU strategy goes beyond piracy
and armed robbery at sea and also addresses illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, trafficking, and
pollution, including oil bunkering. It also contains
measures to address conducive causes on land, by
promoting the development of coastal economies and
the strengthening of law enforcement. In March 2015,
the EU strategy was complemented by an action plan,
a first report on whose implementation so far has just
been finalized.
The EU and its member States are committed to
continuing their assistance to the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea to make the Yaoundé Code of Conduct successful,
under the leadership of the three organizations that
the region itself has chosen — ECOWAS, ECCAS and
the GGC. We welcome the high-level meeting held in
February, which should allow for the operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre based in
Yaoundé by July. We encourage all the parties concerned
to implement the Code of Conduct swiftly and in full.
Financial and technical support has already been
provided by the European Union to the International
Criminal Court and to the Regional Centre on Maritime
Security in Central Africa, based in in Pointe Noire,
Congo. The European Union and its member States
have also developed a concept for live exercises at sea
and crisis response training, and have also provided
training for maritime stakeholders carried out by two
universities in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire. We also highly

S/PV.7675

value the supportive work in the Group of Seven Plus
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which is currently under
Portuguese presidency and meets twice every year.
In our view, that is the adequate forum to develop
ideas and actions to support the implementation of the
Yaoundé Code of Conduct and to ensure that partners
work in synergy.
As already stated, the European Union and its
member States are already active in the Gulf of Guinea
with the implementation of national and regional
projects. Further such support is underway. By the end
of this year, additional projects will be formulated that
will support the Yaoundé architecture, in full alignment
with the 2050 African Union Integrated Maritime
Strategy. We also acknowledge the work already done
by several United Nations bodies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the IMO,
and others such as Interpol. We remain committed to
working closely and effectively with them.
The African Union summit on maritime security
and safety and development in Africa, to be held in
Lomé on 15 October, will offer an excellent opportunity
to sustain momentum and awareness regarding the Gulf
of Guinea. To that end, we are ready to support the
Togolese Government and the African Union in their
work preparing for concrete deliverables at the Summit.
In conclusion, today’s debate comes at a decisive
moment. I would therefore like to once again thank
Angola, China and Senegal for taking the initiative to
hold this debate. Overall, we are experiencing a growing
and possibly still underestimated threat to maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea. It is therefore the right
moment to consider how we can do more collectively
to prevent the situation from worsening further. The
work should proceed on several fronts — root causes,
law enforcement, capacity-building, maritime domain
awareness and job creation.
From the outset, the EU has been a fully committed
partner of the Gulf of Guinea countries and is
determined to remain so. Local ownership and local
leadership, particularly on the part of regional States
and organizations, is essential if our support, and that
of other international partners, will be focused where it
is most needed.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.

16-1153233/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for collaborating with Angola and
Senegal in organizing today’s open debate on piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, which
my delegation views as an important and timely topic
relevant to the development and security of Africa.
Piracy and armed robbery have a negative impact on
the social, economic and humanitarian situations in the
States affected in the Gulf of Guinea. They also affect
the hinterland and landlocked countries that depend on
the sea for exports and imports. Piracy is estimated to
result in an annual loss of $2 billion to the economy
of the West African subregion. We commend the
determination exhibited by the countries of the region,
including through the planning of regional coordination
centres designed to implement the integrated maritime
security strategy adopted in 2013. We also commend
the outcome of the extraordinary high-level meeting,
held in February, of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
aimed at facilitating the launch of the operations of the
Interregional Coordination Centre as soon as possible.
It is important to take note of the adoption by
the African Union (AU) in 2014 of the 2050 AU
Integrated Maritime Strategy, which seeks to move
Africa’s maritime security practices and initiatives
from a subregional level, as represented by the 2009
Djibouti Code of Conduct in East Africa, the 2013
Yaoundé Declaration in West Africa and the Southern
African Development Community’s Maritime Security
Strategy, to a continental level. It thus recognizes AU
member States’ common maritime challenges and
opportunities and addresses threats that negatively
affect social and economic development in African
States in an integrated manner. It sees the challenges of
maritime security as linked to development challenges
and calls for a broad approach to addressing them.
That is significant, given the fact that between them 38
African countries have a combined coastline of 26,000
nautical miles, that sea fishing contributes to the food
security of 200 million Africans and that more than
90 per cent of Africa’s trade is seaborne, highlighting
the importance of addressing the threats that piracy and
armed robbery at sea pose for the continent.
My delegation wishes to recall the decision of
the AU Assembly of January 2014, which stressed
the need for strategic partnerships in support of
initiatives aimed at implementing Africa’s Integrated
34/42

25/04/2016

Maritime Strategy. It allows for the vital role played
by the international community in supporting national
and regional mechanisms for dealing with maritime
security challenges. In strengthening a meaningful
partnership between Africa and the international
community, we need substantial assistance from the
international community and intensified engagement
on the part of the United Nations in order to build on
Africa’s efforts to deal in an integrated manner with the
problem of piracy on a basis of national and regional
ownership. Recent experiences in the Gulf of Aden
have shown how devastating the economic and security
consequences to the international community can be if
the challenge of piracy, including its root causes, is not
addressed in a determined and collaborative manner.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to emphasize
the importance of focusing on the root causes of piracy,
such as high levels of youth unemployment, poverty
and underdevelopment, and the consequent need for
strengthening development interventions, in line with
the African Union Agenda 2063, which identifies the
maritime economy as a major contributor to growth and
development in Africa.
South Africa strongly believes that it is urgent that
the Security Council send a strong and unequivocal
message to the end users of pirated goods. In that
regard, it is also important to start exploring the nexus
between the illicit pirate economy and formal global
stakeholders, including in the area of hydrocarbons.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Menkveld (Netherlands): At the outset, I
would like to express my appreciation to the People’s
Republic of China for organizing today’s open debate on
an important topic and, together with the Republics of
Angola and Senegal, for providing us with a thoughtful
concept note (S/2016/321, annex).
The threat to maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea is not only a threat to the security and prosperity
of African States but one that affects seafaring States
such as the Netherlands and others around the globe. It
is therefore essential that we solve the problem, and that
can be done most effectively through close international
cooperation that also addresses the root causes. In the
wake of the important steps that have already been
taken through the Yaoundé agreements, it is now time
to move forward.
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The Netherlands aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union (EU),
and I would like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity on the problem of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea, the response to it and the importance
of an integrated approach.
The situation in the region remains worrying. In
the first few months of 2016, we have seen kidnappings,
theft and violent attacks on mariners. The need to
address the situation is clear. As I said, illegal maritime
activities in the Gulf of Guinea are not just the problem
of West African States; they are our problem as well.
Such activities harm regional trade and economic
development, hinder the flow of commerce between
Europe and West Africa and other regions and thus
do damage to prosperity on a larger scale. Within the
countries of West Africa, a lack of maritime security
poses a threat on various levels to both coastal and
inland communities. Organized maritime crime,
including trafficking in drugs and persons and illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing, is an element of
maritime insecurity that goes beyond the act of piracy
to disrupt societies across the continent, increase
corruption and threaten communities’ livelihoods. A
comprehensive approach and response is required.
In June 2014, the members of the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf
of Guinea Commisssion gathered together to express
their commitment to improving collaboration in the
region. The result was the Yaoundé Code of Conduct
concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
against Ships, and Illicit Maritime Activity in West
and Central Africa, which is being implemented right
now. We look forward to the rapid operationalization
of the Interregional Coordination Centre. Since most
illegal activities take place within territorial waters,
West African coastal countries have a responsibility
to coordinate their response. As such, we appreciate
the efforts and progress being made on the Yaoundé
agenda.
In March 2014, the European Union adopted a
strategy for the Gulf of Guinea, aimed at mapping
threats and stressing the importance of regional and
international action. That initial plan has now been
transformed into an EU action plan so as to support
Governments in the region in taking on the challenges
of combating maritime security on several fronts,
and the Netherlands is an active supporter of that

S/PV.7675

strategy. In order to tackle the multifaceted challenges
of maritime security in an effective way, we need a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
at various levels. Developing coastal communities and
removing incentives for those communities to resort
to maritime crime is pivotal in a long-term approach.
In addition to a strong response to criminal activities,
we should strive for inclusive economic wealth in
the region. To achieve that, the Netherlands actively
supports the implementation of the aforementioned
European Union Gulf of Guinea Action Plan 2015-2020
and its development activities in the region. Within that
framework, and as part of an integrated approach, the
Netherlands focuses its efforts in the countries of the
Gulf of Guinea on maritime capacity-building, and
we undertake exercises and provide training in the
countries on the prevention of criminal activities, such
as drug smuggling and human trafficking.
In September 2015, we organized, together with
the Governments of Togo and the African Union (AU)
representatives, a meeting in New York on maritime
security in Africa in the run up to the AU summit on
maritime security in Togo this fall. We will actively
contribute with Dutch experts to the seminars at the
upcoming AU summit.
In striving for a safe and secure maritime
environment, cooperation is of the essence. We must
work together. The Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore
aims to continue to be a partner for African countries.
Only through equal and respectful partnerships can we
strengthen the maritime security in the region.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Ms. Fountoulaki (Greece): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this timely and
important debate. We also wish to express appreciation
to China, Angola and Senegal for the useful concept
note (S/2016/321) on an issue of major concern,
not only to States in the Gulf of Guinea, but to the
international community.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and wishes to
add the following in its national capacity:
For a traditional maritime country like Greece,
with a leading shipping industry, the longest coastline
in the European Union and maritime borders that are
to a large extent the borders of the European Union,

16-1153235/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the safety of navigation and marine transportation is
of utmost importance. Greece has contributed to the
adoption of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) resolution A.1069(28), regarding the Gulf of
Guinea, as well as to the European Union Maritime
Security Strategy, which addresses, in an integrated
way, all security challenges at sea, including piracy.
Greece recognizes the key role of all Gulf of
Guinea States in raising the international community’s
awareness on the challenges they face in combating
piracy and developing a comprehensive regional
response. We fully support the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions as well as
the resolutions adopted by the International Maritime
Organization on the issue. We also endorse the
implementation of the European Union Gulf of Guinea
Action Plan 2015-2020.
The growing threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and several recent violent incidents against crews are
particularly worrying. The situation poses an alarming
threat to local economies, potentially undermining
stability and threatening the oil revenues upon which
many countries in the region rely. Greece is gravely
concerned about that phenomenon, which endangers
the lives of seafarers who continue to pay a heavy
price. The strong commitment of the international
community and close cooperation with flag States and
regional organizations is necessary in order to ensure
the prosecution of pirates and armed robbers. As an
additional step towards prevention, it is important that
States apply the guidelines and recommendations of the
relevant specialized organizations, in particular, those
of the International Maritime Organization.
We firmly believe that the international
community must support the countries in the region
to build their own maritime strategy in order to fight
piracy. Local ownership renders a strategy legitimate
and sustainable. Agreements providing for technical
assistance and counter-piracy training will reinforce
the determination to develop their means to that end.
The NATO Maritime Interdiction Operational Training
Centre in Crete/Greece, in cooperation with the IMO,
the African Union and, in particular, the East Africa
Standby Force, provides expertise through standardized
or other training tailored to specific needs, either on
its premises or through mobile training teams. There
have been 364 officers and experts from 30 member
States trained so far, including 16 officers from nine
West African States.
36/42

25/04/2016

The problem of piracy can only be resolved with
a holistic, coordinated approach on land and at sea.
Preventing and addressing the root causes of the
phenomenon, such as poverty and the lack of economic
opportunities, and capacity-building should be among
the priorities. The lessons learned from the successful
international involvement against piracy off the coast
of Somalia can provide useful guidelines to address
issues in the Gulf of Guinea.
In view of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1), and
while addressing the multifaceted global challenges of
the future, we should not allow the revival of phenomena
such as piracy to reverse our efforts to enhance and
secure development for the benefit of all nations and
future generations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
Chinese presidency, as well as to the Permanent
Missions of Angola and Senegal, for initiating and
convening this open debate, which focuses on piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, within
the overall subject of the consolidation of peace in
West Africa. As a member-observer of the African
Union, Kazakhstan is deeply concerned that piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea affects not only a number of our
friendly countries in West Africa, but also the wider
international community. It is therefore becoming an
issue of global concern.
We strongly condemn piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which is often part of the heavily armed criminal
enterprises that employ violent methods. Those attacks
by pirates have reached a high record, with some 100
attempted hijackings annually, a close second behind
those in South-East Asia. It is alarming to note that
pirates in the region operate a well-funded criminal
industry, which includes established supply networks.
The piracy attacks mainly occur in territorial waters,
terminals and harbours, rather than on the high seas,
which has hindered intervention by international
naval forces. Furthermore, pirates have become more
aggressive and better armed, with brutal tactics that
defy the methods to capture them.
From the humanitarian point of view, we are
concerned that the pirates in the Gulf of Guinea are
especially noted for their violent modus operandi, which
involves kidnapping, torture, violence and the shooting
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.7675

of crews, thereby constituting a conscious so-called
criminal business model. It is also disconcerting that
many events go unreported. From an economic point of
view, acts of piracy interfere with the legitimate trading
interests of the affected countries. To that end, trade in
the region’s major ports has dropped dramatically. We
grieved that the cost of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
has been estimated to be approximately $2 billion,
while poverty is a big challenge for the countries of
West Africa.

achievement of human security for all. We therefore
stand for fully implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
and, most important, the 2030 Agenda, in the region.
That calls for broadening the concept of peace and
stability from State-centred security to people-oriented
security and from purely military to non-military
security, which includes the important priorities of
food and water and energy security, including nuclear
security, on our path to a non-permanent seat on the
Security Council.

We commend the performance of the United
Nations, the African Union and other organizations
engaged in international efforts in the region to address
the scourge of piracy and armed robbery. To ensure
further progress, a more comprehensive regional
strategy elaborated by all stakeholders is needed.

President Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan, in his recent
new security paradigm document entitled, “Manifesto.
The World. The 21st Century”, presented on 31 March
at the fourth Nuclear Security Summit in Washington,
D.C., proposed the elaboration of a 2045 global
strategic initiative plan. Its main goal is to eliminate
the root causes of wars and conflicts by the United
Nations centennial in 2045. During his address to the
General Assembly last September (see A/70/PV.13), he
also called for transferring 1 per cent of the defence
budgets of Member States to the special Sustainable
Development Goals Fund.

Early in the seventieth session of the General
Assembly, Kazakhstan and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) signed a costsharing agreement for a new project called the
Africa-Kazakhstan Partnership for the Sustainable
Development Goals. The agreement focuses on
technical support to the Ministries for Foreign Affairs
and other relevant institutions in 45 African countries,
including West Africa. The project will promote the
sharing of institutional experiences and best practices as
Governments prepare to take forward the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly
resolution 70/1). The United Nations Development
Programme is working directly with ministries of
African countries to implement that project.
We believe that our overall objective should be to
build on the efforts of countries in the region to achieve
greater State-building, the rule of law, good governance,
inclusive political processes, security and justice sector
reforms, the protection of civilians and the disarmament
and reintegration of combatants. All those measures, as
a complex whole, are vitally important to counter piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. To that
end, we have to think of greater military, diplomatic and
development partnerships that go beyond North-South
cooperation to South-South and triangular cooperation.
My delegation therefore supports the actions of the
United Nations, and especially those of the Council
through its various resolutions concerning the region of
West Africa as a whole and its countries individually.
We need to work together towards the West
African region’s stability, progressive development and

Addressing the issues of piracy and armed robbery
at sea is possible by bringing together existing measures,
operating under the aegis of the United Nations. We
therefore call on all delegations to support these bold
and forward-looking approaches. Development and
peace go together, and therefore we must support the
countries of the West Africa region in implementing
the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. Kazakhstan is therefore reaching out to
countries in Africa through technical assistance
with UNDP projects. We have to invest more in
sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish
to commend China for having convened this meeting
devoted to a subregion that is very dear to us and with
which we share concerns and ambitions, and to a topic
that is particularly important to us: to consider the
potential ways and perspectives to support peacebuilding
efforts in this part of our mother continent, Africa.
The subregion of West African continues to
face several serious problems with regard to peace
and security. The topics that have raised the greatest
concern are, without a doubt, the indiscriminate attacks
perpetrated by Boko Haram and their destabilizing

16-1153237/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

consequences for the humanitarian, human rights and
security situation of the countries of the Lake Chad
basin, the continuing threats facing the Malian peace
process and the repercussions of the Ebola outbreak.
Notable improvements, such as the holding of
peaceful and credible elections in several countries
of the region, as well as progress in eradicating the
Ebola epidemic in some countries of the Mano River
Union — thanks in part to the excellent cooperation
between the United Nations and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) — have not masked
the growing threat posed by terrorism in West Africa.
Violent extremism and terrorist activities continue to
pose a very serious threat to security and development
in West Africa, further aggravating political, economic
and humanitarian problems in the region while
subordinating other threats that are equally important,
such as drug trafficking, transnational organized crime
and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
As you outlined so well in the concept note
(S/2016/321, annex) prepared for this debate,
Mr. President, the threats to peace unfortunately do not
come only from terrorist activities. Piracy activities in
the Gulf of Guinea, which has become the new centre
of gravity for piracy in Africa, have stolen the show
from the Gulf of Aden, where the phenomenon, most
amazingly, has almost disappeared in the face of the
deployment of an international military fleet. The Gulf
of Guinea, an area rich in natural resources — with
8 per cent of global oil reserves, but also fisheries and
other biological resources — has considerable shipping
traffic, thereby offering many targets for small pirate
groups, which are generally well armed and violent.
The coastal area stretching from Senegal to Angola
has become the new stalking ground for pirates. Within
10 years there have been more than 600 acts of piracy,
which have significantly handicapped the development
of the coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea. The
economic losses are substantial for States, for which
maritime revenues represent up to 20 per cent of their
national budgets, as well as for business, including
some Western oil companies that have withdrawn
from the region. As confirmed by the reports of the
Secretary-General on the subregion, little progress has
been achieved with regard to the fight against piracy
and improving maritime safety and security ​​in the Gulf
of Guinea.
38/42

25/04/2016

While the Yaoundé Summit in 2013 created hopes for
a coordinated response at the regional and international
levels to check this phenomenon, maritime insecurity
nevertheless continues to be a threat to the political and
economic stability of the States of the subregion, in
the absence of a joint monitoring system and of a fight
against piracy. The challenge is therefore to establish
a framework to make it possible to pool the technical
and human resources of the States of the subregion, as
well as to adopt appropriate regulatory measures and
predictable and recurrent financial mechanisms to
support the region over the long-term. In our view, that
requires the combination of the following efforts.
First, it requires strengthening international
solidarity. Through resolution 2039 (2012), the Security
Council encourages the States of the Gulf of Guinea,
ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission
to develop, with the support of the United Nations
and other partners, a regional strategy, as well as the
harmonization of actions by their member States at sea
and the elaboration or strengthening of their legislation
in order to combat piracy.
The United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel, under the under the enlightened and active
leadership of Mr. Ibn Chambas — to whom I give high
praise — has spared no effort to coordinate the efforts
of Member States and partners to make the decisions
taken at the Yaoundé Summit fully operational. The
Friends of the Gulf of Guinea Group, for its part, is
playing a growing role in raising awareness of the issue.
However, nearly three years later, the conclusions
reached at the Yaoundé Summit — which included a
Declaration by the Heads of State, a Code of Conduct
and a memorandum of understanding — have not yet
produced the desired results, and external assistance,
which is essential at this stage, remains limited. The
initiative of the International Maritime Organization
to establish a support fund to implement the Yaoundé
decisions is praiseworthy, but it seems essential to us
that donors ramp up their contributions and that those
contributions should go beyond training and focus
on equipment.
It is time for the Gulf of Guinea to enjoy
international mobilization as effective and committed
as that which the Gulf of Aden has received. To win
the battle against piracy, the international community
must respond positively to the appeal by the States of
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the region for international assistance, following the
model of what was done in the Gulf of Aden, in which
the international intervention forces could use force
and coordinate their operations.
The second effort is the strengthening of
interregional coordination. Given the scale of the
phenomenon, obviously no one country in the region is
able to resolve the problem of maritime insecurity on
its own. While it is true that interregional dialogue with
regard to the scourge of piracy was strengthened by the
establishment of an interregional coordination centre
against piracy and regional centres along the coast, the
lack of cooperation among stakeholders is still being
heavily felt. However, in that connection we welcome
the decision of the ECOWAS Chiefs of Defence Staff,
taken in Dakar in September 2015, to incorporate
Mauritania in the maritime security structure in the
Gulf of Guinea.
Member States that are the primary victims of this
scourge should redouble their efforts to operationalize
the maritime safety and security arrangement
established in the Gulf of Guinea, despite the lack of
logistical and financial resources. The countries of the
region are called on to find alternatives to sustainably
finance the operation of their marine structures,
including the regional coordination centres, which are
suffering from a lack of logistical and human resources.
Regional cooperation is sometimes paralysed by
the persistence of major border disputes among riparian
countries. Disagreements related to the maritime
border delimitation process could exacerbate security
problems. That issue should be resolved by the signing
of agreements creating joint operating areas among the
countries concerned, as suggested in in article 83 of the
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Thirdly, national capacities to fight maritime
piracy must be strengthened. At the State level and in
terms of human resources, cooperation among national
entities with maritime missions remains ineffective,
with an occasional lack of communication between the
navy and maritime police or the coast guard in certain
countries. As for naval assets, and despite their efforts,
most countries do not have an adequate arsenal to defeat
the pirates in the Gulf of Guinea, who are reputed to be
the most violent in the world.
To overcome those barriers, each State should
work further to strengthen its legislative framework
and build national structures to manage and coordinate

S/PV.7675

maritime security, including through the strengthening
of cooperation with the private sector and international
organizations, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and the United Nations
Office for West Africa.
In conclusion, I recall that the initiative launched
by Morocco in May 2009, creating the Ministerial
Conference of African States Bordering the Atlantic,
will be a space and framework for intra-African
cooperation in which the actions of different
countries in the areas of development cooperation, the
peacebuilding, conflict prevention and international
security, including the fight against maritime piracy,
are mutually reinforcing.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.
We too thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate. The security situation in the Gulf of Guinea
is assuming alarming proportions that threaten the
safety of civilian vessels from all over the world and
the national interests of the regional countries. Unlike
Somalia, where multilateral counter-piracy efforts have
led to a steady decline in attacks, the Gulf of Guinea has
seen an escalation in acts of maritime piracy, including
armed robbery and hostage-taking, since 2009.
Navigational safety in the Gulf of Guinea and
unimpeded transport of goods are crucial to regional
trade and the development efforts of the coastal
countries. As the abduction of Turkish crew members
of a freighter owned by a Turkish company and a failed
attempt by pirates to board another ship bearing the
Turkish flag have shown, no country is immune from
the growing menace in the region. The international
community should demonstrate the necessary cohesion
and solidarity to face and eliminate that challenge. In
the absence of robust responses, the Gulf of Guinea
pirates are consolidating and expanding their activities
and using increasingly sophisticated methods.
Turkey believes that effective counter-piracy action
must take into account the modus operandi of pirates,
as well as the piracy profile and emerging trends.
Effective responses should also be applied within the
scope of the broader maritime security context, with

16-1153239/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

particular attention to the evolving criminal networks.
The external actors, donor agencies and relevant
international organizations should engage with the
States of the Gulf of Guinea in a coordinated way. Such
an endeavour will require the involvement and support
of existing regional schemes, as exemplified by the 2013
Yaoundé Summit of Heads of State and Government on
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, as
well as the Extraordinary Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Economic Community of Western
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
held again in Yaoundé in February 2016.
The lack of effective cooperation and coordination
among maritime security bodies is the core issue
in failing to counter piracy. The swift sharing of
information among the littoral States about acts of piracy
is of utmost importance. Moreover, the lack of hotpursuit arrangements among some countries hampers
the efforts to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea.
The littoral States should make necessary amendments
in their domestic legislation with a view to punish the
pirates arrested on the high seas.
The execution of various regional strategies already
in place could be coordinated in a wider forum specific
to the Gulf of Guinea, which would serve as an interface
between regional actors and those members of the
international community that are willing and capable to
extend support to this cause. The countries of the region
should receive assistance in building and enhancing the
capacities of their national naval forces. Equipment
support, training, intelligence-sharing and the
establishment of new modalities for cooperation could
be instrumental in that direction. In order to improve
the capacity of coastal countries, a special trust fund
could be established within the United Nations system
through the contributions of concerned Governments
and, if need be, of those private enterprises in the
shipping and maritime transport sector whose business
operations are directly damaged by those attacks.
Turkey is ready to explore all possible avenues of
cooperation among the nations affected by that threat
and to contribute, to the best of its ability, to the
implementation of new strategies that could be devised
in the period ahead.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.
40/42

25/04/2016

Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union. I will also make a statement in my national
capacity.
At the outset, we wish to commend the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council, as well as Angola
and Senegal, for their initiative in organizing this open
debate. We are also grateful to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zerihoun for his briefing.
Cyprus is a maritime nation with a ship registry
ranking tenth among international fleets. It is a major
ship-management centre, representing 20 per cent
of the world’s third-party ship-management market.
Hence, maritime security is vital to my country. Cyprus
has been a member of the International Maritime
Organization (IMO) since 1973 and a member of
its Council since 1987. We have always been a keen
supporter of the IMO as the principal international
regulatory body on matters of maritime security and
safety. We have ratified all international conventions
developed by the organization in that respect.
In the context of contributing to the call contained
in the concept note before us (S/2016/321, annex) to
share national experience and best practices, we wish
to state that, at the national level, efforts against piracy
and armed robbery are regulated by a particular law
that includes West Africa and the Gulf of Guinea. The
law empowers the competent minister to regulate the
passage of ships through risk areas. Furthermore, when
a ship is in a risk area, the master of the ship and its
operator are obliged to implement additional measures
and use any means to ensure the security of the ship and
its personnel.
However, self-protection measures applied by ships
and their crews are limited in effect if not combined
with regional and international cooperation in law
enforcement and preventive measures. In that regard,
the Yaoundé process needs to be firmly implemented
and reinforced. Furthermore, a renewed United
Nations focus on the issue of maritime crime in the
region, possibly in the form of a new Security Council
resolution, would be helpful in that regard.
In conclusion, let me say that Cyprus applauds
and endorses all initiatives undertaken to combat
piracy and armed robbery at sea in the context of the
United Nations, and remains committed to enhanced
cooperation and synergies at the international and
regional levels, in particular through cooperation with
16-11532

25/04/2016

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Last but not least, we fully recognize the nexus between
maritime security and the need to promote economic
development, eliminate poverty and support regional
coordination mechanisms logistically and financially
to respond to the challenges we face. There can be
no security, stability or peace without development,
equality and justice in all respects.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): I thank the delegations of
China, Angola and Senegal for organizing this debate
on the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Tayé-Brook Zerihoun for
his briefing.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is having grave
consequences for the economies of the countries of the
subregion. It hampers maritime activity and threatens
the stability and security of those States. It is therefore a
major concern for countries around the Gulf of Guinea,
including Nigeria.
We welcome today’s adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/4, which is an indication of
the Security Council’s commitment to the restoration
of safety and security in the Gulf of Guinea. Nigeria
looks forward to the Council’s continued engagement
on this issue, in accordance with its mandate for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Criminal gangs motivated by access to crude oil
and those involved in the trafficking of illicit goods
and small arms and light weapons are operating in
the region. Their activities have led to an escalation
in criminal acts, including armed attacks on ships
in the Gulf of Guinea. The recent incidents of pirate
attacks off the coast of Nigeria are an indication of the
enormity of the challenge. There is an urgent need to
help countries in the region to implement the integrated
maritime security strategy. Governments in the region
need to pursue sustained enforcement actions against
piracy networks on land. We believe that the region also
needs to increase its naval assets and maritime aviation
to enable it to respond appropriately to maritime attacks.
At the subregional level, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) has adopted the
ECOWAS Integrated Maritime Strategy. The Strategy

S/PV.7675

is in line with resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039 (2012),
concerning acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea. It ensures a holistic maritime policy
framework for action and cooperation within West
Africa. It also strengthens collaboration with other
African regional bodies. We believe such initiatives
complement the efforts of other regional organizations
and the United Nations in tackling piracy.
An important step in the implementation of
the ECOWAS Strategy was the inauguration of the
Multinational Maritime Coordination Centre in March
2015 for a maritime zone known as Pilot Zone E. That
demonstrates the commitment of ECOWAS member
States to address the critical issue of maritime piracy,
along with other illicit activities at sea. Pilot Zone E,
which includes Nigeria, the Niger, Togo and Benin,
lies mainly in the Gulf of Guinea and is considered to
be one of the most dangerous maritime zones in West
Africa. It is clear that robust protection measures are
needed in that area.
Nigeria believes that strategies to combat piracy
require adequate funding. Fighting piracy involves
maritime domain awareness and the acquisition of
surveillance equipment to ensure an effective response
to incidents of piracy. In that regard, we reiterate our
commitment to the 2013 Declaration of the Heads of
State and Government of Central and West African
States on Maritime Safety and Security in Their
Common Maritime Domain, in which those Heads
of State and Government committed to mutually
collecting and sharing information among themselves,
with regional coordination mechanisms and the support
of strategic partners.
At the national level, the Nigerian Maritime
and Safety Administration and Safety Agency and
the Nigerian Navy have enhanced their operational
collaboration. That has resulted in a substantial
reduction in attacks around the Lagos harbour. The
Agency and the Navy, backed by electronic surveillance
assets, also conduct law-enforcement and anti-piracy
patrols. Those efforts are helping to curtail piracy and
other illegal activities in the Gulf of Guinea.
Nigeria stands ready to form strategic and lasting
partnerships with international stakeholders to
exchange information and technical know-how, mount
surveillance and formulate interception techniques
aimed at curbing piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. We call on the international community to

16-1153241/42

S/PV.7675

Peace consolidation in West Africa

accord the same level of priority given to the threat of
piracy in the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean to
the Gulf of Guinea, as it is of no less significance to the
world in terms of commerce and strategic access.
We take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the assistance from the European Union, the
International Maritime Organization, France, the

42/42

25/04/2016

United States of America, the United Kingdom,
Germany, Japan and China and others too many to
mention here. Their individual and collective efforts
have been crucial to enhancing peace and security in
the Gulf of Guinea.
The meeting rose at 1.55 p.m.

16-11532
