Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,
1. States its deep concern at violent attacks against
the premises of missions accredited to the United
Nations as well as the threats, harassment and hostile
actions against personnel of these missions;
2. Strongly condemns all such acts of violence and
other criminal acts against the premises of missions and
their personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the
status of such missions and personnel under international law;
3. Urges the host country to implement effectively
the new federal legislation, including the taking of
effective measures against the organization of demonstrations and picketing where there is reason to believe
that they may be accompanied by violence or may prevent the conduct of the normal business of missions to
the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to take all necessary
measures to apprehend, prosecute and punish those
guilty of criminal acts against missions and their personnel;
5. Notes the difficulties which the diplomatic p~rsonnel of the permanent missions encounter when parking their automobiles and draws the attention of the
host country, and the diplomatic community, to recommendations 9, 10 and 11 in paragraph 46 of the report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country;
6. Appeals to the host country to review the recently
adopted measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles especially with a view to terminating
without prejudice the practice of serving summonses to
diplomats and towing away their vehicles, in order to
meet more adequately the needs of the diplomatic
community;
7. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to co-operate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffic problems;
8. Requests all members of the diplomatic community to respect the laws and regulations of the host
country;

9. Believes that the host country, the Secretariat,
the diplomatic community and the organizations concerned should vigorously seek the improvement of relations and the promotion of mutual understanding between the diplomatic community and the local
population in order to ensure conditions conducive to
the effective functioning of the United Nations and the
missions accredited to it;
10. Welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the
host country, the New York City community and the
New York City Commission for the United Nations
and for the Consular Corps to accommodate the needs,
interests and concerns of the diplomatic community
and to provide hospitality;
11. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country in 1974, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI), with the purpose of examining on a more
regular basis all matters falling within its terms of
reference;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
appropriate assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to bring to its attention
issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation
of the Agreement between the United Nations and the

145

United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
13. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-ninth session, a report on the progress of its
work and to make, if it deems it necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "Rcp,)rt of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
2197th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3108 (XXVIII). Report of the l;nitecl Nations
Commission on International Tracie Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its sixth session, 28
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966 by which it established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined the
object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its resolutions 2421 (XXUI) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970, 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971 and 2928 (XXVII) of
28 November 1972 concerning the reports of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its first, second, third, fourth and
fifth sessions,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the !low of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among all States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
Convinced that wider participation of States in the
work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law would further the progress of the
Commission's work,
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board, at its thirteenth session, took note with appreciation29 of the report of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its sixth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commissi,m on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
·•
3. Requests the United Nations Commission on Jn ..
ternatit,nal Trade Law. whenever the Cornmiss1011 considers it appropriate, to incorporate the reports or
summaries of the reports of it~ Working Ciroups in the
reports on the work of its future sessions;
2 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No, 17 (A/9017).
~o Ibid., Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/RevJ), part three,
para, 558.

146

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

4. Notes with satisfaction the decision of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law to
organize, in connexion with the eighth session of the
Commission, an international symposium on the role of
universities and research centres in the teaching, dissemination and wider appreciation of international
trade law :md to seek voluntary contributions from
Governments, international organizations and foundations to cover the cost of travel and subsistence of
participants from developing countries;
5. Invites States which have not ratified or acceded
to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement
of Foreign Arbitral Awards:w of 1958 to consider the
possibility of adhering thereto;
6. Recommends that the United Nations Commission on Ir.ternational Trade Law should:
(a) Continue in its work to pay special attention
to the topics to which it has decided to give priority,
that is, the international sale of goods, international
payments, international commercial arbitration and
international legislation on shipping;
( b) Continue to consider the legal problems presented by different kinds of multinational enterprises,
in accordance with the decision thereon adopted by the
Commission at its sixth session;
( c) Accelerate its work on training and assistance
in the field of international trade law, with special regard to the promotion and teaching of international
trade law at universities, taking into account the special
interests of the developing countries:
( d) Continue to collaborate with international organizations active in the field of international trade law;
( e) Continue to give special consideration to the
interests of developing countries and to bear in mind
the special problems of land-locked countries;
(f) Keep its programme of work and working methods under review with the aim of increasing the effectiveness of its work;
7. Invites the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law to consider the advisabilitv of
prep:uing uniform rules on the civil liability of producers for damage caused by their products intended for
or involved in international sale or distribution, taking
into account the feasibility and most appropriate time
therefor in view of other items in its programme of
work;
8. Decides to increa,e the membership of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law from
twenty-nine to thirty-six in accordance with the following rules:
(a) The seven additional members of the Commission shall be elected by the General Assembly for a
term of ,ix yems, except as provided in subparagraph
(c) bdow;
( b) In electing the additional members, the General
Assembly shall observe the following distribution of
seats:
(i) Two from African States,
(ii) Two from Asian States;
... )' One frum E:.istern Emopc:rn States:
( ]!j
(iv) One fwm Latin Ame1ican St:lte1.;
(v) One from \Vestern Euwpean and other States:
ao United Nations, Treaty Serles, vol. 330, No. 4739, p. 38.

( c) Of the additional members elected at the first
election, to be held during the current session of the
General Assembly, the terms of three members shall
expire at the end of three years; the President of the
General Assembly shall, by drawing Jots, select these
members as follows:
( i) One from those elected from African States;
(ii) One from those elected from Asian States;
(iii) One from those elected from the other regions;
(d) The additional members elected at the first election shall take office on 1 January 1974;
(e) The provisions of section II, paragraphs 3 to 5,
of General Assembly resolution 2205 (XXI) shall also
apply to the additional members;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law the records of the discussions at the twenty-eighth
session of the General Assembly on the Commission's
report on the work of its sixth session.

2 I 97th plenary meeting
12 December /973
3166 (XXVIH). (:onvenlion on the Prt>vention
and Punishment of Crimes against lntt>rnationally Prolt>cled PPrsons, including Diplomatic -\genls:n

The General Assembly,
Considering that the codification and progressive
development of mternational law contributes to the
implementation of the purpo.<es and principles set forth
in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,

Recalling that in response to the request made in
General Assembly resolution 2780 (XXVI) of 3 December 1971, the International Law Commission. at
its twenty-fourth session, studied the question of the
protection and inviolability of diplomatic agents and
other persons entitled to special protection under international law and prepared draft articles:'~ on the prevention and punishment of crimes against such persons,
Having considered the draft articles and also the
comments and observations thereon submitted by States,
specialized agencies and other intergovernmental Nganizations~,:i in response to the invitation extended hy
the General Assembly in its resolution 2926 (XXVlI)
of 28 November 1972,
Convinced of the importance of securing international
:igrcernent on appropri:,,tc and effective measures for
the prevention and punishment of crimes agaimt diplomatic agents and other internationally protected persons in Yiew of the serious threat to the maintenance
and promotion of friendly relations and co-operation
among ~tatcs created by the commission of such
crime~:.
Hal'ing elabo,ared for that purpose the provisions
contained in the Convcn1 i,111 annexed hereto,
1. Adopts the Convention on the Prevention and
Puni~hment of Crimes agaimt Internationally Protected
Pcrsnns, iw:ludin,: Diplomatic Agents, annexed to the
r,rc,c·nt rl',(0 hition:
:n S, ·c· · ( hhcr ,b.:i •w)m '", p. J 50,
3~ ()(;~cial Rer-ords n/ 1/i,, Gclirral Assembly, 1·wenty-sn·enth
Sessio". Supplement So. JO iA/87 l 0/Rev.l), chap. HI, sect B.
33 A/9127 and Add.l.
