S/PRST/2002/5

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 February 2002
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4476th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 February 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the tenth report of the SecretaryGeneral of 15 February 2002 (S/2002/169) on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and expresses its
intention to consider its recommendations. The Council calls on all the parties
to the conflict to display their political will in order to achieve a peaceful
settlement and reconciliation. The Council urges all the parties to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement (S/1998/815) to fulfil all their commitments under the
Agreement and under the relevant resolutions of the Council.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue, which is an essential element to achieve lasting peace. It reiterates
its strong support for the Facilitator and his team. It calls on all Congolese
parties to participate in this process, and to do so in a constructive spirit.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the withdrawal of all foreign
troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also
stresses that the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration process of the armed groups mentioned in Annex A, Chapter 9.1
of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is another key element for the settlement of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in this regard:
– reiterates its support for MONUC, which is deploying in the east of the
country in order to facilitate this process;
– calls on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
fulfil its commitments regarding the repatriation of the ex-combatants in
Kamina;
– taking note of the request expressed by the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the Security Council, requests MONUC to
make a first assessment of the number of members of the Rwandan armed
groups (ex-forces armés rwandais and Interahamwe) in the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to report to the Council by
the end of March. Based on this assessment, the Council will examine

02-26159 (E) 250202

*0226159*

S/PRST/2002/5

whether any further support should be given to MONUC in the execution
of this task;
– recalls that all the parties have a major responsibility to contribute to the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
process and that the Joint Military Commission has a role in this respect,
in cooperation with MONUC.
“The Security Council takes note of the reinforcement of the MONUC
presence in Kisangani and reiterates its demand that the city be demilitarized,
in accordance with its relevant resolutions. In this regard, it also stresses the
importance of the full reopening of the Congo River, including to commercial
traffic, and calls on all parties to cooperate in this regard.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the persistent human
rights violations, in particular in the east of the country, and calls on all parties
to put an end to these violations.”

2
