United Nations

S/PV.5041

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

5041

st meeting
Wednesday, 22 September 2004, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Moratinos Cuyaubé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Spain)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mr. Miranda
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Amorim
Ms. Alvear Valenzuela
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Barnier
Mr. Fischer
Mr. Bakhtyar
Mr. Romulo
Mr. Geoana
Mr. Denisov
Mr. Straw
Mrs. Patterson

Agenda
Civilian aspects of conflict management and peace-building
Letter dated 8 September 2004 from the Permanent Representative of Spain to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2004/722)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-51769 (E)

*0451769*

S/PV.5041

actors: not just the operations mandated by the Security
Council, but also the vital work of United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, of regional
organizations,
and
of
our
non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners. And its goal is to build
durable peace in societies shattered by war. That is
ambitious indeed.

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Civilian aspects of conflict management and peacebuilding
Letter dated 8 September 2004 from the
Permanent Representative of Spain to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2004/722)
The President (spoke in Spanish): on behalf of
the Security Council, I welcome the presence of His
Excellency Secretary-General Kofi Annan.
On behalf of the Security Council, I also
welcome warmly, under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, His Excellency
Mr. Said Djinnit, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union; His Excellency Mr. Javier
Solana, High Representative for the European Union’s
Common Foreign and Security Policy; and His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I should like to draw members’ attention to
document S/2004/722, which contains a letter dated 8
September 2004 from Spain addressed to the SecretaryGeneral, transmitting a discussion paper on the present
agenda item, “Civilian aspects of conflict management
and peace-building”.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: Let me start by
commending you, Sir, for taking the initiative to hold
this open debate on civilian aspects of crisis
management. This debate is extremely timely and the
presence of so many foreign ministers is very
welcome.
Yesterday, in the General Assembly, I stressed the
importance of the rule of law. Nowhere is its absence
more keenly felt than in war-torn societies, and
nowhere is its restoration more vital to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
But that is far easier said than done. Peacebuilding is a complex business. It draws in many

2

We have learned from experience that
international interventions, even those that carry the
unique legitimacy provided by the United Nations,
cannot quickly erase the noxious legacy of conflict. We
therefore need to be realistic about what is achievable,
and we must have a clear political strategy for success,
based on a sophisticated understanding of the context
and tailored to respond to it.
That strategy must include benchmarks for
progress towards the goal, not just of holding elections,
but of building legitimate and effective States. And,
since we have comparatively scarce resources, we must
prioritize. Without clear priorities, particularly in the
areas of security, the rule of law and immediate
economic opportunities, the best-laid plans for longterm reconstruction and recovery will fail.
I do not wish to sound pessimistic. On the
contrary, peace-building can be truly successful, as we
have seen in El Salvador, in Guatemala, in
Mozambique and in Namibia, and more recently, in
East Timor. I am also heartened that a number of our
ongoing missions are making solid progress in helping
peace to take root.
But I am very conscious that we face enormous
challenges: in Africa, where the demand for United
Nations peace operations is huge, and in other places,
too, including some very dangerous ones. The tangible
support of Council members, in a number of ways, will
make the difference between success and failure for
our current and future peace-building efforts.
First, the Council needs to sustain its interest and
focus on each and every peace operation. The bit-bybit building of peace, from the ground up, may not
grab headlines, but it must command the Council’s
vigilant attention and long-term commitment. Lack of
interest or division in the Council is a recipe for
unfulfilled mandates and unresolved problems, leaving
the root causes of a conflict to fester and blow up again
some day. We saw the bitter consequences of failed
peace-building in Haiti and Liberia, where we are now

S/PV.5041

engaged once more. We must not repeat those
mistakes.
Secondly, we need more resources, and we need
to get those resources more quickly than we do. I am
pleased that there have been improvements in the
delivery of resources to post-conflict reconstruction.
But the needs remain very great. United Nations peace
operations are an excellent investment. In the entire
history of the United Nations, just over $30 billion has
been spent on our peacekeeping operations. That is just
one thirtieth of the amount that was spent last year
alone on global military expenditures.
Thirdly, we need to make sure that our efforts are
well integrated, since the various elements of peacebuilding are interdependent, and failure in one sector
can mean failure in the rest. To that end, the United
Nations, other international organizations, regional
organizations, bilateral donors and NGOs must
strengthen their institutional links and work together
on the basis of shared goals and shared priorities.
Fourthly, we must make sure that we have the
best people available to carry out the tough
assignments the Council gives them. I am speaking
particularly of civilian staff. We need an international
cadre of highly skilled civilians for peace-building,
both technical experts and people with the ability to
work closely with national actors and bring together
the diverse perspectives of conflict management, Statebuilding, development and transitional justice. I am
proud of the unique expertise of the dedicated staff
who support me in carrying out the Security Council’s
mandates. But, we need to be given the resources to
enhance the quality and quantity of that expertise.
Finally, I cannot conclude this topic without
mentioning the security of United Nations civilian
staff. Risk is an unavoidable part of our work. But
there must be a reasonable balance between the risk to
be undertaken and the substantive contribution that
civilians are called upon to make. I ask for the
Council’s full support in ensuring the security of our
staff — both by the provision of troops, where
appropriate, and politically — when I propose new
measures to the General Assembly, as I shall very
soon.
Peace-building requires a clear strategy,
developed
and
executed
by
highly
skilled
professionals, grounded in local conditions and
reflected in realistic mandates devised by the Council

and, of course, supported by all parts of the United
Nations system and fully backed up by this Council
and the membership of the Organization as a whole.
With that support, our work can succeed, and the
promise of peace-building can be realized.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his important statement.
I now invite the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, His Excellency Mr. Said Djinnit, to
take the floor.
Mr. Djinnit: I wish to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on taking this important and timely
initiative on the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building. My participation in
this debate, on behalf of the African Union (AU)
Commission, stems from the long-standing partnership
for peace between the African Union and the United
Nations. It is also a testimony to our vested interest in
the present deliberations of the Security Council and
the outcome of this meeting, as Africa, unfortunately,
remains high on the peace-building agenda of the
United Nations.
Moreover, the African Union, which is
increasingly involved in peace support operations, is
paying attention to this evolving debate, particularly
since the adoption of the Brahimi report (S/2000/809).
The Commission of the African Union welcomes
the observations and recommendations made in the
background paper (S/2004/722, annex), and it will give
them serious consideration as the African Union
continues with its proactive agenda in response to
crisis and conflict situations.
The African Union has had limited experience in
peace support operations. As members are aware,
under the Cairo Declaration of 1993, establishing the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, the
OAU was not expected to undertake peacekeeping
operations that were considered the exclusive
responsibility of the Security Council. Rather, it was
then required to deploy observation missions of limited
scope and duration.
It was on the basis of that limited mandate that
the OAU had deployed a number of observer missions
in various conflict areas such as Rwanda, Burundi, the
Comoros, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Ethiopia-Eritrea. In some of those missions, the need to

3

S/PV.5041

deploy civilian personnel arose. For instance, the OAU
deployed observer missions in the Comoros at various
stages of the reconciliation process in that country,
essentially for confidence-building. We deployed
groups of gendarmerie elements that were better
prepared than military observers to interact with the
civilian population and authorities. That experience
proved to be successful.
The situation has changed under the African
Union. In the Protocol establishing the Peace and
Security Council, the heads of State or Government
expressed their strong determination to enhance the
capacity of the African Union to bring about peace,
security and stability on the continent.
Article 6 of the Protocol establishing the Peace
and Security Council delineates its responsibilities in
the following areas: promotion of peace, security and
stability in Africa; early warning and preventive
diplomacy; peacemaking; peace support operations and
intervention, pursuant to article 4 of the Constitutive
Act of the African Union; peace-building and postconflict reconstruction; humanitarian action; and
disaster management.
Furthermore, the Protocol recognizes the
importance of an effective cooperative relationship
between the civilian and military components of any
mission. Article 13 of the Protocol provides for a
stand-by force — “civilian and military components”
to be “ready for rapid deployment at appropriate
notice”.
Based on that mandate, the African Union, soon
after its establishment, was called upon to demonstrate
its resolve to respond to conflict situations and
emerging crises. It had to do so despite the constraints
inherited from the OAU, including the lack of the
capacity to respond to crisis and conflict situations in a
rapid, timely and effective manner. Against that
background, the African Union had no alternative but
to deploy peace-support operations in Burundi to pave
the way for the deployment of a peacekeeping
operation by the United Nations — which has been
done since then — and, more recently, in Darfur, where
the African Union is confronted with an immense
challenge.
Our still-limited experience in the Darfur region
of the Sudan, through the establishment of the
Ceasefire Commission and the deployment of the
African mission in the Sudan, revealed the need to

4

expand the composition of the mission to include
civilian components in order to address the civilian,
human rights and humanitarian aspects of the crisis,
affecting, in particular, women, children and the
elderly. It also revealed the need to include women in
the AU mission to address the specific plight of women
in that region. This, I believe, deserves special
consideration in future peace-support operations. The
linkage with civil society organizations also merits
particular attention.
In deciding to deploy peace-support operations in
Burundi and Darfur, the African Union was indeed
aware of its limitations. However, it took up the
challenge, in the expectation that the United Nations
and other partners would provide the requisite support.
In the process, the African Union gained valuable
experience, which needs to be built upon.
I wish to seize this opportunity to pay tribute to
the United Nations and its Secretary-General and to the
Security Council for their commitment to peace in the
continent and for their constant support of the efforts
of the African Union and its regional communities.
I wish also to express gratitude and appreciation
to our other partners, which provided the African
Union with financial, logistical and material support
that enabled our continental organization to assume its
responsibility. Their support is all the more necessary
now that our organization is called upon to assume a
greater role in peace-support operations.
As I stated earlier, with the establishment of the
African Union, our continental organization is engaged
in building its peace and security architecture, at the
core of which is the Peace and Security Council,
provided with the mandate of authorizing the
deployment of peace-support operations, including
peacekeeping and intervention. Needless to say, as part
of the process of enhancing the effectiveness of the
Peace and Security Council, our efforts should be
geared towards the establishment of the African
standby force by 2010 as agreed upon, to provide the
African Union with the tool to implement its decisions.
However, as we strive to achieve that goal, our
continental organization is faced with the challenge of
building a rapid-reaction capability that will enable it
to bring a value-added element and have a comparative
advantage in the context of the partnership for peace
we want to strengthen with the United Nations and
other partners within the international community. In

S/PV.5041

that endeavour, the African Union would rely on the
continued support of the United Nations within the
framework of Chapter VIII of its Charter. It would also
count on the strong support of its partners to build its
capacity effectively to plan, deploy and manage peacesupport operations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Djinnit for his excellent statement.
I now invite the High Representative for the
European Union’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, to take the floor.
Mr. Solana (spoke in Spanish): Let me at the
outset thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this public meeting on such an important issue in
current times. I should like to express my gratitude for
the presence of the Secretary-General and extend my
thanks to the members of the Council.
Civilian aspects in recent years have taken on
primary importance in crisis management. Until
recently, conflicts were of an inter-State nature, and
that was the main concern of the international
community. Today internal conflicts are the most
frequent. Although the deployment of forces may still
be necessary in some cases, the objective is broader
and more complex: restoring a legitimate Government
and the defence of the rule of law, as was so eloquently
stated yesterday by the Secretary-General.
The rebuilding of a State has a political as well as
a security dimension. But it also requires — and this is
a key point — the establishment of institutions in
which the population can have confidence.
Guaranteeing security is necessary for a State that has
been ravaged by a conflict to move forward on the path
towards development, making it very clear that
security and development are two concepts that go
hand in hand.
The European Union is convinced that it can and
should make a significant contribution to this very
important task for the international community. The
European Union’s security policy from the outset set
out to give the European Union the means to enable it
to deploy not only military but also civilian
instruments, in order to help to substitute for, assist or
strengthen — depending on the case — the capacities
of the recipient country.
Over a very brief period we in the European
Union have developed concepts and established

structures capable of sustaining the deployment of
civilian elements. The member States of the European
Union have committed capacities in various areas — in
the civilian area, 5,000 police officers, more than 200
specialists in the strengthening of the rule of law,
among others. We have carried out expert-training
programmes, as noted in the statement just made by the
Secretary-General.
Indeed, we have been making considerable
efforts. In the past three years, the six operations that
the European Union has undertaken have shown an
operational capacity. Three of those six operations are
civilian, and a seventh operation — also a police
operation — in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is still at the planning stage.
But much remains to be done. As the SecretaryGeneral has said, obtaining qualified civilian personnel
for deployment in crisis-management operations is
more difficult than in the case of military personnel.
Thus, the international community must build up
mechanisms to have civilian personnel properly trained
and ready for rapid deployment. Our societies need to
rethink the criteria used for the recruitment of properly
trained staff, and be ready to deploy them rapidly in the
civilian component of crisis management operations.
As the discussion paper prepared by the
presidency of the Council rightly recognizes, we also
need to develop new mechanisms — and I would even
venture to say a new culture of coordination —
between the civilian and military aspects of such
operations. We need to make use of all the synergies
that
exist
and
avoid
clashes
owing
to
miscommunication.
The European Union takes the position that
reconstruction teams should be set up before a conflict
is resolved, covering all the necessary aspects, both
military — acting in their security capacity — and
civilian, to be used in policing and, as I said earlier, in
order to secure the rule of law in the country requiring
assistance.
For its part, the European Union, with the wide
array of instruments that it possesses and its particular
nature as an institution, is particularly well qualified to
tackle these challenges. Bosnia and Herzegovina is
perhaps the case in which the EU’s capacity for action
is most plainly evident: along with the cooperation
programmes being developed and the dimension of a
relationship of close partnership with the country, is

5

S/PV.5041

coupled the deployment of a police operation,
replacing the one initiated by the United Nations. Soon
we will be shouldering the responsibility for a military
operation as well, replacing NATO.
Also, in order to give a more comprehensive
response to the need for civilian-military coordination,
the EU has set up a civilian-military planning cell,
which, in the case of a crisis, can encompass the
planning of both aspects: civilian and military. If we do
a little analysis of recent conflicts, who knows? It may
well be that from the outset there has been a lack of
such planning among the civilian and military aspects
and this analysis will show that that the need for such
coordination is imperative.
The action taken by the European Union in recent
years has as its prime objective the strengthening of
effective multilateralism. Part of EU policy is to work
effectively with the United Nations — the heart of this
multilateral world and the framework within which we
can work most effectively. Around this time last year,
the European Union signed a Joint Declaration with the
Secretary-General to make this cooperation yet more
effective. The experience and resources of the
European Union are ready to serve the international
community.
Following the statement made by my friend Said
Djinnit, I want to underscore more clearly the close
partnership that we have with our good friends in the
African Union. I am certain that that cooperation will
continue and that there will be other needs as great as
the need to make the Darfur operation a success. We
are ready to offer the African Union any assistance and
cooperation that it may require.
In conclusion, the challenges are enormous and
we need to tackle them together. The EU is willing to
do its utmost to make this world a safer and fairer
place for all. I trust, and I am sure, that today’s debate
in the Council, which bears the highest responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
will assist us in continuing to make progress in that
direction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Solana for his important statement. The European
Union’s commitment to continue to work with other
regional organizations, as well as the United Nations,
in order to further reflect on these issues is well
known.

6

I now give the floor to the Secretary General of
the League of Arab States, Mr. Amre Moussa.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to express my great
appreciation for the Spanish initiative that you lead as
an able diplomat, innovative minister and colleague.
This important meeting falls under the item of
peace-building — a most important and necessary
item. The successive initiatives in the Security
Council — the Mexican initiative to consider how to
confront the new challenges to international peace and
security; the Romanian initiative on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
for stability; and, finally, the Spanish initiative on the
consideration of civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building — all show the
importance that the Security Council attaches to
continuing dialogue to develop concepts and
mechanisms of complementarity and partnership
between the United Nations and international and
regional organizations, under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and in the service of the
Charter itself — in other words, in the service of
international peace and stability.
In previous dialogues, whether in this Chamber or
in high-level meetings that the Secretary-General of the
United Nations regularly holds with the leaders of
regional organizations, we stressed the need for a
collective, international security regime, the need for
strengthening the multilateral regime and activating the
role of the United Nations in finding solutions to
current problems reflecting the true interests of
different parties, based on a balance and on
international legitimacy and justice that would gain
international, regional and national support for such
solutions.
Previous meetings stressed two fundamental
principles that inform our debate and thinking today.
The first principle is that cooperation between the
United Nations and the Security Council on the one
hand, and regional organizations on the other, is
fundamentally governed by the Charter of the United
Nations and, particularly, by the provisions of Chapter
VIII. Solid norms have been established for those
relations by General Assembly resolutions and
agreements for cooperation, as well as periodic
mechanisms that make up a matrix of relations of
cooperation, partnership and complementarity. What is

S/PV.5041

needed is to operationalize that system of relations so
that regional organizations may become one of the
main organs of United Nations action in dealing with
regional crises and conflicts, as well as world
challenges, developments and changes. As the
Permanent Representative of Spain said, in his letter to
the Secretary-General of 8 September 2004, the
complexity of present-day crisis management may also
make it helpful to share the burden of crisis
management between different actors, drawing on each
of their particular strengths.

rebuild after conflict and to prevent the deterioration of
the situation in such societies to levels worse than
previous ones. Military victory in itself is not the final
victory. It has also become obvious that the military
aspect is but a part of a wider political process, and
military operations must be evaluated by the degree of
success of the peace-building process that follows. The
Secretary-General and the Security Council and its
organs must therefore have a role to play, just as they
play a role in the authorization of military action
within a clear and comprehensive framework.

The second fundamental principle stressed in
previous meetings is that threats and challenges in the
international arena need to be dealt with collectively, in
a multilateral manner, with a variety of instruments and
mechanisms available for crisis management, dealing
with both civilian and political aspects, and that
political solutions, not military solutions, must be the
first choice in dealing with crises. A military solution
must be the last resort in the true sense of the phrase
“having exhausted all other means available, clearly,
objectively and in good will”.

I fully agree with the presidency’s discussion
paper that building peace is more complex than waging
war. Indeed, it is always easier to destroy than to build.
That may be obvious, but the Security Council must
clearly acknowledge that the decision to go to war or to
undertake a military operation in the context of a
conflict must be clearly legitimate and must be based
on the purposes and principles of the Charter, which
permit the use of force only under Chapter VII, with
the authority of the Security Council. Article 51
provides for the legitimate right of self-defence.

Coercive measures must, equally, be clearly
authorized by the Security Council. I say this because
the means to solve crises have a great role in the
success of peace-building. If there is a rush to resort to
force, peace-building will be fraught with danger and
difficulties and could even engender a fatal reversal
that would affect regional peace and stability and the
maintenance of international peace and security in turn.
That is, perhaps, one of the main reasons for the
establishment by the Secretary-General of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. Many
intellectuals throughout the world believe that such
changes and developments are not the result of sudden
events. Rather, they have their roots in economic,
social and political problems that go back to the end of
the cold war — problems that have led to
destabilization and an increasing feeling of oppression
and injustice — as well as in poverty,
underdevelopment, disease, violence, armed conflicts,
and terrorism. Hence, Mr. President, you chose the
important theme of civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building for our debate today.

In order to ensure success and legitimacy,
political and civilian operations must follow the end of
hostilities. Ensuring public order and operation of
government institutions and civil administration cannot
be considered separately from the decision to go to
war.

Recent experience shows that, following the end
of hostilities, proper and serious preparation for the
civilian and political aspects of an effective
framework, authorized in all instances by the Security
Council, is necessary if we are to help societies to

It is only logical that collective international
security is strengthened by regional security. That is
fully understood by the League of Arab States, and the
principle has become entrenched in our organization
over the past few years. Many changes are now taking
place in our work. In particular, there is increased
openness to civil society in the Arab world, and we are
opening the doors of the League’s Economic and
Social Council to such organizations. We are moving
towards creating an Arab parliament, which would be
the basis of democratic regional order, and adopting a
human rights charter for the Arab world, as well as a
mechanism for the prevention, management and
settlement of disputes in the region.
Because of our geographic position — we are at
the crossroads between Asian and African concerns
and close to Europe, on the other side of the
Mediterranean Sea — the Arab League finds itself
sharing in many of the crises and concerns of those
regional organizations. Thus, we have cooperated

7

S/PV.5041

horizontally with many regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, in the context of peace
negotiations on Darfur, within a troika led by the
African Union in cooperation and coordination with
the United Nations and the League of Arab States, as
well as with regard to the situation in Somalia, where
we are following up and helping to stabilize the
situation. Those issues are of concern to both the Arab
and African regions. At the same time, we are
attempting to continue to act within the Barcelona
process for the security of the Mediterranean.
We agree with the Spanish discussion paper that
the participation of the largest number of parties in the
management of crises requires further coordination
between those parties. We also agree with the need to
designate a lead organization — the United Nations, or
a regional organization, as agreed upon — to
coordinate international efforts for crisis management.
That will also require effective coordination between
crisis management teams and the parties concerned as
regards financing, development and reconstruction, and
that in turn will require a professional strategic plan
that is carefully adopted and implemented.
There is no disagreement whatsoever on the
changing nature of the responsibilities that civilian
parties have taken on in both civilian and military
operations. However, the substance of the issue —
dealing with incipient or current challenges — relates
to the fundamental role of the Security Council in the
wider issue of the maintenance of international peace
and security within this unique forum, as the SecretaryGeneral has characterized the United Nations.
We have a great deal to say in this regard, as we
have witnessed the reluctance of the Security Council
to face major issues. It has neglected some major
crises, such as the Arab-Israeli conflict, the issue of
Palestine and the continuing Israeli violations of
international law and the principles of the Charter. The
Security Council’s approach to the maintenance of
peace and security throughout the world must not be
selective; it must not be subject to pressure or to
special interests and lobbying. Here is the crux of the
matter: if the Security Council is reformed and plays
its proper role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, we will be able to discuss the
civilian aspects of conflict and peace-building more
effectively.

8

The League of Arab States has made clear its
view of regional stability and security in the Middle
East. We have stressed the need to eliminate all
weapons of mass destruction in the region, without
exception. The issue of weapons of mass destruction
must be dealt with from an integrated, regional
perspective so it will not disturb the balance of
regional security. Thus, over the past 30 years we have
witnessed many initiatives by the Arab States calling
for a zone free from nuclear and all other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East. Paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991) stressed that disarming Iraq of
weapons of mass destruction was a step towards the
goal of ridding the entire Middle East region of all
such weapons. That is a resolution that is enforceable,
because it was adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter. The time has come for the Council to do its
part in ensuring that all the paragraphs of that
resolution are implemented, especially paragraph 14,
as it is of major importance for collective security in
the Middle East and throughout the world.
The core of the issue remains the credibility of
the multilateral international order. Challenges to the
international order in the past few years have made it
clear that the Council’s credibility is based on two
fundamental factors: its legitimacy and its
effectiveness. The United Nations must expand the
membership of the Council in order to make it more
democratic and increase its effectiveness and
legitimacy, on the basis of the purposes and principles
of the Charter and in the common interest, crystallised
through consensus. This world is our world. It will not
be safe unless we are all safe and can all feel that our
rights will be maintained through the legitimacy
provided by the United Nations, as well as through
respect for the principles of international law and the
Charter.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Moussa for his kind words addressed to me.
Ms. Alvear Valenzuela (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like, first of all, to thank the Spanish
presidency for its initiative in inviting us to reflect on
the civilian aspects of conflict management. This
provides an opportunity for us to consider a key issue
that relates to the ongoing efforts of the Security
Council to improve peacekeeping and peace-building
instruments.

S/PV.5041

In order to tackle a crisis, we must first examine
its root causes. A multi-dimensional approach must be
adopted to conflict resolution. Once minimum security
conditions have been restored, public order must be
effectively strengthened and the groundwork laid for
social, political and economic reconstruction. People
need help to start a new life, to regain confidence and
to participate in building the future of their
communities. For that reason, it is essential for
initiatives to focus on restoring the rights and hopes of
men and women and on ensuring that their children can
grow up as children.
A study of the civilian aspects of crisis
management highlights the need for effective
coordination between civilian and military actors.
Successful civilian action is without doubt a
precondition
for
guaranteeing
the
effective
rehabilitation of a country in crisis, and depends, first
of all, upon the existence of an adequate level of
security to promote respect for the rule of law. It also
requires an effective police force, judicial system and
prison system. In that regard, an efficient civilian
police force is particularly important. Those elements
are the basis for the comprehensive post-conflict
rehabilitation of individuals, a process that is
necessarily linked to a strategy of long-term economic
and social development.
We must consider effective coordination between
crisis management mechanisms and the mechanisms
for reconstruction and long-term development. The
success of such initiatives will depend on our ability to
develop a lasting commitment on the part of the
international community to United Nations action.
The wide range of actors and agencies that
increasingly participate in preventive diplomacy
creates a special opportunity for civilians to contribute
to crisis resolution. That involves action by
Governments, regional organizations and nongovernmental organizations. Preventive diplomacy
today is not the exclusive preserve of the United
Nations system. We must promote the effective
engagement of the various actors and the development
of flexible contacts among them and with the military
elements, in order to create a pattern of mutual
awareness and cooperation.
In that context, there is a need to recognize the
experience of regional organizations in crisis
management. The Security Council has shown interest

in making use of the capabilities of regional
organizations in conflict management, which certainly
includes a civilian dimension.
Working to promote good governance on the
continent of the Americas is an aspiration on which the
Governments of the region have agreed. Within the
framework of the Organization of American States
(OAS) the advances made in the Inter-American
Democratic Charter of 2001 and in the Santiago
Declaration on Democracy and Citizen Confidence of
2003 demonstrate a clear political will to strengthen
democracy as an essential element of the hemisphere’s
identity and the basis for coexistence in peace and
security. That endeavour in the field of democratic
governance could be taken into account in the design
of the multidimensional mandates of peacekeeping
operations.
The crisis in Haiti marks a new challenge for the
United Nations system and the international
community to continue developing their capacities to
manage the civilian aspects of conflicts. The United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
has been designed to rehabilitate a nation in political,
economic and social terms, in order to achieve lasting
peace and security. The operation’s multidimensional
mandate encompasses the essential elements of a
strategy for managing the civilian aspects of the crisis.
It is a matter of priority to restore the capacities of the
Haitian national police and the rule of law.
I express my solidarity and sympathy with the
victims of the recent natural disaster in Haiti, which
has further compounded the difficulties facing the
Haitian people. The action of MINUSTAH is
associated with a political transition towards a system
of full democracy. That approach requires the effective
presence of the OAS, which can contribute its
experience in the field of electoral assistance and the
rebuilding of institutions. The United Nations would
thus incorporate regional actors into the operation,
while permitting the use of mechanisms established by
the OAS in achieving a common objective.
We believe that an appropriate interrelationship
between the regional and global spheres is an issue that
cannot be ignored in a reform process that includes the
various actors and approaches that contribute to
conflict prevention and to post-conflict activities.
We believe that the United Nations has improved
its conflict management capacity, both in theory and in

9

S/PV.5041

practice, but we think it is necessary to develop a
doctrine that would enable us to make the multilateral
system more active and efficient in the comprehensive
management of conflicts.
To that end, we propose a number of concrete
measures. First, Member States should develop their
capabilities in the areas of the police, strengthening the
rule of law, civil administration and promoting national
reconciliation with a view to their possible use within
the framework of the peacekeeping operations of
United Nations or regional organizations. The idea is to
establish a national register of the human and material
resources that may be called upon in case of need,
taking into account the gender perspective.
Secondly, we believe it is important to promote
cooperation among the United Nations, its agencies
and programmes, regional organizations and Member
States in order to increase the availability of human
and material resources for the management of the
civilian aspects of peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, we think it is important to promote the
active participation of civil society — a key element
that, on some occasions, would serve to supplement the
actions of State actors.
Fourthly, consideration should be given to the
establishment of a focal point within the Department
for Peacekeeping Operations in order to design,
coordinate and monitor the implementation of a
multidimensional approach that would blend the
civilian and military aspects of crisis management.
Lastly, the Secretariat should prepare a matrix of
the elements to be considered for improving civilianmilitary coordination in the design of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.
We live in a world beset by a wide range of
conflicts that demand increasing United Nations
involvement. The response of the United Nations must
focus, first of all, on promoting all the preventive
mechanisms necessary to forestall crises. But, at the
same time, as we renew our political commitment to
United Nations action in crisis management and postconflict situations, we need to work further in this area.
What is at stake here is the effectiveness of a
multilateral system, which is essential for maintaining
order in a globalized world.
We are hopeful that the Council will succeed in
structuring approaches that take account of both the

10

civilian and the military dimensions. We must ensure
that peacekeeping operations make it possible to truly
restore stability based upon the principles of the United
Nations Charter, by creating conditions for restoring
community life and the essential value of human
dignity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile for her specific
proposals.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Joschka Fischer, Federal Vice-Chancellor and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
Mr. Fischer (Germany): Sir, we welcome your
initiative to hold this debate in the Security Council. In
the past two years, we have seen a renaissance of
multilateral conflict management. The worldwide
growth of United Nations missions makes that plain.
Regional organizations, such as the European Union
and the African Union, are also making ever more
significant independent contributions in the field. That
is a development we very much welcome. It shows the
growing readiness of the international community to
effectively engage even in conflicts that have long
been neglected. A central precondition here was the
recognition — achieved, not least, thanks to the United
Nations — that military stabilization has to go hand-inhand with the reconstruction of shattered societies and
State structures. Together with the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), it provided the decisive impetus —
meaning that today, even in the earliest phase of
conflict management, considerations and planning
stretch beyond the political and military aspects. Our
commitment in Afghanistan, in the Balkans and in
many multidimensional peacekeeping missions around
the world bears witness to that new comprehensive
approach.
Peacekeeping that brings together military and
civilian aspects means a much greater burden for the
international community in terms of finance and
personnel. But we must be ready to shoulder that
burden. After all, only credible and long-term
engagement can be successful; anything else only
entails far greater risks.
But we must also be aware that each peacebuilding mission is a massive intrusion for the society
concerned. Therefore, a high degree of experience and
cultural awareness is needed. That is especially true of
civilian components such as building State and judicial

S/PV.5041

structures, clearing up human rights violations,
drawing up a new constitution or organizing and
holding elections. We never start from scratch; we
must respect and use local traditions and structures. At
the same time, we must never lose sight of central
United Nations standards such as the rule of law,
democracy and human rights.
Here, I see a vast opportunity for cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union, the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. They have more homogenous membership
structures, are anchored in the same cultural areas and
communities of values, and are thus essential partners
when it comes to crisis management in their particular
zones of interest — above all, to make a Security
Council mandate more acceptable in a country and in
the wider region. The EU is doing just that in the
Balkans.
We need great persistence and much staying
power if our peace-building is to have a sustainable
impact. We have to give the young people in crisis
regions hope for the future. We have to re-establish
structures in the State and in society that can withstand
the unavoidable strains following the withdrawal of a
peace mission. But we must also live up to the people's
expectations for a rapid and clear improvement in their
situation. Those expectations may not always be
realistic, but disappointments can greatly hamper the
acceptance of peacekeeping missions. In Afghanistan,
the Taliban, Al Qaeda and others opposed to the peace
process systematically exploit the frustration of the
population to discredit the peacekeepers as unwelcome
occupiers. We have to find a happy medium between
short-term expectations and long-term commitment to
make clear the benefits of the mission as quickly as
possible.
Here, we should make increased use of quickimpact projects. The United Nations has had positive
experience with that instrument and has greatly
increased the relevant financing. Take, for example, the
United Nations Mission in Liberia. It is important that
civilian and military experts be able to provide the
people with rapid and visible assistance, even if it is
too early for reconstruction efforts to bear real fruit.
That is what we have seen in Afghanistan. We can win
the people over by repairing a damaged bridge or
school, digging a well, providing health advice or
setting up a local radio station.

We have been working for some time to minimize
the Organization’s reaction time to crises and to
coordinate and more efficiently implement our national
contributions to military missions. The same is true of
civilian components. We should thus develop and
rapidly implement a coherent tool kit for civilian
peacekeeping. The United Nations should assume the
central task of coordination.
A challenge that we all need to tackle at home is
the training and mobilization of civilian experts in
crises and reconstruction. After all, we now need more
and more civilian personnel for international peace
missions. That is the only way to ensure that the United
Nations can quickly fall back on urgently needed
police trainers, judges or lawyers. And, unlike military
personnel, those experts are not usually ready and
waiting, but rather are employed by authorities and
companies. That is particularly true of the police. Thus,
here, we should, above all, push ahead with
establishing a standby system as well as rapiddeployment units.
Finally, we must better coordinate the United
Nations system’s contribution to the civilian
components of peace missions so that we can fully tap
its potential. But, for that to work, financing must also
be resolved. We need to break new ground here. A call
also goes out to the Bretton Woods institutions. We
should certainly treat the costs of civilian crisis
management as a normal component of a peace
mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Federal Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany for his vision and his presentation
of the problems in civilian crisis management.
I now call on His Excellency Mr. Michel Barnier,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
Mr. Barnier (France) (spoke in French): Rarely
in its history has the Organization had to confront and
manage so many crises at the same time — managing
them not only simultaneously, but in all their
dimensions and aspects so that we can provide lasting
solutions to them. At the same time, we have been
increasingly capable of anticipating and preventing
new conflicts. That is why, I believe — like all my
colleagues — that your initiative today, Mr. President,
to bring us together around this table is not only timely
but necessary. Why? Because, as everyone knows,
peace-building is a very difficult objective to attain.

11

S/PV.5041

Thirty per cent of countries emerging from conflict fall
back into it. In Africa, that proportion is 60 per cent. A
few moments ago, the Secretary-General rightly
recalled that we have had success in Africa and
elsewhere. Such success is encouraging and should
prompt us to continue our discussions and our efforts
to increase the effectiveness of United Nations
interventions.
In reacting to crises, the work of Blue Helmets
remains central. But, to restore confidence, rebuild
institutions, restore economies and — as should be
done everywhere — initiate a democratic electoral
process, we need not only Blue Helmets on the ground,
but also police officers, judges, human rights observers
and public service specialists.
Like many here, I was able, on recent visits to
Haiti and Kosovo, to observe such difficulties on the
ground. And it is my feeling that we must face three
main challenges.
The first challenge is to be able to react on time.
Let us draw a lesson from a crisis that revealed the
international community’s inability to act preemptively to prevent its appearance. We therefore need
to discuss our common action and sometimes our
inaction, particularly in the area of development and
human rights protection. Once a crisis has erupted,
civilian actions must be carried out immediately. Why?
First, it is in situations of extreme instability and
uncertainty that, generally speaking, the most serious
violence is committed against civilian populations and
the most serious human rights violations occur, and it
is at such times that crisis exit strategies are prepared.
But, unfortunately — as the Secretary-General noted in
his report on justice and the rule of law — our rapid
reaction capability remain very insufficient when
compared with our military capacities. That lack of
means is compounded by procedural slowness, which
increases the gap between the people’s expectations
and concrete actions — a situation that certain groups
may exploit to prolong a state of war.
How can we respond to this? First, we can
reinforce the human resources available to the United
Nations by establishing a pool of jurists, police
officers, judges and human rights experts who can
quickly be made available. That is precisely the
approach that the European Union has chosen, as
Javier Solana has just explained very well.

12

To political and human crises, I would like to add
those crises caused by natural disasters. It is an idea I
have put forward in other circumstances. In the
European Union, we need a civilian protection force
that can be present as a whole on the ground when
disasters and crises of this kind occur, as they also have
human consequences.
We can respond by thinking about establishing
financial instruments that can be rapidly mobilized.
That way, we can hope to create without delay a
virtuous circle that encompasses civilians. And finally,
we can, of course, respond by increasing funding. In
comparison to the $4 billion budget for peacekeeping
operations for 2004, financing for certain essential
actions — for example, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants and the
establishment of joint tribunals — is quite pathetic.
The second challenge we should underline is that
of coordination. Given the complexity of crises, we
have to act as a team. There is no shortage of actors.
There are United Nations funds and agencies, the
international financial institutions and the regional
organizations. We have seen — and support — the role
played by the African Union, non-governmental
organizations and civilian, military and humanitarian
stakeholders. Progress has been made, but the
coordination among those numerous actors is
inadequate, with the result being too much duplication
and a certain lack of coherence on the ground.
Accordingly, we need to continue to strengthen
the responsibilities of the special representatives of the
Secretary-General and the resident coordinators of the
United Nations Development Programme. Another
practice that would be useful to expand in a pragmatic
way is the creation of ad hoc contact groups consisting
of the countries most concerned and interested in the
settlement of a given crisis. They would help establish
a shared analysis and priorities around which a
coherent strategy for action could be based.
Finally, we hope that the high-level panel
established by the Secretary-General will produce
concrete proposals for the creation of permanent
mechanisms to coordinate among world and regional
institutions, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector.
The third and last challenge is that of an exit
strategy. It is a complex problem. How can we help a
country without creating a long-term dependency on

S/PV.5041

external assistance? How can we move from an
approach of substitution to one of ownership by the
local people? How can we uproot crisis factors in the
long term? First, we must stress men and women —
human resources, training, education and assistance —
the approach consistently favoured by the European
Union, and we must respect the specific nature of a
situation and the local cultural identity. We must more
thoroughly involve civil society in international
assistance. In that respect, I note the very important
proposal contained in the Cardoso report on civil
society and the United Nations, which we must
carefully study in an open-minded and constructive
manner.
Finally, I underline the linguistic requirements of
peacekeeping operations, particularly for civilian
police. As I myself have seen on the ground, Frenchspeaking individuals are sorely lacking in Haiti, as well
as in Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. France is undertaking to better respond to those
needs. We hope to mobilize potential contributors,
particular among the francophone community, to meet
the appeals made by the Secretary-General.
Crisis management is no longer the preserve of
the Security Council, nor even of the United Nations. It
is the responsibility of the international community as
a whole. Together, we must examine both the preemergency and post-emergency stages of crisis
management. Before an emergency arises is the time
for prevention. After an emergency is the time of
transition. We must move towards an integration of
those stages in our collective action. With its partners
in the European Union and the United Nations, my
country will work towards that goal.
I welcome once again the initiative you have
taken, Mr. President, on this question, which is at once
very political in nature and a very concrete one for our
people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France for his
suggestions for responding to the challenges he
mentioned.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mircea
Geoana, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania.
Mr. Geoana (Romania) (spoke in French): I and
the Romanian delegation are pleased that the Spanish
presidency convened this meeting. When Mr.

Moratinos visited Bucharest, I had the privilege of
discussing this issue and the common steps taken in
this regard by Romania and Spain.
I would also like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Javier Solana and his colleagues, our friend Mr.
Amre Moussa, and our friends from the African Union.
(spoke in English)
In the last couple of years, our debate has shifted
from what we call costly contemplation to engagement.
On this topic, we are now at the stage of defining the
degree and the quality of our engagement. The breadth
and diversity of that engagement can be addressed only
once we adopt a broad concept of security and conflict
management. We should not only look at the symptoms
and the challenges but also establish benchmarks for
the viability and durability of our effort. The time has
indeed come for the Security Council, the United
Nations family and all of us to deal with these issues.
The recent Mexican initiative and others,
including our own in July, signal a new trend in
Security Council activities and decisions on this issue.
We acknowledge not only the multifaceted nature of
security but also the need for a multifaceted response
to security threats. The topic proposed by our Spanish
friends also indicates a major challenge in avoiding
placing dividing lines between the military and the
civilian components, which are still too rigidly kept
apart. We are aware of the major role of each
component, but we should try to make the synergy
between the two components real.
We find it only logical to start thinking of all
operations as having two phases of deployment and
two categories of staff in a mutually reinforcing
relationship. We have learned from our experience in
the Balkans and in other places where Romania has
been engaged that another key to success in all postconflict operations is to rapidly build up local capacity
and ownership.
Interagency cooperation still needs to be
improved. We have seen some progress, especially in
cooperation among the United Nations, the European
Union and the African Union. But more remains to be
done in that respect.
Rapid reaction national units are a must, and my
country is working on a national registry for experts
and professionals that can be deployed at any time.

13

S/PV.5041

The expected outcome of the synergy between the
military and the civilian components in conflict
management and peace-building is our ability to
prevent future armed conflicts. We are also looking at
an aspect that is important to us and is important to the
success of our endeavour — the functioning of the
basic elements of good governance.
In that regard, the capacity of post-conflict
societies to assimilate democratic values, especially
competitive electoral politics, is of decisive
importance. Here again, we should have a realistic
approach, including with respect to the right balance
between
military
and
civilian
instruments.
Unfortunately, there continue to exist situations, such
as the prolonged deadlock in the peace and transition
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which make the case for more substantial military
resources from the international community.
I would urge all of us to look at and try to review
the United Nations electoral assistance practices,
whose understanding of the criteria for fair and free
elections needs to be substantially broadened. We must
also give more support to independent national
electoral commissions; the concepts of freedom of
organization, movement, assembly and expression by
political parties; accurate electoral rolls; and freedom
of access for election monitors from international
organizations and non-governmental organizations.
Economics should not be missing from any
toolbox of civilian instruments for conflict
management and peace-building. We also look with
great interest to the way in which the European Union
has addressed some of these issues in a successful way.
Dealing with the challenges of conflict
management and peace-building at the beginning of the
twenty-first century requires, indeed, a multilayered
and multi-institutional approach. The Security Council,
including on the occasion of the thematic debate
initiated by my country during our presidency in the
month of July, acknowledged the important role played
by regional organizations in this field and encouraged
them to continue the development of their crisis
management capabilities, including at the civilian
level.
The African Union and the European Union are
just two examples of organizations that play a truly
effective role in conflict management and peacebuilding.

14

In conclusion, the tasks for civilians and the
military in post-conflict situations are no longer
simple, as they involve good coordination in the field
and clearly stated goals. The role of the Security
Council is decisive in this respect because, in most
cases, it is the Council that lays down the framework
for good civil-military interaction. Significant added
value in this regard will undoubtedly be brought by
today’s open debate of the Council, and, again, we
welcome the Spanish initiative in this regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania for his kind
words addressed to me.
I now give the floor to the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of the Philippines, His Excellency Mr. Alberto
Gatmaitan Romulo.
Mr. Romulo (Philippines): Mr. President, I am
very pleased to see you occupy the presidency of the
Security Council. I also wish to congratulate your
delegation on organizing an open meeting of the
Council on this important topic.
The dangers to international peace these days are
posed less by conflicts between countries and more by
the deadly web of terrorism, weapons proliferation and
the political turmoil brought about by dysfunctional or
failed States. Old paradigms of conflict management
and peace-building that were current in the era of
bipolarity and major-Power rivalries do not prove
useful anymore, since today’s threats or breaches to
peace emerge more from State weakness than strength.
As experience over the last decade has shown, the
attainment of sustainable peace in countries shattered
by conflicts involves complex and multidimensional
aspects calling for harmony of the efforts of the
international community, through the United Nations.
For the Philippines, peace is an imperative. With
over 7 million Filipinos overseas in over 180 countries
and on ships passing through all the world’s oceans and
straits, the stakes are higher for the Philippines.
Conflicts can and have had a direct impact on the
safety of our nationals. As a nation, conventional
notions of physical territory no longer solely define us.
Our interests lie wherever events and developments
bear upon the lives and futures of our Filipinos
overseas. As a nation and as a people, we dream of
peace in all lands and believe that the work of civilians
can help build firm foundations for peace.

S/PV.5041

The Spanish concept paper for today’s debate,
emphasizing the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building, correctly builds on an
element required to face the challenge for better and
more collective efforts to address and resolve conflicts
and to build an effective peace. The principles and
doctrines of military readiness are well understood, but
often neglected are the civilian or non-military aspects
for achieving sustainable peace after these hostilities
have ceased.

Security
Council
mandates
are
now
multidimensional in character, giving significance to
human rights, economic and social factors and even
health in peace operations. These realities have also
been translated into concrete reform of the United
Nations Secretariat conflict management structures,
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The most recent of these reform exercises, which is
still under way, was laid out in the August 2000
Brahimi Report.

Sustainable peace demands that failed States and
States recovering from debilitating conflicts develop
their Governments and build their economies and civil
society. However, without external help, this will be
impossible to achieve. International assistance is
required for these States to foster responsive,
accountable institutions of governance, such as rule of
law mechanisms, including the justice system,
administrative bureaucracies, central banks and fiscal
and financial rules and mechanisms, and to guard
against a possible relapse into conflict.

At the working level, cross-sectoral mechanisms
are now in place at United Nations Headquarters. This
welcome trend in the way various United Nations
bodies have been performing their mandate under the
Charter has contributed to an environment in which
military and civilian aspects are now seen as a
seamless whole under the rubric of conflict
management and peace-building.

The United Nations does not lack the structural
mechanism for the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building. In fact, the United
Nations has specific expertise in the most important
areas of humanitarian assistance — conducting
elections; disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation
and reintegration; strengthening of rule of law
mechanisms; protection of human rights, and various
aspects of civil affairs. The problem is not so much of
capacity — even if this, also, is a genuine problem —
but the effective harnessing of such capacity to reach
the goal of stabilizing post-conflict States.
Fortunately, the horizon is far from bleak. The
United Nations has been cognizant of — and
responsive to — the strong trend towards synergistic
approaches between the military and civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace-building. As early as
1992, then-Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
had introduced the concept of post-conflict peacebuilding to describe the range of civilian tasks, as it
were, in modern-day United Nations peace operations.
The United Nations mandates in Kosovo and East
Timor in the 1990s were the benchmarks on how the
nature of peacekeeping had evolved from a purely
military
dimension
into
civil
administration,
governance and even development-type tasks, or, in the
context of today’s debate, the civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace-building.

While there has been a noticeable and qualitative
improvement in the comprehensive approach to — and
structures for — attaining sustainable peace in postconflict States, it is critical to continue to re-energize
our efforts for a more effective and coordinated
response to complex crisis situations.
On a broader level, one factor that could improve
the civilian aspects of conflict management and peacebuilding is to get the United Nations committed to
peace missions for the period necessary to establish
new and effectual governmental institutions in warshattered States. To attain long-lasting peace in warravaged States, we should assist them for as long as
necessary in establishing stable and functioning
governmental institutions. The results, and not the
contingencies of the length of a mission, would be the
prime factor for effective conflict management and
peace-building.
On a national level, Member States may wish to
revisit the White Helmets Initiative, introduced in the
United Nations General Assembly almost a decade ago
by Argentina. The White Helmets Initiative calls on
Member States to establish corps of volunteers for
humanitarian relief operations who may be deployed to
other countries in need of such assistance, in
coordination with the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. They are largely
self-financed and/or supported by contributions and
thus are not a burden to the limited United Nations
budget or the official accounts of Member States.

15

S/PV.5041

This and similar voluntary endeavours and
programmes, such as the United Nations Volunteers,
are able to harness the noble spirit of volunteerism
which fortunately continues to pervade much of our
citizenry and civil society.
I began by emphasizing how important
international peace is to a country that has more than
one-tenth of its population in other lands. I have
discussed our thoughts and our support for the theme
of our debate and the specific ideas and mechanisms
that will ensure a meaningful role for civilians in
peace-building.
Our interest in this theme goes beyond our desire
to ensure the safety of our nationals overseas. Our
interest in this theme is also driven by the fact that the
very nationals whose safety would be ensured by
genuine peace are themselves deeply and meaningfully
involved in building peace. Many of our nationals are
directly involved in peace-building around the world
through international organizations
and
nongovernment organizations. Some work on behalf of our
Government, providing assistance to civilian
authorities in post-conflict areas in the fields of
governance, electoral process, judicial administration
and the training of civilian police.
But many more, as migrant workers, are helping
build the peace. They are the medical personnel who
tend to the sick and wounded in post-conflict and even
in conflict areas. They are the engineers who help build
roads that link villages and tribes who are now at
peace. They are the pilots and loadmasters who help
bring sustenance to areas starved by war. They are the
teachers who help foster knowledge, openness and
tolerance. They are the field workers who help manage
the natural resources that were once the cause of
conflict. Though they are migrant and contract workers
earning a living far from their land and loved ones,
they often play significant roles in building peace,
unheralded and sometimes at grave risk to themselves.
The quest for international peace and security is a
multifaceted
challenge.
Peace
requires
a
comprehensive, concerted and determined approach
that addresses the root causes of conflicts, including
their economic and social dimensions. To the extent
that the goal of peace is indivisible, the approaches and
efforts at achieving it must be holistic, well planned
and well coordinated.

16

The strategy in responding to threats to and
breaches of the peace requires the effective and
efficient harnessing and use of all resources of the
United Nations. It demands interdependence,
cooperation and coordination among United Nations
organs and agencies whose mandates impact the
attainment of sustainable peace. It often also demands
sacrifice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines for the
kind words he addressed to myself.
I now call on His Excellency Mr. Celso Luiz
Nunes Amorim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I feel
honoured, Sir, to be here under your presidency.
Although I know the Council is facing difficult times, I
am glad to be here and to see so many friends in the
Secretariat and in delegations with whom I worked
here for many years. We worked with great dedication,
although perhaps not always successfully, towards
achieving peaceful results.
I wish to congratulate you, Foreign Minister
Moratinos Cuyaubé, my friend, for promoting this very
timely debate on the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building.
President Lula opened the general debate of the
fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly (see
A/59/PV.3) with a wide-ranging presentation of
Brazil’s perception of the most pressing challenges
facing the world today. The key element in this vision
is the idea that the foundation of peace is social justice.
As President Lula has said, a world in which hunger
and poverty prevail cannot be a peaceful world.
I also wish to express Brazil’s firm support for
the Secretary-General’s words yesterday in the General
Assembly about the importance of the rule of law. Law,
not power, should be the regulator of coexistence both
domestically and internationally.
Recent experience has given us a number of
examples of conflicts in countries with very low levels
of development, illustrating the limitations of a purely
or primarily military approach to peace-building.
Without a broader perspective, without considering
economic and social variables and without focusing on
the well-being of civilians, we will fail in seeking
lasting solutions. I heard from other speakers that this

S/PV.5041

is a broadly shared vision. The question, really, is how
to achieve it.
In Brazil’s opinion, the United Nations should
develop instruments and mechanisms that translate this
awareness into real strategies. Article 65 of the Charter
of the United Nations offers us an opportunity to
enhance cooperation between the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, thereby broadening
the scope of multilateral cooperation in conflict
management and peace-building. Let us not forget that
the Economic and Social Council, and not the Security
Council, is the Charter organ with responsibility for
matters relating to social development. And of what do
we speak when we talk of efforts to build lasting peace
or of reconstruction if not social and economic
development? That was the focus when the World
Bank was created for the reconstruction of Europe. It
was a bank for reconstruction; development came later.
Still, reconstruction and development go together, but
they are matters that relate also to the Economic and
Social Council. I think it is part of the work of the
Security Council to promote the work of the Economic
and Social Council in fulfilling its tasks, so as to ease
the work of the Security Council and prevent it from
interfering in its own work. I am well aware of the
working methods of the Security Council, so I will not
propose anything concrete, but I would have liked to
see a reference to Article 65 of the Charter in the very
specific context that the President has set for our
discussion. I put this forward as food for thought for
the future.
In the past, we have tried to use that provision of
the Charter as a basis in situations such as Burundi and
Guinea-Bissau. However, while those endeavours
proved to be useful experiments, they have not yet
represented a sufficiently well-defined response to the
demands we face in many parts of Africa, in the
Middle East, in Timor-Leste, in Haiti with its chronic
violence and elsewhere.
Since I am referring to Haiti, I would like to say
that Brazil has accepted the responsibility of
commanding the forces of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, with strong participation
from other Latin American countries, including Chile,
on the clear understanding that peace in that
marginalized sister nation of our continent, will require
a long-term commitment from the international
community — a commitment not only to security, but
also to socio-economic progress.

The United Nations has failed the people of Haiti
in the past by interpreting its role too strictly and
focusing it excessively on security issues. This time, in
parallel with efforts to establish a more secure
environment, we need to launch a sustained programme
to assist Haitian society in the political, social and
economic areas. Those are tasks that go beyond the
purview of the Security Council. They need to be
coordinated with it, but they require the participation
of other agencies and organs.
We need to take advantage of the present
atmosphere, which is favourable to United Nations
reform, in order to begin to formulate new ways of
addressing these situations. We need to ensure
continuity among preventive action, peacekeeping
efforts and the post-conflict peace-building phase. We
also need to tackle the question of the duration and
intensity of these efforts, as I believe was just
mentioned by my colleague from the Philippines.
Of course, we must rapidly deploy all the troops
required by Security Council resolutions. We are facing
this need in Haiti at this very moment. But it is
particularly important to provide all of the human,
financial and material resources needed for physical
and institutional reconstruction. We appreciate the
generosity of donor countries and international
financial institutions, but these need to be coordinated
with the multilateral agencies, whose primary authority
to define the general framework needs to be
recognized.
Speaking of civilian aspects of peace-keeping
means focusing attention on the fundamental
importance of restoring human dignity, which is
generally the first victim of conflict situations. I can
easily foresee that some of today’s discussions will
explore certain specific technical aspects of
peacekeeping operations and how they dovetail with
the humanitarian agenda, the role of regional
organizations and other matters. Those are all relevant
aspects deserving of our consideration.
For my part, I wish to emphasize the need to
develop new and better tools for addressing the
structural problems at the root of tensions that lead to
violence and conflict. Poverty, disease, lack of
opportunity and inequality are some of the causes of
conflicts, particularly those within countries, which,
regrettably, are becoming ever more prevalent on our
agenda.

17

S/PV.5041

In accordance with prevailing practice, once
members of the Security Council have determined that
a certain agenda item no longer represents a threat to
the peace, that situation is sent into limbo, without any
intergovernmental follow-up of the reconciliation and
reconstruction processes. That flaw in our methods of
work may allow a conflict to reignite, as the tragic
example of Haiti underscores.
No matter how sophisticated our military
peacekeeping actions may be, we will be able to meet
the security challenges effectively only if we integrate
the political, social and economic elements into our
strategies. To that end, we can base our action on the
wise provision of Article 65, drafted in 1945, which
reminds us of the absolute need to address security
issues in their socio-economic context and even
provides guidance on how to do so from the
institutional and multilateral standpoints.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil for his service in
this Organization, and in particular for his efforts to
enhance coordination among the various organs of the
United Nations family.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Makhdum Khusro Bakhtyar, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan.
Mr. Bakhtyar (Pakistan): I would like to warmly
felicitate the Spanish presidency for organizing today’s
debate on the civilian aspects of conflict management
and peace-building. Your presence here, Sir, to preside
over this ministerial meeting testifies to the importance
of this theme.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, as well as Mr. Javier Solana, Mr. Amre Moussa
and Mr. Said Djinnit for their important contributions
to the debate.
The Security Council in recent months has
reflected on various dimensions of conflict
management and post-conflict peace-building. The
Council’s debates on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, complex crises and United Nations
response, peacekeeping operations, justice and the rule
of law, and post-conflict stabilization have contributed
richly to our collective thinking on developing a
coherent and effective response to these challenges.
Today’s discussion complements that ongoing
discourse.

18

In the discharge of its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council is frequently called upon to intervene
in complex crisis situations. Those situations are often
characterized by inter-linked military and security
dimensions, as well as political, economic, social and
humanitarian facets. The wide range of issues involved
requires a comprehensive, multidimensional approach
based on increased system-wide coordination.
Broadly speaking, there are three basic conditions
for a successful transformation from conflict to
sustainable peace: the restoration of security, a viable
political process, and development and reconstruction.
Effective coordination between military forces and
civilian actors is required to meet those conditions.
Peacekeeping operations represent the most
effective and widely used instrument for conflict
management, but a peacekeeping operation is usually
established when there is peace to keep. In the preconflict stage, there is always scope for civilian
involvement through preventive diplomatic action.
Early warning and early engagement, including
through the Secretary-General’s good offices and the
United Nations system at large, could at times prevent
conflicts from erupting. Early diplomatic engagement
could also help contain the conflict if it indeed erupts.
Conflict prevention must therefore be a priority goal.
During the conflict phase, the increasingly
complex, multidimensional peacekeeping operations
are instrumental in managing crises and creating an
enabling environment for a smooth transition to the
post-conflict or peace-building phase. However, the
civilian aspects are important in several respects, such
as humanitarian assistance, conflict resolution and
dispute settlement, and implementation of the peace
process. Access, the protection of the humanitarian
community and adequate resources are crucial for an
effective humanitarian response. Peaceful resolution of
the conflict through the provisions of Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter should remain a priority
throughout.
The post-conflict phase relies more heavily on the
civilian role when there is only a residual military
presence, if required. The civilian component helps in
the maintenance of public order, the reintegration of
ex-combatants, the development of functioning public
institutions, the protection and promotion of human
rights, justice and the rule of law, electoral processes,

S/PV.5041

and economic reconstruction and development. The
diversity of challenges in this phase requires the
involvement of multiple actors, both within and outside
the United Nations system.
A comprehensive policy response must, in our
view, place the greatest premium at all stages of
conflict on addressing the root causes. That is essential
to preventing a relapse of conflict, with its attendant
consequences. Equally, recognition of the inextricable
link between peace and development would help us to
develop strategies for longer-term stability and selfsustaining peace and security.
It is important to recognize that civilian conflict
management and peace-building are a complex task,
the nature and requirements of which vary from
situation to situation. National and regional capacities
also vary significantly. Accordingly, there can be no
“one-size-fits-all” solution. Endeavours to develop any
overarching guidelines must take those factors into
account.
We support the emphasis on strengthening
national civilian crisis management instruments and
capabilities. If those are unavailable or inadequate at
the national level, the logical first recourse to fill the
capacity gaps should be the subregional or regional
resources, where possible. The role of the regional and
subregional organizations and their cooperation with
the United Nations under Chapter VIII of the Charter
are important as regards civilian and military
capacities, both of which should be developed. Internal
and external resources are required to develop those
capacities. States and regional organizations in a
position to do so should provide adequate assistance.
Increased system-wide coordination is essential
to successfully integrating civilian aspects into the
United Nations strategies to deal with complex crisis
situations. Civilian elements are being progressively
incorporated into the planning and operations of
multidimensional peacekeeping missions. Steps are
also under way to achieve better coordination of the
civilian and military aspects, but solutions do not lie
only in increasing the number or size of the civilian
components
of
the
peacekeeping
missions.
Corresponding steps should be taken at Headquarters
to ensure an integrated and coherent response at the
organizational level.
The crucial issue of resources must also receive
due attention. Civilian aspects — particularly those

relating to humanitarian relief — are often dependent
on voluntary contributions and therefore prone to
perennial shortfalls. Consideration should be given to
provide resources from assessed contributions, as is the
case for the peacekeeping missions.
The multidimensional tasks in the post-conflict
phase are not primarily the domain of the Security
Council. Many lie within the purview of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The
involvement and support of international financial
institutions is equally important in effective conflict
management and peace-building. A comprehensive
approach presupposes a dynamic interface among the
relevant United Nations organs and the broad range of
national, regional and international actors and
stakeholders, all working in synergy.
We believe that ideas on better coordinating
mechanisms within the United Nations must be
explored. Today’s debate would go a long way in this
search. Pakistan’s proposal for establishing ad hoc
composite committees of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council deserves careful consideration in this context.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan for his
statement.
I now call on the Minister of External Relations
of Angola, Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda.
Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in French): We
welcome your presence, Sir, and we commend the
Spanish presidency on organizing this discussion on
the civilian aspects of conflict management and peacebuilding. We also thank them for the excellent support
document that we hope will be of benefit to all United
Nations Members, in particular countries emerging
from complex conflicts.
We wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement. We also welcome with
satisfaction the presence of the High Representative for
the European Union’s Common Foreign and Security
Policy, Mr. Javier Solana, and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, Mr. Said
Djinnit, as well as the representatives of the Arab
League, whose statements have made a remarkable
contribution to today’s discussion.
By civilian aspects of conflict management and
peace-building, we understand the whole group of

19

S/PV.5041

decisions taken at the end of a conflict in order to
consolidate peace and to prevent a further outbreak of
hostilities.
Peace-building
does
not
replace
humanitarian and development activities in the
countries emerging from crisis. On the contrary, its
purpose is to complement or redirect such activities so
as to reduce the risk of further outbreak of conflict by
helping to create the most favourable conditions for
reconciliation, reconstruction and economic recovery.
Experience teaches us that post-conflict peacebuilding requires much more than purely diplomatic or
military decision-making and that a consistent peacebuilding effort is required to eliminate the multiple
causes of a conflict. According to the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development,
“Since 1970, more than 30 wars have been fought
in Africa, the vast majority of them intra-State in
origin. In 1996 alone, 14 of the 53 countries of
Africa were afflicted by armed conflicts,
accounting for more than half of all war-related
deaths worldwide and resulting in more than
8 million refugees, returnees and displaced
persons. The consequences of those conflicts
have seriously undermined Africa’s efforts to
ensure long-term stability, prosperity and peace
for its peoples.” (S/1998/318, para. 4)
The increase in missions, many of which address
issues of a political nature, the building of national
institutions, election monitoring, the organization of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes, issues relating to refugees and displaced
persons, respect for human rights and the rule of law,
and the relaunching of development attest to the
growing significance of the civilian component in
peace-building. Given this cross-sectoral nature, the
international community must necessarily take into
account the link between peace and development. It
thus must be able to rely on the cooperation,
coordination and complementarity of the principal
United Nations organs, including the Security Council,
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council.
Moreover, joint deployment with regional and
subregional organizations, in keeping with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, has
demonstrated that such partnerships are mutually

20

advantageous. In this regard, the response of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Côte d’Ivoire and in Liberia before the
deployment of peacekeeping forces attests to the value
and the role of regional and subregional organizations.
In the case of armed conflict, the Security
Council’s role is clear. Nonetheless, in situations in
which public order and the functioning of public
institutions need to be restored at the end of a conflict,
it is incumbent on the civilian component to play a
more important role in peace-building in order to
achieve its objectives. There are certain elements that
are required and certain conditions that need to be met.
In our view, the most important conditions are the
following: first, diplomatic, political and economic
action must be undertaken on several fronts. Secondly,
the peace-building effort must be properly financed.
Thirdly, the activities of multiple actors need to be
coordinated at the highest level, in strategic and
administrative terms, in a framework incorporating all
United Nations partners, including the Bretton Woods
institutions, national authorities, the private sector and
civil society.
There is also the aspect of human rights and the
rule of law, which are also very important and vital to
the peace-building process.
The importance and the role of the private sector
in peace-building is also a great challenge for countries
emerging from conflict. The various resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, in particular as
regards the Kimberly process, eloquently demonstrate
this.
As we encourage economic development, if we
accept the rule of law, and if we give people the sense
of being members of the community where these
activities are being carried out, we are certain that the
private sector can make a crucial contribution to peacebuilding.
In Africa as elsewhere, conflicts change in nature
and therefore require for different forms of action in
order to tackle their effects. Today, crises are much
more complex. The protagonists involved are
numerous, and so are their dimensions.
Keeping in mind the state of affairs in a country
such as our own, we note that there is a growing gap
between requests for assistance, which are increasingly

S/PV.5041

numerous, and the limited resources available; urgent
solutions are therefore required that are based on
clearly defined priorities.
We are therefore convinced that the international
community will continue to follow up this very serious
issue.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to once
again express great appreciation to the presidency of
the Security Council for having convened this
important debate, and we would reiterate that we will
support the presidential statement that the Council will
shortly be issuing.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister of External Affairs of Angola for his
statement.
I give the floor to Ms. Anne Patterson, Deputy
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America.
Ms. Patterson (United States of America): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your selection of the topic
for your presidency’s thematic discussion.
The United States agrees that today’s complex
emergencies and peace operations require the
international community to develop civilian as well as
military response capability. The United Nations and
its Member States play a critical role in lessening and
responding to such crises.
The post-cold-war experience teaches us that ad
hoc responses are not enough. Individually and
collectively, we must better organize ourselves to
identify resources that can be readily accessed and
rapidly deployed for reconstruction and stabilization.
There are several areas in which we want to work
together, including transitional security and law
enforcement, the rule of law, good governance and
democratic participation, economic reconstruction and
humanitarian responses.
We have often seen a sharp increase in social
unrest and criminal activity take place in the immediate
post-conflict period. While military peacekeepers can
help stabilize a post-conflict country, the establishment
of a competent, impartial and adequately resourced
civilian police mission is crucial to maintaining
security.

The United States is proud to be the secondlargest contributor of civilian police to peacekeeping
missions. The presence of civilian police enables
military peacekeepers to draw down earlier than might
otherwise be possible, leaving them available to be
deployed elsewhere as necessary. In addition, civilian
police are essential to re-establish local and national
public security institutions to stop vigilantism and
revenge-taking. That is our major component of crisis
management in post-conflict reconstruction.
Civilian police are, in fact, a crucial bridge
between a martial State and a functioning democracy.
The deployment of civilian police will also set an
example for the development of local police
institutions. Let me mention one example. Many
countries, but particularly the United States and Spain,
worked together to establish the national police of El
Salvador after that country’s extended conflict. While
the new police force was not perfect, it was vastly
better than its predecessor and an essential element in
that
country’s
reconciliation
and
democratic
transformation.
Several delegations here have outlined a number
of ways to improve the international community’s
civilian police response, which we endorse. However,
policing alone is not the answer. We must take an
approach that incorporates the entire public security
and justice system and indeed the broader issue of
democracy-building and incorporating civil society
into the process.
As such, we believe that civilian police must be
linked with assistance to the judicial and penal
systems. Without that integrated approach, policing
becomes nothing more than a continuation of the
peacekeeping function rather than a vital precursor to
peace-building. To that end, and of paramount
importance in managing post-conflict societies, is the
rapid establishment of the rule of law in a post-conflict
State. That is essential in order to prevent the
emergence of political corruption, organized crime and
other criminal and terrorist elements that wish to
obstruct the peace process. We very much look forward
to exploring the rule of law issue in greater detail next
month during the United Kingdom presidency.
The role of international and regional
organizations in responding to crises must also be
further developed and improved. We appreciate the
ongoing efforts of the various United Nations

21

S/PV.5041

departments, agencies and programmes to address the
civilian dimensions of complex emergencies and peace
operations. Democracy and governance issues are
central to these responses, and President Bush
announced yesterday our support of a democracy fund
that would undertake the promotion of democracy and
engagement with civil society — both critical in postconflict environments. We look forward to hearing
recommendations on all these matters from the
Secretary-General’s High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change.

countries recovering from such conflicts only if we
help to build civilian institutions and structures,
capable government, a strong economy, a functioning
civil society. So resolving today’s conflicts, which
often occur within States rather than between them, is
more complex than in the past. It may involve
stabilizing a fragile peace, restoring public order,
reintegrating combatants, acting on women’s issues,
ending impunity, and rebuilding local institutions for
security, governance, justice, democracy, economic
growth and for social welfare.

Finally, we must continue to work with the
international financial institutions to develop improved
coordination and a shared understanding of
responsibilities.

Acting across all these areas presents us with big
challenges, made all the more acute by the need to act
quickly in the brief period following the end of the hot
conflict. Acting quickly is vital, as we know, for
success. But as well as being quick, we have to be
coherent, across a range of issues and a range of actors.

The United States will continue to support
effective multilateral cooperation in confronting the
challenges of internal conflict and State collapse. As
the Spanish paper noted, civil and military planning,
coordination and cooperation are central to the success
of reconstruction and stabilization.
The United States Government is announcing
today the formation of a new office within the State
Department — the Office of the Special Coordinator
for Stabilization and Reconstruction — which will,
hopefully, improve our own domestic Governmentwide capacity to respond to post-conflict situations.
My delegation supports examining how to
improve the coordination of international civilian and
military cooperation, as well as efforts to adopt
supporting
doctrines
for
reconstruction
and
stabilization. In that spirit, the United States will
continue working to increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of its own national reconstruction and
stabilization capacities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, The
Right Honourable Jack Straw.
Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Government of Spain and in particular, if
I may, my colleague and friend the Foreign Minister of
Spain, Miguel Moratinos, for having organized today’s
debate.
Military peacekeeping and political peace
agreements bring an end — or they should — to the hot
war of conflict. But we can ensure lasting peace in

22

I think that, over the last decade, we all have been
on a very steep learning curve. We are agreeing more
comprehensive mandates, for example for the
operations that we have determined in Liberia, in Côte
d’Ivoire, in Haiti and in Burundi. We are learning the
importance of supporting programmes which originate
locally and which reflect local cultures, such as the
Loya Jirga in Afghanistan.
I think we are getting better at burden-sharing.
Last year, for example, the European Union police
mission in Bosnia took over from the United Nationsled International Police Task Force there. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a European Unionled force helped to prepare the way for United Nations
troops.
Alongside that, we are working more closely
across institutions, such as the United Nations and the
World Bank are doing in Iraq, the Sudan and Liberia,
and together with the Inter-American Bank and the
European Commission in Haiti.
All those improvements show the direction in
which we need to go in future. Let me suggest briefly
five areas on which we need to focus: earlier action,
better financing, stronger partnerships, local priorities
and long-term engagement.
First, on earlier action, we have got to plan and
implement civilian processes early so we are able
quickly to lay the foundations for stability. To take the
example of Iraq, Prime Minister Alawi has made clear
that it cannot simply be a case of security first and

S/PV.5041

elections later. Elections are themselves vital to
building security. We need to help the Secretariat
deploy civilian staff more quickly and improve our
own capacities — as the United Kingdom is doing
through a new interdepartmental, post-conflict
reconstruction unit between the British Foreign Office,
the British Department for International Development
and the British Ministry of Defence — so that we are
better able to give civilian support to United Kingdom
and international operations abroad.
Secondly, we need better financing for the
civilian parts of peace-support operations. I am not
necessarily arguing for an increase in the scope of
assessed contributions, but we have to find ways to
generate more funding for civilian peace-building
activities, especially in the vital first year after the end
of a conflict.
Thirdly, we have to build stronger partnerships.
Regional organizations can often mobilize resources
more quickly and have special, local legitimacy, which
is why I greatly welcome the contribution made earlier
this morning by the representative of the African
Union. It is the African Union that is playing a crucial
and leading role in the resolution of the conflict in
Darfur.
The
European
Union’s
capacities
and
partnerships with the United Nations are growing, too,
and our partnership also needs to be with civil society
and non-governmental organizations. I welcome the
recommendations of the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations — the Cardoso
panel — on this.
Linked to all of this is a need to better coordinate
our actions. In post-conflict environments, competing,
conflicting or inappropriate programmes can often do
more harm than good. We have all seen examples of
that, where well-meaning individuals and Governments
take programmes down off the shelf, do not adapt them
to local circumstances and end up creating more, not
fewer, difficulties. There is much to be learned from
the trust fund models that we have seen in Afghanistan,
in Iraq, in Liberia and elsewhere.
My fourth point concerns local priorities, and it
relates to the point I have just made. We can no longer
impose structures that will collapse as soon as the
international community leaves. Instead, we have to
work to priorities agreed in and by the country
concerned and develop the local capacity to implement

them. The Afghan Transitional Administration is a
commendable example of that necessary local
leadership.
Fifthly, and finally, there is the question of longterm engagement. We have to address the fact that
international political attention for the financing of
post-conflict countries tends to wane, or drop off, after
three or four years, although studies show that that is
precisely when countries are most vulnerable to
relapsing into conflict. We therefore need to find better
ways to mobilize long-term support for post-conflict
countries in transition. I hope that the High-level Panel
will propose some options for doing so.
It is also not just a matter for us; it is a matter for
the world media, because as their attention drops off,
so inevitably — in all the countries that we
represent — does the attention of our voters and then
the attention of our Governments. We have to try and
turn that around.
Let me end by commending the report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional
justice in conflict and post-conflict societies
(S/2004/616). I look forward to discussing how we can
follow-up
on
its
excellent
analysis
and
recommendations in the open debate on the report
under the United Kingdom’s Security Council
presidency next month. These discussions are vitally
important, and we need to keep working on building
our capacities and partnerships, sharing expertise and
continually reviewing our operations to ensure that we
really do learn the lessons for the future and put them
into practice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom for his kind words
addressed to me.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Andrei
Denisov, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations.
Mr. Denisov (spoke in Russian): The item before
us today is a topical one in the context of the activities
of the Security Council and of the Organization as a
whole. Experience has shown that attaining lasting
peace and settling regional conflicts are possible only
on the basis of a comprehensive approach; this has to
combine traditional diplomatic and peacekeeping
efforts with measures to achieve post-conflict recovery

23

S/PV.5041

in the States concerned. In other words, we need
reliable guarantees for regional stabilization to prevent
the re-emergence of conflicts.
Given those conditions, the peacekeeping
operations conducted by the United Nations or under
its auspices are becoming ever more complex and
multidimensional in nature. The importance of civilian
police and other non-military components is
increasing. They are the ones that bear the
responsibility for helping to establish legitimacy, the
rule of law and a judicial system, as well as to
strengthen effective governmental institutions in States
emerging from the “hot” stage of a conflict. All of
these are important intrinsic elements of peacebuilding.
In order to implement all the prescribed tasks,
qualified international civilian staff — combining a
high standard of professionalism with a sensitive
regard for the political, cultural, social and other
features of States undergoing a post-conflict stage — is
required. The United Nations has some significant
experience in this area, but, of course, the decisive
factor is the willingness of Member States to make the
needed personnel and resources available.
In a comparatively short period of time the
United Nations has made significant progress in
resolving a number of complex conflicts. Tajikistan,
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Timor-Leste and Guatemala —
these examples are but a partial list of the
achievements of the productive combination of United
Nations peacekeeping and peace-building instruments.
In all of those instances, success was made possible to
a large extent because of the close coordination among
the military, political, civilian and rehabilitation
components of those operations. This once again
underscores the growing importance of strengthening
interaction between the Security Council and the other
principal organs and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations must be
intensified in the peacekeeping area, in keeping with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
fact, a number of these structures have well-developed
police and other civilian capacities which they could
make available to the United Nations.
However, each crisis situation is unique, and
there is no uniform peacekeeping model that can be

24

applied to all conflicts. In each specific case there is a
need to choose the best set of peacekeeping
instruments, whether it be a United Nations
peacekeeping operation, a coalition or a regional
operation. Such efforts must be organized in strict
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations,
which clearly stipulates the Security Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and in particular its key political
role at all stages of peacekeeping operations, from the
definition of their mandates to the transition towards
peace-building.
A comprehensive approach to dealing with the
consequences of crises requires a seamless, sequential
transition from one stage of peacekeeping to the next.
Here, the support of the Security Council for civilian
peace-building efforts is of great importance, including
at stages when the central implementation role is
handed over to United Nations specialized agencies or
to international and regional organizations.
Russia is fully cognizant of its responsibility, in
the context of peacekeeping, in the efforts of the
international community. It is our intention to
constantly increase our contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping, including by making available properly
trained police contingents and civilian personnel.
We will continue to help broaden practical
cooperation in the area of crisis management between
the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
We are prepared to work closely with all
interested international partners in order to reinforce
the lead role of the United Nations in conflict
prevention and management and to enhance its
effectiveness in the interests of strengthening global
security and stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Joël Adechi, Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to express our appreciation for your initiative, Mr.
President, in having organized this ministerial-level
meeting of the Security Council on civilian aspects of
conflict management and peace-building. It is a very
topical and relevant theme, given the increasing
complexity of United Nations peacekeeping missions,

S/PV.5041

particularly when their mandate is simply to help a
State to regenerate itself as an entity and when it
covers a broad range of activities involving civilian
stakeholders, as well as a military component.
Activities requiring a major civilian component
include the setting up of a dialogue among former
belligerent parties through transitional institutions;
supervising and facilitating the implementation of
peace agreements or political accords; the promotion of
national reconciliation; combating impunity; and the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants,
which are often the poor relations of disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
rehabilitation
programmes.
A number of reforms are also necessary for the
establishment
of
lasting
democratic
national
institutions and for the creation of conditions to
promote their development. This means preparing for
and holding credible, transparent elections conducive
to the establishment of a democratic political system
based on the rule of law and respect for fundamental
freedoms. It also means helping to restore the major
macroeconomic sectors and reviving normal economic
activities.
Preparing for and holding elections require the
concomitant establishment of physical conditions for
the voting process and an enabling environment so that
people can give expression to their wishes — and that
includes providing security guarantees. Hence, there is
a need for close coordination between the military and
civilian components of peacekeeping operations. In
general, we are all in agreement today that an
environment made safe by the military and the civilian
police is absolutely essential for civilian reconstruction
and rehabilitation activities undertaken by civilians.
Security is therefore a condition for peace and
development.
The success of peacekeeping operations depends
not only on the parties to a conflict, but also on a
careful calibration of the human resources made
available to a United Nations mission, particularly the
military and civil police component, and the civilian
component itself, with a view to carrying out the tasks
set out in the mandate.
We believe that the question of the political
supervision of peacekeeping operations has been
resolved very effectively by means of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representatives. We unreservedly

support that approach, because it is consistent with the
interface between civilian authorities and military
institutions. We should reaffirm the prerogatives of the
Special Representative, as head of the mission, in his
supervisory capacity over the utilization on the ground
of the resources and forces at his disposal.
Our goals should be to define the conditions
necessary for establishing a bridge between security,
recovery and development and to maximize the
synergy of the United Nations, regional organizations,
national Governments and civil society, according to a
division of labour based on complementarity and
comparative advantage.
In the light of those comments, we believe that
there is a need to plan, organize, mobilize and finance
civilian capacities at a level greater than at any time in
the past, and to clearly define the objectives of the
civilian components of missions, giving them precise
mandates that include, right from the outset, various
options for a viable and credible exit strategy.
Thus the rebuilding of a State should henceforth
be viewed as the main goal of conflict management and
peace-building, and be placed on an equal footing with
the restoration of security conditions. Clearly, restoring
security is not enough to ensure that the peace will be
lasting. Haiti is a graphic example in that respect.
In the past, a number of studies and proposals
have dealt with this issue in the context of the United
Nations. According to a recent study, when the postconflict reconciliation phase fails, 40 per cent of
countries emerging from conflict relapse into violence.
In the case of Africa, those figures are even higher —
as high as 60 per cent. Preventing such a relapse should
be the abiding concern of all stakeholders.
The mandates of operations must be defined very
carefully. They must be precise and must include a
complete range of civilian activities essential for the
effectiveness of peacekeeping. It is important that
stakeholders be given greater latitude on the ground,
but they also need sufficient elements to facilitate
planned financing. The civilian aspects of crisis
management must be given the same priority as that
accorded to the military aspect so that civilian
achievements can provide proper support for the
military element in the long term.
That situation also represents a challenge to
individual States that provide troops and civilian

25

S/PV.5041

personnel and that are required to deploy agents that
have the necessary expertise and competence in crisis
management. That also applies to regional and even
subregional organizations, which are assuming greater
responsibilities in the area of post-conflict
management.

Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes you to the Council,
Mr. President, to preside over this meeting. We also
wish to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan, Mr.
Solana, Mr. Moussa and Mr. Djinnit for their presence
and for their statements.

Exchange of training programmes and experience
among various countries and institutions that
participate in peacekeeping operations should make it
possible to strengthen and consolidate know-how and
to develop a network of people with the best possible
qualifications that is extensive enough to meet existing
needs in good time.

In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have proven that the civilian component is
playing a greater role than ever in peace-building.
Strengthening the effectiveness of the civilian
component is of great importance to the success of
peacekeeping operations and to endeavours to assist
the parties concerned in making a smooth transition
from conflict to peace-building. The issue deserves
serious attention from the Security Council, therefore.
the convening of this meeting is of urgent necessity
and timeliness.

Once they are on the ground, civilian personnel
must constantly endeavour to carry out their activities
in close coordination, acting strictly within the
parameters of their role so as not to put themselves at
risk unnecessarily or cause difficulties that could
jeopardize the results of their efforts. Civilian
personnel must be trained to manage stress. They need
to work in a team and must be able to work under
difficult conditions. They must also have a degree of
knowledge of the local cultural realities so that they
can adapt to them.
From the standpoint of the duration of operations,
it should be stressed that the activities of the civilian
component must be designed and conducted in such a
way as to ensure that they can hand over to their
counterparts in the countries concerned. They must
gradually evolve and allow an increased role for local
people as they take over essential functions, and help
them to develop the necessary capacity for a gradual
transfer of responsibility to local stakeholders. That is
the only way in which it will be possible in the long
term to create conditions for the United Nations to
disengage and leave behind solid democratic
institutions and a national economy that can become
part of the global economy.
In conclusion, I would like stress the very
important question of the necessary financing needed
for peacekeeping operations. They should avoid
complicated procedures. Funding must be made
available, and it should be disbursed within a
reasonable time period so that the work can be carried
out in effective manner.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Wang Guangya, Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations.

26

I would like here to make four observations.
First, in conflict management, the roles of military
action and that of the civilian elements are closely
interrelated and predicated on one another. There can
be no reconstruction without peace and no stability
without reconstruction. Military success guarantees the
presence of a civilian role, which is an essential and
indispensable
element
in
any
post-conflict
reconstruction.
Secondly, civilian assistance should be provided
in accordance with specific circumstances and needs.
Conflicts in various parts of the world vary greatly as
do actual needs in the field of reconstruction. When
providing civilian assistance, the international
community should focus its measures and avoid
activities which should be performed by others.
Thirdly, the role of existing United Nations
mechanisms must be brought into full play with
increased efficiency. The various parties of the United
Nations system have accumulated a wealth of
experience in post-conflict reconstruction and have
established specific practices and mechanisms. In
strengthening the role of the civilian element, we must
summarize and draw upon past successes and make full
use of available resources so that existing parties can
each do their part and avoid duplicating their actions.
Fourthly, priority must be given to assisting
regional and subregional organizations to enhance their
capacities. In recent years, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and
others are increasingly active in peacekeeping and

S/PV.5041

reconstruction. However, due to their limited
capacities, they have yet to tap potentials in civilian
and other areas. Increasing the assistance of relevant
organizations in the civilian sector and enhancing
capacities should be one of the priorities of the next
phase of work of the United Nations.
In recent years, China has played an active role in
the military sector of peacekeeping operations and has,
at the same time, increased its participation in the
civilian sector. This month, China will send a team of
civilian police — for the first time — to Haiti, to help
maintain public order.
China is ready to work with the relevant parties
to carry out exchanges and jointly promote and
strengthen the role of the civilian sector in
reconstruction and sustainable development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Mourad Benmehidi, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Algeria to the United Nations.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French):
Allow me first to say how delighted my delegation is
to see you presiding over the work of our Council, and
to congratulate you on the choice of the topic which is
crucial to the work of the Council, given the challenges
it needs to meet.
For several years now we have witnessed efforts
that seek to move the United Nations from a culture
reacting to conflicts, towards becoming a culture that
prevents conflicts. The result is that the
multidisciplinary
nature
of
United
Nations
peacekeeping missions has become an absolute
necessity worldwide.

has remained limited in the absence of a dedicated
civilian component.
The importance of the civilian aspects of conflict
management and peace-building has gradually come to
the fore in light of the experience of the international
community. This has been graphically demonstrated by
the successful transition in Timor-Leste, and — we can
say today — in Liberia where, despite the presence of a
very strong military component and of satisfactory
results obtained in stabilizing the situation, the
Security Council surely cannot consider a withdrawal
from that country for several years to come.
Indeed, the phase following the end of
hostilities — which includes the deployment of a
civilian component that includes a police force of an
appropriate size; a rule of law component dedicated to
disseminating the values of democracy, tolerance and
human rights; the rehabilitation of the judiciary and
penitentiary system; and civilian administration and
electoral assistance components — is an essential stage
for returning to normalcy before tackling the critical
stage of reconciliation, reconstruction and the initial
stages of development.
The multitude of civilian and military
stakeholders working for various international and
regional organizations, in addition to the increasingly
significant contributions provided by humanitarian
non-governmental organizations, make the existence of
a correct exit strategy absolutely essential.

Improved planning and improved execution of
the military aspect of peacekeeping operations has
required, in particular, that exit strategies be defined.
This has shown that stressing the military aspect in
order to attain lasting peace is not sufficient. The
concept of multidimensional action by the international
community in order to achieve lasting peace has gained
ground and has gradually given way to a more complex
form of peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

Improving interagency coordination within the
United Nations system can provide a model for
complex international operations. From our standpoint,
the same concerns relating to the need for exit
strategies for military operations should lead us to
define exit strategies for the civilian components of
international operations. The success of the civilian
aspects should, in fact, be gauged by the strength of the
institutional capacities of the country concerned and
the links they have established with the stakeholders in
reconstruction and development partners in the long
term — particularly companies and development
institutions which are set to take over after the conflict.

Although international military operations have
proven their effectiveness in stabilizing the situation on
the ground, their ability to restore law and order and
the normal functioning of institutions based on the rule
of law, to rehabilitate basic public and social services,
or to initiate the socio-economic recovery of a country,

The increasing number of crises and the many
demands made on the international community have
shown how great the needs for conflict resolution are.
More than 56,000 blue helmets and about 11,000
civilians are now involved in various international
operations at an annual cost equivalent to $3.5 billion.

27

S/PV.5041

It is foreseeable that the trend will increase,
particularly when it comes to the size of the civilian
component of the operations. That means we must
think about planning for the human and material
resources to meet those needs.
We are seeing a marked tendency in the
Organization to have recourse to the possibilities
outlined in Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter,
including increasing the involvement of regional and
other international organizations in preventing conflicts
and managing crises. My delegation supports that
approach since it is unanimously acknowledged that
the regional organizations have a definite comparative
advantage for carrying out the civilian tasks of
missions where the cultural dimension is decisive and
when it comes to working closely with the local people
and facing the sociological realities of a situation.
I would like to stress two principles that we deem
to be essential to make that international cooperation a
success. First, reliance on regional pillars should not be
understood as any neglect by the United Nations — or
in particular, the Security Council — of any of its
obligations to maintain international peace and security
or neglect in its cooperation for development.
Secondly, we need to take account of the clear
disparity that exists between the various regional
organizations concerning financial resources, expertise
and capacities, with a view to giving them assistance at
the appropriate level, but without diverting resources
from development. We believe that the support in the
area of peace and security that the European Union has
provided to the African Union’s new structure through
the African Peace Facility fund — which we
welcome — meets that concern. That kind of initiative
could advance the cherished goal of planning and
setting up standby civilian crisis management
capacities at the national level that could be mobilized
at the regional level if necessary.
Moreover, the civilian dimension of international
operations raises institutional issues that should be
examined. From that perspective, a greater role should
be given to the Economic and Social Council, which is
directly concerned by several aspects and has gained
some experience in that area through its Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on African countries emerging from
conflict.
Finally, I should like to emphasize that the
increased importance given by the international

28

community to civilian aspects of conflict management
and peace-building is fully in keeping with the
priorities defined by Africa in the framework of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development —
particularly the strengthening of reliable institutions
and governance to ensure successful economic
development. I should also like to reiterate our
conviction that support from the international
community in that area before conflict erupts would be
far less costly and have greater chances for success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain. For the sake of brevity and in
view of the lateness of the hour, I shall try to condense
part of my statement so that we can move forward and
conclude this thematic debate, which I believe has been
a great success. Copies of the full text will be provided
to delegations.
Allow me to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral, the regional organizations — the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the European
Union — and all the ministers and representatives who
have spoken this morning for having participated in
this debate.
I believe I can summarize the discussion and part
of my statement by highlighting various points. First,
restoring security is an essential prerequisite for
undertaking activities of a civilian nature. Secondly,
after security, re-establishing the rule of law is the
most urgent task. Thirdly, we also need to devote
attention to issues related to the judicial system — a
matter to which Spain has been devoted greater
attention and interest in recent years. To that end, our
country recently hosted a criminal justice workshop in
Madrid, under the sponsorship of the European
Commission, precisely to improve training in that area
for peace mission participants. Along the same lines,
our Government believes that the penitentiary system
is also an essential part of a general strategy aimed at
re-establishing the rule of law. All of that is related to
the promotion and strengthening of institutionbuilding.
Similarly — as indicated in various statements
this morning — the holding of free and fair elections is
key to achieving democracy and good governance. But,
above all, I believe that a number of speakers have
stressed the urgency and necessity of swift deployment
in crisis management operations. Such swift

S/PV.5041

deployment would be much facilitated if immediately
available reserves of personnel and resources could be
established at the national and regional or international
levels. We should also promote the development of a
doctrine on procedures for setting up crisis
management operations. Likewise, I would like to
stress that I agree with the statements of many speakers
on the need to improve and strengthen coordination
mechanisms.
In conclusion, the relevance of the civilian
component in peace missions is being increasingly
appreciated. But, as is the case with military personnel,
we need to increase their numbers so that they can
carry out their tasks properly. In that connection, the
Spanish Government is promoting the creation of a
civilian guard unit of approximately 1,000 personnel,
which we hope will be operational in two years and
capable of responding immediately to the possible
needs of the international community. Therefore, we
will need sufficient institutional capacity in the system,
which could be achieved by creating a coordination
mechanism responsible for accomplishing that purpose,
hewing closely to the objectives of the Security
Council.
Finally, we would like the most significant
aspects of today’s discussion — a discussion that I
believe has greatly enriched our debate — to have
continuity and follow-up. I am sure that, in the future
in this Chamber, there will be further consideration of
the need to expand our thinking on civilian aspects of
conflict management.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council met at the ministerial
level on 22 September 2004 to consider ‘Civilian
aspects of conflict management and peacebuilding’. Ministers recognized the increasing
importance of civilian aspects of conflict
management in addressing complex crisis
situations and in preventing the recurrence of
conflict. They affirmed the importance of conflict
resolution in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter.

“Ministers
also
acknowledged
the
importance of civilian-military cooperation in
crisis management. Military and police
components are essential to address and stabilize
certain serious crisis situations and to guarantee
security. Moreover, the participation of a strong
civilian component is key to the provision of
humanitarian assistance, the re-establishment of
public order, functioning public institutions,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and peace-building
for
longer-term
sustainable
development.
Substantial civilian participation in crisis
management is also essential for a strategy of
military disengagement and plays a crucial role in
the phase of post-conflict peace building. In this
context, it is important that there be coordination
between the civilian and military components in
crisis management from the first phase of
integrated mission planning. In addition, there
should be significant coordination with actors
involved in longer-term reconstruction and
development, including in particular the other
organs of the United Nations system, in
accordance with their respective mandates, and
the international financial institutions, as well as
cooperation with the business sector.
“Ministers recognized the increasing role of
some regional and subregional and other
international organizations in crisis management.
They also recalled that Articles 52 and 53 of the
United Nations Charter set forth the contribution
of regional organizations to conflict management,
as well as the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations. They
encouraged these organizations, whenever
possible, to continue to develop their crisis
management capabilities, including in the civilian
field, in close coordination with the United
Nations and in accordance with the provisions of
Article 54 of the United Nations Charter. When
applicable, clear schemes for joint operations
should be developed. Also, greater coordination
and interoperability among those organizations,
as well as developing and sharing common
strategies, operational policies and best practices
in civilian crisis management would enhance
efficiency and coherence in crisis management.
Continued internal coordination in this field
among all relevant United Nations organs and
agencies should also be strengthened.

29

S/PV.5041

“Ministers supported the efforts by Member
States to continue to develop, as appropriate,
their own civilian crisis management capabilities,
including, inter alia, rapid civilian response
teams, and they also supported their initiatives to
make these capabilities available to the United
Nations and other relevant regional or
subregional organizations, as a contribution to
their efforts in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Adequate capabilities should
be developed in key areas of civilian crisis
management, such as police, justice and the rule
of law, preparation of electoral processes and
electoral observation, civil protection and public
administration. The Security Council should
consider the nature and availability of these
capabilities when approving the necessary
mandates for United Nations operations.
“Adequate and flexible means for
transitional peace support and crisis management
activities, such as protection of civilians,
including United Nations and humanitarian
personnel, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the end of
impunity,
public
institution-building
and

transitional justice, as well as the promotion and
protection of human rights and the integration of
a gender perspective are essential to ensure
lasting peace after a conflict. Also, the
involvement of local actors in the policy-making
process and a fruitful relationship with civil
society should be among the priorities of any
post-conflict strategy.
“The Security Council commends the
efforts of the Secretary-General in addressing all
relevant issues relating to the civilian aspects of
crisis management and invites him, other
institutions and agencies of the United Nations
system, regional and subregional organizations
and Member States to continue to give serious
consideration to this matter, with a view to
making further progress in this field.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2004/33.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.10 p.m.

30
