S/PRST/2003/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 March 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4718th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 March 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its previous decisions concerning the
situation in Somalia, in particular the statements of its President of 13
December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/35) and of 28 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/8),
and welcoming the report of the Secretary-General of 26 February 2003
(S/2003/231), reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia, and its respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, political independence and unity of the country, consistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
“The Security Council reiterates its firm support for the Somali National
Reconciliation Process and the ongoing Somali National Reconciliation
Conference in Kenya, launched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and led by the Government of Kenya. The
Council strongly encourages all parties throughout Somalia to participate in
the process, which offers a unique opportunity for all Somalis to end the
suffering of their people and to restore peace and stability to their country. The
Council demands the Somalia parties to abide by and implement expeditiously
the decisions adopted throughout the process, including the Declaration on
Cessation of Hostilities and the Structures and Principles of the Somali
National Reconciliation Process, on 27 October 2002, hereafter referred to as
the ‘Eldoret Declaration’ (S/2002/1359), as well as the December 2002
agreement reached by five Mogadishu faction leaders and the Transitional
National Government regarding the restoration of peace and security in
Mogadishu and a subsequent agreement among the five faction leaders which
included a commitment to make efforts to reopen the International Airport and
Seaport in Mogadishu, as mentioned in paragraph 26 of the report of the
Secretary-General of 26 February 2003 (S/2003/231).
“The Security Council commends the Government of Kenya for its
crucial role in facilitating the Somali National Reconciliation Process, and
calls on the IGAD Technical Committee comprised of the three Frontline
States (Djibouti, Ethiopia and Kenya) to continue their active role in
promoting the Process. The Council welcomes the appointment of Ambassador

03-27746 (E)

120303

*0327746*

S/PRST/2003/2

Bethuel Kiplagat as the Special Envoy of Kenya to the Process. The Council
also welcomes the appointment of Mr. Muhammad Ali Foum as the Special
Envoy of the African Union for Somalia, the generous financial contribution of
the European Union, Norway and the US, and the sustained engagement of
their envoys, as well as those of the IGAD Partners Forum and the League of
Arab States. The Council strongly encourages their continued active and
positive role in support of the reconciliation process.
“The Security Council notes that the six reconciliation committees of the
Somali National Reconciliation Process have continued their work despite
difficulties faced by the Somali participants regarding representation. The
Council urges all parties involved to fully participate in the six reconciliation
committees and to resolve the representation issue, and welcomes the
establishment of an arbitration committee in this regard. The Council supports
the Secretary-General’s commitment to assist in the work of the six
reconciliation committees with technical support and relevant expertise.
“The Security Council expresses its strong regret that even after the
signing of the ‘Eldoret Declaration’, fighting continued to break out in Somalia
in particular in Mogadishu and Baidoa. The Council condemns all those
involved in the fighting and calls for an immediate end to all acts of violence
in Somalia. The Council shares the Secretary-General’s conclusion that it is
those that have weapons of war who continue to hold the people of Somalia
hostage to the cycle of violence. The Council also shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view that these people will be held accountable by the Somali people
and the international community for their actions if they persist on the path of
confrontation and conflict. In this regard, the Security Council welcomes the
establishment of a mechanism by the IGAD Frontline States to monitor
compliance with the ‘Eldoret Declaration’ and their intention to consider
appropriate measures against all individuals and groups violating the ‘Eldoret
Declaration’ and December 2002 agreements.
“The Security Council notes with serious concern the continued flow of
weapons and ammunition supplies to Somalia, as well as allegations of the role
of some of the neighbouring States in breach of the arms embargo established
by resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992, and calls on all States and other
actors to comply scrupulously with the arms embargo. The Council welcomes
the work of the Panel of Experts, established pursuant to resolution 1425
(2002) of 22 July 2002, and expresses its intention to give full consideration to
and take appropriate action regarding the Panel’s report as a step towards
reinforcing the arms embargo and disarmament.
“The Security Council, insisting that persons and entities must not be
allowed to take advantage of the situation in Somalia to finance, plan,
facilitate, support or commit terrorist acts from the country, emphasizes that
efforts to combat terrorism in Somalia are inseparable from the establishment
of peace and governance in the country. In this spirit, the Council urges the
international community to provide assistance to Somalia for the further and
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
“The Security Council expresses serious concern regarding the
humanitarian situation in Somalia, in particular the internally displaced
persons, especially in the area of Mogadishu. The Council urges the Somalia

2

S/PRST/2003/2

leaders to live up to their commitments under the ‘Eldoret Declaration’, to
facilitate the delivery of much-needed humanitarian assistance, to assure the
safety of all international and national aid workers, to provide immediate safe
access for all humanitarian personnel, and to support the return and
reintegration of refugees. The Council calls on Member States to respond
urgently and generously to the United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for 2003.
“The Security Council notes that while some parts of Somalia remain
unstable, relative stability continues to prevail in significant portions of the
country. The Council welcomes the evolution of the community-based peacebuilding activities and calls for the acceleration of comprehensive peacebuilding activities. The Council requests the Secretary-General to continue
putting in place, in a coherent manner, preparatory activities on the ground for
a comprehensive post-conflict peace-building mission in Somalia once security
conditions permit, as stipulated in the statement by the President of the
Council of 28 March 2002 (S/PRST/2002/8), which should take into account
combating poverty and strengthening public institutions.
“The Security Council stresses that a comprehensive post-conflict peacebuilding programme with special emphasis on disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration will be an important contribution towards the
restoration of peace and stability in Somalia. The Council welcomes the
contribution of Ireland, Italy and Norway to the Trust Fund for Peace-building
in Somalia and calls on other donors to do the same without delay.
“The Security Council commends the work done by the United Nations
Country Team, the Red Cross and Red Crescent movements and nongovernmental organizations in support of peace and reconciliation in Somalia.
The Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue to support actively
the IGAD-sponsored Somalia National Reconciliation Process and to continue
to implement and enhance ongoing humanitarian and peace-building activities
on the ground.
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to assist the Somali
parties and support the IGAD mediation in the implementation of the steps and
conclusions for peace, as adopted throughout the Somalia National
Reconciliation Process.”

3
