S/2017/911

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council established the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular intervals on the
implementation of its mandate. The report covers the activities of UNMIK, and
developments related thereto, from 16 July to 15 October 2017.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagements with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force continue to perform their
roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues its presence in
line with the presidential statement of the Council of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work in partnership with the Mission.

II. Key political and security developments
3.
Following the conduct of early legislative elections on 11 June 2017, in whi ch
the opposition gained unprecedented ground, the situation in Kosovo was marked by
a prolonged period of negotiations, which culminated in the formation of a new
Assembly and government.
4.
The compromise reached on 4 September involved a switch in alle giance by
the New Kosovo Alliance party led by Behgjet Pacolli, which had secured four
Assembly seats in the legislative elections. The New Kosovo Alliance left the
coalition led by the Democratic League of Kosovo, with which it had competed in
the elections, to join the “PAN” coalition, which is led by the Democratic Party of
Kosovo and comprises that Party, the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and the
Initiative for Kosovo. As a result of this compromise, on 7 September, the Assembly
was able to re-elect the leader of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, Kadri Veseli, as
its president, following which Kosovo President Hashim Thaçi gave a mandate to
form the new government to the leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and
candidate for Prime Minister of the “PAN” coalition, Ramush Haradinaj.

17-18666 (E)

021117

*1718666*

S/2017/911

5.
On 9 September, the Assembly of Kosovo, with a sufficient but very slim
majority of 61 votes in favour out of 120 seats in the Assembly, approved the new
government led by Prime Minister Haradinaj, with New Koso vo Alliance leader
Pacolli as Principal Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Support from the ethnic Serb voting bloc led by the Serbian List, following
consultations with Belgrade, was crucial in assuring this majority. The new
government, which represents a relatively diverse political spectrum, includes 5
deputy prime ministers and 21 ministers, with the Democratic Party of Kosovo
holding 6 ministries; the New Kosovo Alliance 4 ministries; the Initiative for
Kosovo and the Serbian List 3 ministries each; the Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo and other communities 2 ministries each; and 1 ministry without party
affiliation. Additionally, the Serbian List holds six deputy ministerial posts. Among
the 21 ministries, only two are led by women, which represents a decrease in
women’s representation at that level, from 16.7 per cent to 8.9 per cent. On a
positive note, two of the five deputy presidents of the Assembly of Kosovo are
women, and 7 of 14 parliamentary committees are chaired by wome n.
6.
With the new governing framework in place, the government began to return
to its many pressing challenges. However, shortly thereafter, the focus shifted to
another Kosovo-wide election, at the municipal level, which was scheduled for
22 October. Significantly, at his first cabinet meeting on 12 September, Prime
Minister Haradinaj dismissed the members of the State Commission on Border
Demarcation with Montenegro in a bid to revise the border deal. In an interview
with the Radio Television of Kosovo on 26 September, the Prime Minister opined
that the border with neighbouring Montenegro is not where the previous State
Commission drew the demarcation line. On the same day, while in Podgorica on an
official visit, Principal Deputy Prime Minister and Mini ster of Foreign Affairs
Pacolli, speaking at a joint press conference with his Montenegrin counterpart,
Srdjan Darmanović, stated that the current composition of the Assembly of Kosovo
makes it difficult to ratify the border demarcation agreement of 26 Aug ust 2015 and
appealed for “understanding and patience”.
7.
On 22 September, Prime Minister Haradinaj participated in a regular meeting
of the Ministerial Council for European Union Integration, which focused on the
implementation of the European reform agenda, and encouraged the new Assembly
to act on necessary legislation. Subsequently, on 4 October, the Assembly
unanimously ratified the agreement between Kosovo and the European Union
signed on 20 April on the implementation of financial assistance under t he 2016
European Union Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance.
8.
By the end of the reporting period, all political parties were intensively
engaged in the campaign for Kosovo-wide municipal elections scheduled for
22 October. On 30 August, the Central Election Commission certified 91 political
entities: 35 political parties, 1 coalition, 30 civic initiatives and 25 independent
candidates, running a total of 7,300 candidates for municipality assemblies and
mayors. Although all candidates were initially certified, on 12 September the
Commission decided to decertify 87 candidates who had been convicted by Kosovo
courts in the past three years, thus applying for the first time article 29 of the Law
on General Elections. On 22 September, however, the Central Election Commission
was obliged to reverse its decertification decision, following a ruling by the
Supreme Court that article 29 was unconstitutional. The 87 candidates were thus
allowed to resume their candidacies. This prompted renewed concern by many
international and local observers about the integrity of the eligibility criteria, as well
as the political independence of the judiciary.
9.
Several allegations of threats and intimidation against non-Serbian List Serb
candidates were reported at the end of July, before the submission of party lists to
2/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

the Central Election Commission. On 26 and 28 July, a vehicle belonging to the
president of the Kosovo Serb Civic Initiative-Social Democratic Party, Oliver
Ivanović, and another belonging to a non-Serbian List mayoral candidate in
Zvečan/Zveçan were burned by unknown perpetrators, in North Mitrovica and
Zvečan/Zveçan respectively. After submission of the party lists, four municipal
assembly candidates withdrew from the election and publicly pledged their suppor t
to the Serbian List. At the outset of the campaign for municipal elections on
20 September, my Special Representative issued a statement emphasizing the
importance of electing representatives in a democratic and transparent manner and
calling on all leaders and parties to ensure a campaign free of intimidation and
coercion, enabling voters to freely exercise their rights.
10. While the overall security situation in Kosovo remained stable during the
reporting period, underlying tensions were apparent, particularly in the north. On
7 August, in Zubin Potok, unknown perpetrators threw an explosive device in the
yard of a Kosovo-Serb police officer serving in the narcotic section of North
Mitrovica police station, causing material damage to the house and t hree vehicles.
In two separate incidents, one off-duty Kosovo Serb police officer was physically
assaulted in Zubin Potok on 7 August, and another in North Mitrovica on
2 September. No suspects in these incidents have been identified by police as of the
publication of the present report.
11. UNMIK continued to coordinate closely with all international partners on the
ground to address concerns of radicalization in Kosovo society and the recruitment
of Kosovo residents by terrorist organizations. On 13 August, Kosovo prosecutors
imposed detention on remand for two defendants suspected of terrorism-related
offences, including intention to engage in foreign military action. The two suspects
were apprehended by Turkish authorities when attempting to cross the Tu rkish
border with the Syrian Arab Republic illegally on 28 July.

III. Northern Kosovo
12. Political events in northern Kosovo were dominated by the broader dynamics
related to the formation of a new government and upcoming municipal elections.
The dominant trend was the prominence of Kosovo Serb politicians, publicly
supported by Belgrade, encouraging participation in Kosovo elections under the
banner of the Serbian List.
13. Significantly, the Kosovo Central Election Commission eventually decided no t
to include 1,200 conditional ballots in the final tallies of the Assembly of Kosovo
elections, on the grounds that voters casting conditional ballots must present
Kosovo identification and not identification issued by Government of Serbia
institutions. This decision was subsequently upheld by the Kosovo Supreme Court
after an appeal by the Serbian List. This issue had been a point of contention in
several locations in northern Kosovo, where displaced voters in possession of only
Serbian identification can have a potentially significant impact on election results.
14. On 13 September, offices of the Serbian Red Cross organization across
Kosovo were raided by Kosovo police owing to suspicion of the organizations
having conducted unsanctioned information-gathering activities on local residents,
which, in the north, led to physical confrontation. According to the Serbian Red
Cross organization, the activities — supported by the Government of Serbia — are
surveys of Kosovo Serb and other non-majority communities and are needed for
planning social assistance. During the operation at the Red Cross facility in North
Mitrovica, a crowd gathered outside to block the Kosovo police, resulting in at least
two police officers being injured.
17-18666

3/18

S/2017/911

15. There was little progress towards reopening the main bridge in Mitrovica to
vehicular traffic, in line with the agreement on freedom of movement across the
Mitrovica bridge reached within the context of the European Union -facilitated
dialogue on 25 August 2015. The mayor of North Mitrovica continued to hold that
security providers should increase their presence before he would agree to the
opening of the bridge.
16. On 21 July, the European Union announced a decision to cancel a planned
project to provide 7.8 million euros of financial assistance for the construction of a
cultural centre and a new university building in North Mitrovica municipality. In a
statement issued on the same day, the European Union Special Representative in
Kosovo explained that the decision was taken only after the municipality failed to
meet several extended deadlines for preparatory steps needed to enable construction.
The mayor of North Mitrovica publicly criticized the statement, claiming that the
decision to cancel the project was related to the delays in the opening of the main
bridge in Mitrovica.

IV. Normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina
17. During the reporting period, the European Union-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade resumed at the presidential level, wit h informal consultations
between President Thaçi and Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić held in Brussels
and on the margins of the opening of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly, in New York.
18. Following one such consultation on 31 August in Brussels, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy announced that
the parties had “agreed on the final steps for the full implementation of the judiciary
agreement by 17 October 2017”. While progress was subsequently made towards
the implementation of this agreement, especially as regards the formal recruitment
of judges, prosecutors and other justice personnel, important gaps remained,
including with respect to the translation of key legislation in Serbian, the
refurbishment of premises, security arrangements for personnel in Mitrovica and the
provision of adequate guarantees from Belgrade concerning the pension rights and
other entitlements of Kosovo Serb judges and prosecutors. At the end of the
reporting period, it was not clear whether the 17 October deadline would be met,
although all parties agreed that its fulfilment would represent an important sign of
goodwill to make progress in the implementation of existing agreements.
19. More significantly, political actors on both sides stressed the importance of
moving the dialogue on to deeper issues. In this context, President Vučić continued
his initiative to launch an internal dialogue on the Kosovo issue, which, as
explained during a 28 July interview with the Radio Television of Serbia, is meant
to promote discussion in order to find a solution for the Kosovo issue. Subsequently,
in a televised address to the nation on 12 September, the President formally
announced a new phase of the internal dialogue starting in O ctober 2017, the
outcome of which would define “the relationship between Serbia and Kosovo” and
the ensuing consequences for Serbia’s future. He also announced that he had tasked
Prime Minister Ana Brnabić with coordinating the institutionalization of the
dialogue process and the formation of a widely representative working group,
including members of government, opposition, civil society and religious
institutions.
20. In parallel, in July, President Thaçi stated that the time had come to open a
new phase of the dialogue “that would lead to complete normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina”. In stressing that Kosovo should be represented “as
4/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

consensually as possible”, the President called for the creation of a “unity team” to
represent Kosovo institutions, political parties and civil society in the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. Similarly, in his 9 September inaugural address, Prime
Minister Haradinaj, in stressing that “there is no alternative to dialogue with Serbia”
and despite “a tragic history, we cannot change the fact that we are neighbours”,
noted that the dialogue should be “directed towards people and not merely the
political elite”. He then encouraged more internal discussion in Kosovo, involving
civil society, media and the political opposition. President Thaçi also called for the
involvement of the United States of America in the final phase of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. At a meeting held on 29 September with United States
Vice-President Michael Pence during an official visit to the United States, President
Thaçi stressed that the involvement of the United States is “decisive for reaching a
final agreement, applicable to both sides”.

V. Returns, reconciliation and cultural heritage, and
community relations
21. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) recorded a total of 113 (61 female, 52 male)
individual voluntary returns to Kosovo by members of non-majority communities.
UNHCR estimates that, at the end of September 2017, the total number of internally
displaced persons living in Kosovo stood at 16,418. Of those, 54 per cent were
Serbs, 42 per cent Albanians, 3 per cent members of the Roma -Ashkali-Egyptian
community and 1 per cent others. Meanwhile, 31 individuals sought asylum in
Kosovo during the reporting period, bringing the total to 112 individuals. Kosovo
institutions provide asylum seekers with accommodation, food, medical care and
access to school for minors, and do not restrict their freedom of movement within
Kosovo.
22. Kosovo institutions made considerable efforts to improve access to education
for members of the Roma-Ashkali-Egyptian community. Of note, on 6 September,
the Kosovo Ministry of Education, Science and Technology launched a ca ll for
applications for 500 Kosovo-wide scholarships for secondary school students from
this community for the 2017-2018 academic year.
23. UNMIK continued to monitor developments related to the promotion and
protection of religious and cultural heritage. No progress was observed with regard
to implementation of the May 2016 ruling of the Kosovo Constitutional Court,
which confirmed that 23.5 hectares of disputed land around the Visoki Dečani
Orthodox Monastery are the legal property of the Monastery. Follo wing the refusal
of the Deçan/Dečani municipal authorities to register the land as the Monastery’s
property in compliance with the Court ruling, the Monastery raised the issue with
the municipal cadastre office of Deçan/Dečani, which operates under the Min istry of
Environment and Spatial Planning.
24. In July, the Serbian Orthodox Church appealed to the government in Pristina
to resolve the issue of rental dues unpaid since November 2013 for premises
belonging to the Serbian Orthodox Church that are being used by the Kosovo
Anti-Corruption Agency. The budget of the Agency, which reports directly to the
Assembly of Kosovo, is approved by the Assembly on an annual basis and is
supported by the World Bank through a grant.
25. In a positive development, the municipality of Pejë/Peć observed a Day of
Interreligious Tolerance on 21 September. Under the auspices of the municipality,
representatives of various religious communities gathered to discuss interreligious

17-18666

5/18

S/2017/911

tolerance and met with local residents to convey messages of peace and tolerance
among all communities.
26. On 4 October, the Kosovo Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a communiqué
announcing its decision not to apply for membership in the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in 2017. While
acknowledging that membership in international organizations continued to remain
a priority for Kosovo, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs stated that the decision to
postpone its application to UNESCO was purely pragmatic and was tak en in close
coordination with international supporters of Kosovo.
27. UNMIK continued to make efforts to improve the gender balance in municipal
institutions by encouraging the appointment of qualified female candidates in local
administrations. Of note, 36 of 38 Kosovo municipalities have appointed gender
equality officers.

VI. Rule of law and human rights
28. In line with the decision announced by my Spokesperson on 26 May, a trust
fund has been established to implement assistance projects benefitin g the Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian communities in North and South Mitrovica and
Leposavić/Leposaviq. UNMIK has developed categories of projects to address the
most pressing needs of the Ashkali, Egyptian and Roma communities in northern
Kosovo, namely infrastructure, service delivery and livelihoods, which would
require a total projected sum of $4.5 million. In parallel, UNMIK and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations initiated outreach with representatives of
Member States in Pristina and in New York respectively, in order to garner financial
support for the trust fund. I call on Member States to contribute generously to the
trust fund, which has received no pledges to date.
29. On 28 July, representatives of UNMIK and other international organizations,
including OSCE, the European Union and the Council of Europe, as well as civil
society participated in a coordination meeting on the theme “Dealing with the past”,
organized and chaired by the Embassy of Switzerland in Kosovo. On 4 August, at
the fourth consultative meeting on the establishment of a truth and reconciliation
commission, the Office of the President presented a draft presidential decree on the
creation of a preparatory team. The team will comprise 10 members, including
members of civil society and a representative of the President’s office. UNMIK and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
subsequently sent a joint submission of comments on the draft decree to the Office
of the President. A fifth consultative meeting was held on 4 October, at which the
Office of the President presented a revised proposal for the appointment of the
Commission’s preparatory team and announced that it would provide financial
support for the team’s work in 2017 and 2018. As at 15 October, the adoption of the
normative regulations for the establishment of the truth and reconciliation
commission remained pending.
30. On 31 July, the President of Kosovo decreed the appointment of 53 new
judges, including 12 women. However, the Kosovo justice system still has high
judicial vacancy rates that have a negative impact on the efficiency and
effectiveness of the administration of justice: there is currently a backlog of cases,
estimated at approximately 350,000.
31. Gender-based violence remains a significant challenge for Kosovo. According
to a 2015 survey conducted by the Kosovo Women’s Network, 68 per cent of
women in Kosovo have suffered some form of domestic violence. Of note, on

6/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

21 August, the Court of Appeals increased the prison sentence impos ed on an
individual found guilty of the aggravated murder of his wife from 12 to 17 years.
The case attracted significant media attention and led civil society organizations to
organize protests in reaction to the low sentence imposed in the first instance by the
Basic Court of Prizren.
32. On 19 July, the Basic Court of Pristina found five defendants in the Badovci
retrial guilty of attempted incitement to commit terrorist acts. According to the
prosecution, the group had the intention of publishing a vide o by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant on the Internet. The Court lowered the sentences imposed on
the accused, from a total of 49 years to 12.5 years of imprisonment.
33. On 22 August, the Basic Court of Pristina released from its custody four
members of the opposition party Vetëvendosje accused of having committed
terrorist acts by throwing explosive devices at the Assembly building on 4 August
2016. Their release followed the death of another Vetëvendosje member while being
detained in Prizren. All four accused are currently under house arrest.
34. The trial of Zoran Vukotić commenced at the Basic Court in Mitrovica on
26 September. In April, the Special Prosecution of Kosovo had filed an indictment
against the defendant for war crimes against the civilian population after his
extradition from Montenegro, based on an international wanted notice issued by
UNMIK at the request of the Kosovo authorities.
35. In follow-up to the round table on missing persons, held in Geneva and
co-chaired by my Special Representative, on 23 August the Missing Persons
Resource Centre funded by UNMIK organized a conference on the challenges of
identifying human remains. Participants highlighted the need to address the alleged
misidentifications of missing persons and recommended that the Kosovo
government establish a task force on the matter. In a related development, UNMIK
produced a 13-minute documentary, entitled “Something still missing”, to
commemorate the International Day of the Victims of Enforced Disappearances o n
30 August. The documentary, which was broadcast on two leading television
channels in Kosovo, highlights the efforts of local families’ associations to
determine the fate of their missing relatives, while building trust across
communities.
36. Effective implementation of Kosovo’s strategies and action plans on serious
and organized crime, including drug trafficking, trafficking in human beings and
other forms of crime, remained a major challenge, including owing to the limited
funds allocated to the administration of justice in Kosovo. Significantly, in 2017, the
amount allocated for the functioning of the courts and prosecution services
corresponded to 1.45 per cent of the total government budget. On a positive note, on
18 September, the new Minister of Justice issued an administrative instruction to
facilitate implementation of the Law on the Management of Sequestrated or
Confiscated Assets, a key piece of legislation to efforts to better address serious and
organized crime.
37. At a panel discussion organized by a group of non-governmental organizations
on 9 October, President Thaçi challenged the legitimacy of the Specialist Chambers,
calling it a “mono-ethnic court that would undermine reconciliation efforts”. He
added that he had agreed to its establishment not because he believed it to be a fair
court, but rather because the international community had promised “visa
liberalization, establishment of a Kosovo army, and to facilitate Kosovo’s
membership at international organizations, including UNESCO a nd the Council of
Europe”. These claims were denied by multiple representatives of the international
community in Pristina.

17-18666

7/18

S/2017/911

VII. Women and peace and security
38. UNMIK continued to monitor developments related to the process of
recognition and verification of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. On
22 September, the government of Kosovo approved the draft Law on Amending and
Supplementing the Law on the Kosovo Budget for 2017, which included a decision
to allocate 200,000 euros to support associations that deal with victims of conflictrelated sexual violence. At a government meeting on 23 September, the Minister of
Finance announced that the deadline for verification of conflict -related sexual
violence survivors would be shortened from five years to five months, allegedly to
expedite payment to survivors. However, it is a serious cause for concern that the
shortened deadline will result in many cases not being processed.
39. The Kosovo Women’s Network, together with the United Nations E ntity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), supported
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence through a project entitled “Supporting
women survivors of sexual violence”, which has provided psychosocial support to
women survivors and 58 microgrants towards their economic empowerment. Over
100 women survivors are expected to benefit from the project, which ends in
December 2017. In addition, from 29 to 31 August, the Kosovo Institute for Public
Administration and UN-Women provided training for members of the government
Commission to Recognize and Verify Survivors of Sexual Violence during the
Kosovo War. The training focused on the Commission’s mandate, safe handling of
information and best practices in identifying conflict-related sexual violence.
40. On 14 September, Prime Minister Haradinaj attended an event to launch a
commentary on the Law on Gender Equality, which aims to clarify ambiguities in
the Law and promote its implementation. At the event, the Prime Minister expressed
regret at the underrepresentation of women in the government and pledged his
commitment to advancing gender equality.
41. Not only is women’s representation and participation in government bodies
and politics limited, but a recent report published by the GAP Institute for Advanced
Studies in Kosovo concluded that women’s representation on the boards of public
enterprises and independent agencies in Kosovo is also very low (between 15 to 16
per cent) and recommended the introduction of a quota system in or der to increase
women’s participation. The Minister of Economic Development, who was present at
the launch of the report, expressed commitment to increasing the representation of
women in public enterprises.

VIII. Partnerships and cooperation
42. During the reporting period, UNMIK continued to engage at all levels of
government, in particular with local administrations, through a variety of initiatives
aimed at promoting intercommunity trust-building and the protection of human
rights. As part of this outreach, my Special Representative continued his visits to all
municipalities in Kosovo. The Mission also supported two meetings initiated by
local authorities on the empowerment of existing legal mechanisms for the
protection and promotion of community rights.
43. The Mission continued to actively encourage cooperation between communities.
In this spirit, participatory approaches to local governance were implemented in
several municipalities: in ethnically mixed areas in Graçanicë/Gračanica,
Rahovec/Orahovac, Pejë/Peć, Ranillug/Ranilug, Gjakovë/Đakovica, Gjilan/Gnjilane
and Prizren/Prizren municipalities, public hearings were held on the planning process
for the 2018 budget. Furthermore, on 8 September 2017, around 40 Kosovo Serb and
8/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

Kosovo Albanian entrepreneurs from eastern Kosovo gathered in Gjilan/Gnjilane for
the autumn regional entrepreneurship fair, aimed at facilitating business partnerships
among them.
44. UNMIK continued to provide document certification services. A total of 606
documents were processed during the reporting period, comprising 340 relating to
pensions and 266 to civil status, such as high school documents, university diplomas
and marriage, birth and death certificates. UNMIK also continued to facilitate
liaison between the Kosovo authorities and the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL). During the reporting period, UNMIK received 30
requests for the issuance of international wanted notices; four Red Notices were
published and six were cancelled. From 26 to 29 September, UNMIK attended the
eighty-sixth INTERPOL General Assembly, held in Beijing. Prior to the General
Assembly, Kosovo withdrew its application for membership in INTERPOL.

IX. Observations
45. I commend the efforts of the Kosovo institutions to mainta in a peaceful
environment during the protracted period of political uncertainty that followed the
11 June legislative elections. I wish the new governing coalition success in meeting
the broad range of pressing challenges facing Kosovo, and in working to a ddress the
basic needs of the population of Kosovo.
46. Building capacity and effective institutions has been challenging for Kosovo
and its international supporters over a long period. Despite determined efforts,
frustration among the electorate has grown over time, as reflected in the results of
the June elections. Whatever the balance of power, parties and their leaders share
common responsibilities. UNMIK will continue to support efforts towards the goal
of lasting peace and stability in Kosovo.
47. An important part of achieving these objectives is sustained progress in the
normalization of relations between Belgrade and Pristina. The Pristina -Belgrade
political dialogue, facilitated by the European Union, demands steadfast
commitment and an acknowledgement that implementation of the agreements signed
in 2013 has often been delayed. High-level agreements, both old and new, only have
meaning if they are backed by broad-based support and action from both sides.
48. UNMIK has been dedicated to supporting the efforts of the European Union to
advance the political dialogue for many years. Specifically, the Mission has been
engaged in building trust among communities in Kosovo, which directly
complements progress in political talks. The success of the Mission’s efforts at the
community level, however, depends on those talks keeping pace with practical
reality on the ground.
49. As previously noted, the rule of law and its impartial application are central to
progress. I note with appreciation the efforts of the Kosovo institutions to tackle the
multiple challenges facing the internal justice system and to secure delivery of
justice as part of achieving lasting peace. I call upon Kosovo political leaders to
exercise judgment in their public statements about the mechanisms of international
justice, in particular the Specialist Chambers, which represent a cornerstone for
securing justice for victims of the past conflict.
50. I also wish to reiterate my call on Member States to support the trust fund
established in follow up to the recommendations of the Human Rights Advisory
Panel. Their generous support will go a long way towards addressing the most
pressing needs of affected communities.

17-18666

9/18

S/2017/911

51. I am grateful to my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, and the Mission at
large for their continued engagement with key leaders and stakeholders in a
coordinated effort to build greater trust among communities, and to promote
progress and long-term stability in Kosovo and the region. The capacities of
UNMIK remain at the service of all partners contributing to these objectives.
52. In conclusion, I reiterate my gratitude to the United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes on the ground for their valuable collaboration with UNMIK, and to
longstanding partners of the United Nations in Kosovo, including the Kosovo Force,
the European Union and OSCE.

10/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo from 16 July to 15 October 2017
1.

Summary
On 26 September, the Joint Rule of Law Coordination Board met. The Board
is a coordination mechanism between Kosovo institutions, the European Union
Special Representative/European Union Office in Kosovo and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). At the meeting, the compact progress
report was presented, which took stock of progress made between July 2016 and
June 2017, while highlighting that Kosovo’s rule-of-law institutions had assumed an
increased responsibility in carrying out their functions independently. However, it
was also highlighted that relevant Kosovo institutions must intensify their efforts in
addressing remaining challenges in the rule of law, including the o verarching issues
of political interference and corruption.
At the high level European Union-facilitated dialogue held on 31 August 2017,
the date of 17 October 2017 was set as the date for integration of Serb judges,
prosecutors and judicial personnel into the Kosovo system. In this context, EULEX
continues to support the judicial and prosecutorial councils to the fullest extent
possible to meet their obligations. Progress was made with the issuance of an
administrative instruction by the Ministry of Internal Affairs on citizenship criteria
in accordance with the Brussels agreement.

2.

EULEX activities

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 18 August, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Supreme Court pronounced a judgment in the Drenica 2 war crime case, rejecting
the requests of the defence counsel and the prosecution for protection of legality.
The Supreme Court thus confirmed the sentence of six years of imprisonment
against three defendants and the sentence of three years of i mprisonment against six
other defendants as handed down by the Court of Appeals.
On 26 September a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
started the main trial against Zoran Vukotić in the Vukotić I case. The defendant was
extradited from Montenegro and is accused of war crimes against the civilian
population in Kosovo.
A panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court continued to
adjudicate the war crime case against Oliver Ivanović. In February 2017, the Court
of Appeals annulled the previous judgment by the Mitrovica Basic Court, which had
sentenced the defendant to nine years of imprisonment, and returned the case for
retrial.

17-18666

11/18

S/2017/911

Organized crime and corruption
EULEX judges, in joint panels with local judges, continued to adjudicate other
organized crime cases, including MTPT and Naser Kelmendi at the Pristina Basic
Court.
On 15 August, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Pristina Basic Court started the main trial against one defendant in the human organ
trafficking Medicus case.
Other serious crimes
On 3 October, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court started a
retrial in the case against two defendants charged with abuse of official position or
authority and fraud in office.
Capacity-building
In July, three liaison officers from the Kosovo Police international law
enforcement coordination unit and two liaison officers from EULEX participated in
a three-day study visit to the headquarters of Europol in The Hague, focusing on
enhancing the unit’s executive capacities and operational performance related to
international police cooperation. The study visit was organized in the framework of
a project, facilitated and funded by EULEX, aimed at encouraging the Kosovo
Police to adopt best European practices in the fight against transnational organized
crime.
Institute of Forensic Medicine
EULEX continued to work on the autopsy and clinical examination backlog as
well as on re-association of human remains. On 23 August, EULEX attended the
conference on the issue of missing persons, held in Pristina, organized by the
Missing Persons Resource Centre and supported by the British Embassy in Pristina,
to give a presentation about renewed EULEX efforts to re-open previously closed
cases. The overall efforts of EULEX resulted in the successful identification of
more missing persons. EULEX also appealed to the families of missing persons to
come forward with DNA samples. More than 100 persons on the missing persons
list cannot be DNA-identified because of a lack of reference samples.
EULEX carried out an exhumation of a grave in the Mitrovica area, resulting
in the identification of one individual. The Mission also exhumed a human body
discovered during a site assessment in Gllarevë/Iglarevo (Klinë/Klina municipality).
The body is suspected to be of a victim killed during the conflict in Kosovo. Further
exhumations were conducted in Prizren and Fushë Kosovë/Kosovo Polje as well as
in the village of Domaj. EULEX also carried out a site ass essment in Zubin Potok.
The remains of four Serbian individuals were buried in Prizren with the
authorization of the prosecutor and the victims’ families.
Property rights
The Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel received no new appeals and
adjudicated 19 appeals, while 246 appeals are pending a decision of the Panel.
In the period from 16 July 2017 until 12 October, the Special Chamber of the
Supreme Court for privatization matters rendered 563 decisions in first -instance
trial panel cases and finalized 96 cases at the appellate panel level.

12/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

2.2

Strengthening
On 7 and 8 July the Ministry of Justice started working group sessions to
review the criminal code and criminal procedure code, followed by additional
sessions on 14 and 15 July, as well as on 22, 23, 29 and 30 September. Last year,
together with the European Union Special Representative/European Union Office in
Kosovo, EULEX already provided expert advice on both codes through the
Legislative Review Mechanism.
On 3 August, EULEX attended the Normative Committee session of the
Kosovo Judicial Council on the adoption of amendments to the regulation on
procedures for selection, appointment, evaluation, suspension and dismissal from
the office of the president of judges and supervisory judges. This follows the
decision of the Constitutional Court, which annulled the previous selection process
and found that the mechanism applied by the Kosovo Judicial Council to nominate a
candidate for the position of president of the Supreme Court and president of the
Court of Appeals did not guarantee sufficiently an equal, merit -based, transparent
and open voting process. EULEX and the European Union Special Representative,
in conjunction with other partners, had previously worked with the Kosovo Jud icial
Council to improve the relevant Council regulation. However, EULEX having
observed the repeat of the voting process, it is assessed that neither selection for the
presidents was preceded by a substantive discussion on the candidates’ suitability
for the position. The justification of the Council’s selection decisions lacked
sufficient reasoning, which does not necessarily reflect on the quality of the
candidates actually chosen. On the positive side, the new director of the Kosovo
Judicial Council secretariat was appointed on 10 August, in full compliance with the
applicable regulations.
Despite substantial efforts and funds invested by the Norwegian Government,
the Case Management Information System, software developed to track and provide
easy access to all types of cases and respective information on proceedings, will
most probably not become operational in courts and prosecution offices by the
project deadline set for June 2018. This is a setback to the efficiency and
transparency of court proceedings.
On 16 August, the acting Director General of the Kosovo Correctional Service
was assaulted by masked men in front of his apartment in Pristina. The acting
Director General sustained bodily injuries that required him to stay in hospital for
several days. The investigation is ongoing, and two suspects have been identified
but are still at large. This attack has had a strong impact on the management of the
Kosovo Correctional Service and especially on the Service’s managers, who have
been striving to work professionally and resist undue pressure. EULEX is
monitoring and following up on the case.
On 15 September, the Ministry of Public Administration re -advertised the
vacancy for the position of Director General of the Kosovo Correctional Service.
The previous selection process for the position was cancelled by the Ministry of
Justice in July. EULEX had concerns over the transparency and the selection criteria
and will closely monitor the new selection process.
On 14 and 21 September, two inmates were granted conditional release by the
Kosovo Judicial Council release panel. EULEX raised its concerns about these
decisions. There is an open investigation of one of the inmates, who is suspected of
abusing the conditions of his confinement during hospitaliza tion.
On 28 September, the Prizren Basic Court extended by two months the
detention on remand against a Kosovo Serb who was arrested in August near the
town of Suhareka/Suva Reka by the Kosovo Police on charges of war crimes.

17-18666

13/18

S/2017/911

EULEX is closely monitoring the case, noting that the Kosovo authorities have thus
far been dealing with the case in accordance with relevant rules and procedures.
EULEX has also supported the Serbian counterparts with their requests for
assistance on this case, in line with its mandate.
There is an insufficient number of correctional staff at the high -security prison
in Podujevë/Podujevo after the cancellation of the vacancy announcement for 60
new staff for the prison and 10 for the detention centre in Gjilan/Gnjilane, even
though the recruiting process was almost complete. Additionally, seven officers
have been selected to study at the Kosovo Academy for Public Safety. This will
cause significant difficulties for the prison in managing the current number of
prisoners, in particular taking into account the different categories of prisoners.
Transparent recruitment processes continue to be a problem with the Kosovo
Correctional Service. The Ministry of Justice justified these cancellations by saying
there was a lack of funds. In the light of signs of political interference with regard to
the cancellations of other important high-level positions, such as that of Director of
the Kosovo Correctional Service Directorate for Operations and Security and
Director General of the Service, EULEX is following these processes closely.
On 15 September, the educational-correctional centre in Ljpjan/Lipljan was
officially inaugurated. The new centre will work to encourage the rehabilitation and
reintegration of young offenders to prevent repeat offences. EULEX has been
supporting and monitoring the process. According to the Juvenile Justice Code, all
juveniles serving “educational measures” should be transferred to the centre.
However, as at 20 September, there were still 13 juveniles serving “educ ational
measures” in the Lipjan Correctional Centre considered to be too dangerous to be
transferred. In order to fulfil the requirements of the Juvenile Justice Code, EULEX
proposed that the Kosovo Correctional Service conduct risk assessments and, if
deemed appropriate, request the respective courts to amend the educational measure
on the basis of the article of the Juvenile Justice Code.
Regarding the Regional Police Directorate in Mitrovica North, a EULEX
assessment of investigations into police misconduct shows that the outcome of the
monitored cases is still not satisfactory.
The Police Inspectorate of Kosovo completed its investigations of all 59 police
officers accused of abuse of official duty and taking bribes in exchange for not
writing traffic tickets. As a result, 57 have been dismissed, while two are still under
investigation After a four-month investigation, including the use of wiretapping and
hidden cameras, the Inspectorate detained 59 Kosovo Police officers (35 Kosovo
Albanians, 23 Kosovo Serbs, one Kosovo Bosniak) from Mitrovica North,
Mitrovica South, Prizren and the Highway Police Unit in one operation in December
2016.
The drafts of the new Law on Asylum and the Law on Foreigners have been
finalized. The former is ready to be submitted to the local authorities for approval,
while the latter will be sent to the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of European
Integration for their assessment. EULEX has provided extensive comments and
advice concerning both drafts.
On 6 September, EULEX attended the third quarterly southern border
initiative meeting, which was sponsored by the Export Control and Related Border
Security Assistance Programme and hosted by Kosovo border police and customs in
Pristina. EULEX is working closely with the Programme on several projects to
enhance Kosovo border security operations, including through the sharing of
information, joint training events, joint risk analysis and cross -border cooperation.

14/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

EULEX participated in a two-day seminar, held in Podgorica and Plav,
Montenegro, on 19 and 20 September, focused on “best practices exchange” for the
development of the Trilateral Police Cooperation Centre of Kosovo, Albania and
Montenegro. The establishment and development of the Trilateral Police
Cooperation Centre in Plav is very much at the heart of EULEX efforts to develop
the National Centre for Border Management in Kosovo, with a view to ensuring that
all best practices currently being used are captured.
On 7 July, the Integrated Border Management National Coordinator formally
approved the revised integrated border management action plan (2013 –2018).
EULEX provided important contributions to the action plan and continues to
provide support to its implementation process. As part of the review, the National
Coordinator established a new multi-agency unit, which will be responsible for the
oversight of the implementation of activities set out in the action plan. EULEX fully
supports this initiative, which is in line with the integrated border ma nagement
seven-point action plan, as drafted by EULEX and approved by the Minister of
Internal Affairs. On the common crossing points between Kosovo and Serbia, the
spirit of cooperation between the two sets of authorities is very good, although
overall progress is stalling.
On 17 July, as part of the European Union-facilitated dialogue, specifically the
implementation of the integrated border management technical protocol, EULEX
donated two containers for use at the common crossing point of Konculj/Dheu i
Bardhë. The donation of these containers will significantly improve the capacity of
both sets of authorities to more effectively facilitate the clearance of commercial
freight traffic through the common crossing point.
After the last deadline, of 10 January, for justice integration in the north was
missed, progress was made during the last round of talks, held in Brussels on
31 August, setting the date for the implementation of the Justice Agreement for
17 October. EULEX supported the Kosovo Judicial Council and the Kosovo
Prosecutorial Council in complying with the obligations stemming from the
Agreement. There was limited progress regarding the arrangements for the
finalization of the freedom of movement agreement, with the implementation of the
“sticker regime” — replacing the “proba” licence plate regime by two stickers
covering the “RKS” and “SRB” acronyms and coats of arms on such licence
plates — and the recognition of older civil status documents and driving licences.
3.

Other key issues
NSTR

17-18666

15/18

S/2017/911

Annex II
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor’s Office
Since becoming judicially operational on 5 July following the adoption of the
Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Specialist Chambers, the Specialist
Chambers further developed internal normative documents relevant to the
performance of judicial functions.
On 21 July, the electronic court management system was installed. The system
supports the efficient management of the court’s activities and all Specialist
Chambers’ filings are included in this system. The renovations of the future
premises of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers are also proceeding, and all project
timelines are met.
On 25 August, the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the Specialist
Chambers, including the Rules of Procedure of the Specialist Chamber of the
Constitutional Court, were published on the Specialist Chambers website in all three
official languages of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers.
The Specialist Chambers continue to ensure a robust governance framewo rk
for the proper functioning of the Specialist Chambers, including through the
issuance of instructions on the safeguarding of the confidentiality and integrity of
data and elaborating on provisions regarding the procedure for review of
administrative decisions. On 11 September, the President of the Specialist Chambers
adopted the Rules of Procedure for Staff Appeals, regulating the appeal by staff
members of administrative decisions of the Registrar, as well as of disciplinary
decisions of the Registrar or the Specialist Prosecutor, and providing staff members
with an internal procedure before a Staff Appeals Judge.
The Specialist Chambers continues to engage with the media and civil society
and outreach activities continue to be conducted in both Kosovo and The Hague. On
15 and 16 September, a colloquium was held for the Specialist Chambers’ judges in
Nuremberg, hosted by the International Nuremberg Principles Academy, where the
judges engaged in expert discussion on the latest developments in internation al
criminal law and international humanitarian law.
The Specialist Prosecutor’s Office, which is located in The Hague, is
continuing its investigation into the allegations contained in the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly report of January 2011 on inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. To this end, it is engaging with
relevant States, individuals, victims and groups. Assistance from judicial and law
enforcement authorities in Belgrade and Pristina, as well as in the European Union
and the wider international community, is essential. The Special Prosecutor’s Office
requires the continued engagement and full support of the international community
and individual states in all its activities. The Office is committ ed to fulfilling its
mandate as efficiently and in as short a time as possible without compromising the
quality or credibility of its work.

16/18

17-18666

S/2017/911

Annex III
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2017)
Country

Number

Bulgaria

1

Estonia

1

Finland

1

Germany

1

Hungary

2

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Total

8

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2017)

17-18666

Country

Number

Czechia

2

Poland

1

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

8

17/18

S/2017/911

18/18

17-18666
