A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/17
6 December 1994

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 41
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/49/L.27 and Add.1)]
49/17.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa, in particular resolution 48/160 of
20 December 1993,
Also recalling its resolution 48/159 A of 20 December 1993 on
international efforts towards the total eradication of apartheid and support
for the establishment of a united, non-racial and democratic South Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of 7 October 1994
containing an account of the work of the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa and the
administration of the Programme for the period from 1 September 1993 to 31
August 1994, 1/
Recognizing the valuable assistance rendered by the Programme to the
peoples of South Africa and Namibia,

____________
1/

A/49/491.

94-60099
/...

A/RES/49/17
Page 2

Bearing in mind that, in order to address the priority needs of
disadvantaged South Africans, the Programme is continuing to allocate a higher
proportion of resources for the purpose of institution-building in South
Africa, in particular by strengthening the historically black and other
institutions of higher learning through programmes for staff and students,
Recalling the Conference on Human Resource Development held at Cape Town
from 26 to 28 October 1994, sponsored by the United Nations Development
Programme, the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Government of South Africa,
Noting that the South African authorities have emphasized human
resources development as a major pillar of the reconstruction and development
programme,
1.
Endorses the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa;
2.
Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the
United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa for
their efforts to adjust the Programme so that it can best help meet the needs
evolving from changing circumstances in South Africa, to promote generous
contributions to the Programme and to enhance cooperation with governmental,
intergovernmental and non-governmental agencies involved in educational and
technical assistance to South Africa;
3.
Welcomes the transfer to the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 48/258 B of 23 June 1994, of the residual funds of the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
4.
Also endorses the activities of the Programme aimed at
contributing to South Africa’s human resource needs during this critical
period of development by:
(a)
Expanding arrangements for co-sponsored training in sectors
previously neglected for the disadvantaged majority;
(b)
Continuing to utilize the catalyst function of the Programme to
arrange co-sponsorships to maximize the potential multiplier effect of the
graduates of the Programme by strengthening institutional financial,
managerial and educational skills;
(c)
Engaging educational institutions, non-governmental organizations,
foundations and the private sector in arrangements for tuition waivers,
co-sponsorships, job placement of graduates and fund-raising;
5.
Encourages further contacts and consultations on the Programme
between the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Advisory Committee and the
relevant South African ministries;
6.
Expresses its appreciation to all those who have supported the
Programme by providing contributions, scholarships or places in their
educational institutions;

/...

A/RES/49/17
Page 3

7.
Appeals to all States, institutions, organizations and individuals
to offer such financial and other assistance to the Programme as will enable
it to carry out its programmed activities;
8.
Invites the Secretary-General, in the light of the changed
political circumstances in South Africa, having consulted with the Advisory
Committee, to make recommendations to the General Assembly at its fiftieth
session on the future role of the Programme.
65th plenary meeting
23 November 1994
