UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

248f
NEW

MEETING:

..g

20 OCTOBER

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/248
of the agenda

The situation

(4

l/Rev. 1)

..............................

1
1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*......................

in Namibia:

Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);

(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United

(4

Nations

addressed to the President

of the Security Council

(S/16051);

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943)
................................................

1

S/PV.248 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2481st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

20 October

(Jordan).

which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. SarrP (Senegal)
took a place at the Council table: Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba),
Mr. Wolde (Ethiopia), Mr. Krishnan (India), Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr.
Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa),
Mr. Rupia (United RepubIic of Tanzania), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2481/Rev.l)
1. Adoption
2.

1983, at 3.30 p.m.

of the agenda

The situation in Namibia:
(a)
Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b)
Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c)
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/15943)

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 19 October from the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, which reads as
follows:
“On behalf of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, I have the honour, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, to
request an invitation to the delegation of the United
Nations Council for Namibia, headed by me, to participate in the Security Council’s consideration of the item
entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’ which begins on 20
October. The other members of the Council’s delegation
to these forthcoming meetings of the Security Council
are: Mr. Mohamed Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Khwaja
Wasiuddin (Bangladesh), Mr. A. Coskun Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Feodor StarceviC (Yugoslavia) and Ms. Myma
Bradshaw (Guyana).*’

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943)

3. On previous occasions, the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice,
therefore, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and
the delegation of the Council.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Angola,
Canada, Cuba, Ethiopia, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia in

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President of
the. United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
1

have received a letter dated 18 October from the Chairman
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, which
reads as follows:

dent of the Council, transmitting the text of a decision on
the question of Namibia adopted by the Special Committee at its 1248th meeting on 13 October 1983.’
11. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ethiopia, Mr. Goshe Wolde, who wishes to make a
statement in his capacity as representative of the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). I
welcome Mr. Wolde and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

“On behalf of the Soecial Committee. I have .the
honour to request, under rule 39 of its provisional rules
of procedure, to be invited to participate in the Council’s consideration of the situation in Namibia.”
5. On previous occasions, the Council has extended invitations to representatives of other United Nations bodies
in connection with the consideration of matters one its
agenda. In accordance with past practice, therefore, I pro:
pose that the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to the Chairman of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

12. Mr. WOLDE (Ethiopia): It is with a deep sense of
honour and pleasure that I make this statement to the
Council as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia
and the representative of the current Chairman of the
OAU; on an issue to which Africa attaches great importance and with which Ethiopia in particular has a longstanding association.
13. Having said those few words, Sir, I should like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council and to extend to you my best wishes for the
successful completion of your term of office. I should, in
the same vein, like to-express the appreciation of the Ethiopian delegation to the representative of Guyana for the
highly admirable manner in which he guided the deliberations of the Council during the very busy month of
September,

It was so decided.
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 20 October from the representative of Togo, Zaire and Zimbabwe [S/Z60551, which
reads as follows:
“We the undersigned, members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’, the Security Council extend an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure,
to Mr. Peter Mueshihange, Secretary for Foreign Relations of the South West Africa People’s Organization.”

14. It is a matter of record that, ever since 1946, the
question of Namibia, the subject of the Council’s deliberations today, has been on the agenda of the General Assembly. Since then, all the major organs of the.United Nations
have, at one time or another, been seized of the question
and countless resolutions have been adopted on it, so that
today the independence of the Namibian people is increasingly becoming a litmus test for the effectiveness of the
United Nations in general and that of the Security Council
in particular.

7. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to extend an invitation to Mr. Mueshihange in
accordance with rule 39 of its provisional
rules ofprocedure.

15. As we all know, the General Assembly has during
successive sessions pronounced itself on the developments.
in Namibia, and in 1966 it terminated South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory [resolution 2145 (XXl)}, setting up
the following year a United Nations body to administer the
Territory until independence.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
place at the Council table.
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The’
Security Council is meeting today in response to requests
from the representative of Senegal in a letter dated 17
October [S/26048] and from the representative of India in
a letter dated 18 October [S/Z605TJ addressed to the President of the Council.

:

I-:.
_-:

::.. ._-..
::
I-.

9. The members of the Council have before them document S/15943, which contains a further report of the
Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia.

16. The International Court of Justice too has on several occasions considered the question, and in 1971 it
handed down an important advisory opinion whereby it
ruled the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia
to be illegal.2 In this connection, we in Ethiopia feel particular pride at having been associated with efforts at the
Court towards upholding the legal authority of the United
Nations over Namibia.

10. I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/16050, containing
a letter dated 17 October from the Chairman of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples addressed to the Presi-

17. As the statutory guardian of international peace and
security, the Council has also been convened frequently to
consider the question of Namibia and even met once on
African soil, in our capital city, Addis Ababa. It has,
moreover, adopted numerous decisions, among which
resolutions 264 (1969), 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) figure
2

prominently. Yet Namibia
illegal occupation.

remains under South Africa’s

23. At this juncture, I should like to review very briefly
this contrived issue of the Cuban presence in Angola in its
historical context and proper perspective. To begin with,
we have to ask ourselves why the Cuban forces are in
Angola. As we all recall, the presence of Cuban forces was
requested by the legitimate Government of Angola, for
the clear and express objective of repulsing the open and
flagrant invasion by South Africa. Even though the first
invasion was repulsed in time by the Angolan people,
with the assistance of Cuban troops, we should not forget
that South Africa’s acts of aggression have continued
since then, and that at present the armed forces of Pretoria are in illegal occupation of parts of southern Angola.
Hence the continued need for the assistance of Cuban
forces, which is in full conformity with Article 51 of the
Charter, according to which every State has the right to
individual or collective self-defence.

18. However, when in 1978 the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978), there was a widely shared sense of optimism that at long last the day for Namibia’s independence
was fast approaching. There were, of course, a few of us
who were sceptical, doubting both the sincerity of the
South African regime and the determination of the
members of the so-called Western contact group. As subsequent developments have shown, the sceptics have been
proven right. The best efforts of the Secretary-General, the
flexibility and statesmanship of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the sole and legitimate rep
resentative of the struggling people of Namibia, and the
co-operation of the front-line States notwithstanding,
it
has been impossible to put into operation the United
Nations plan as embodied in resolution 435 (1978).

24. The presence of Cuban forces in Angola, therefore,
is not only legitimate and legal; it is also a positive
element in the continuing struggle for the maintenance of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola. As
regards the other States in the region, the presence of
Cuban forces in Angola has neither harmed nor threatened their security and stability. Moreover, it has not
posed-and
indeed cannot pose-a threat to South Africa,
a country whose war machine is by far superior to the
armed forces of the States in the entire subregion. Furthermore, for the Cuban forces to pose a direct threat to Pretoria, Angola and South Africa must at least share a
common border, which they obviously do not.

19. We all know the reasons why. Clearly, they are the
intransigence and prevarication of the South African
regime and the total lack of political will and determination on the part of the Western contact group. Indeed,
South Africa not only has effectively ‘blocked the implementation of the United Nations plan but has also used the
negotiating process to strengthen its grip over Namibia by
establishing illegal institutions and organizing puppet political groups.
20. When South Africa declared during the preimplementation talks in Geneva that it was not ready to
implement the’united Nations plan, we believed that the
imposition of enforcement measures under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations was the most logical
course of action. To our deep regret, however, that peaceful course was blocked-by the triple veto cast by the three
permanent members of the Council who were’ also
members of the contact group.

25. To talk of South Africa’s security concern over
troops in a country with which it has no common border
can as a result only be construed as an acceptance, however tacit, of the occupation by South Africa of the international Territory of Namibia as legal. And to raise this
as an international issue, much less link it with the question of Namibia’s independence, cannot but also be an
open and arrogant interference in the domestic affairs of,
Angola, in clear contravention
of the principles and
norms of international law.
,’

21. Today that peaceful course is still not only blocked,
but with the advent of a new Administration in Washington, the question of Namibia’s independence has been
rendered more difficult and complex by the infamous
strategem of linkage. The question of Namibia is a question of the inalienable and undeniable right of a people
to self-determination and independence and, as such, it is
an issue of international concern. The presence of Cuban
forces in Angola, on the other hand, is a matter falling
entirely within the sovereign rights of Angola. To link
these two is, ! submit, both irrational and irresponsible.
Given the fact that the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola is a strategic objective of one particular member of
the contact group, we find the linkage self-serving as well.

26. Our bitter experience with the South African regime
and our frustration at the failure of the contact group to
assist in the implementation of the plan compel us to
wonder-and
wonder aloud-whether
the question of linkage is not merely one more of the many obstacles that
are continually being created to delay the implementation
of the United Nations plan. Indeed, we in Ethiopia are
convinced that even with the withdrawal of Cuban forces
from Angola, the plan will remain a dead letter. We are
further convinced that what the strategem of linkage is
intended to achieve, and what would probably happen
following the withdrawal of Cuban forces, is the invasion
and occupation of Angola with the dual aim of overthrowing its legitimate Government and replacing it by
traitorous elements subservient to neocolonial and racist
interests and of weakening the liberation struggle of the
Namibian people.

22. From the latest report of the Secretary-General on
the matter iS/Z5943], we gather that, as far as the United
Nations Transitional Assistance Group (UNTAG)
is concerned, virtually all the outstanding issues have been
resolved. What appears to block the implementation of the
plan is therefore the irrelevant and unjustified precondition of the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola.

27. Fortunately, the international community has clearly
perceived this clever but transparent ploy and has, as a
3

result, taken a clear and unequivocal stand against the
attempts to link Namibia’s independence with any extraneous and irrelevant issues. In this connection, it is to be
recalled that the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, at its nineteenth ordinary session at
Addis Ababa in June 1983, took an unequivocal position
which is set out in paragraph 2 of its special resolution on
Namibia.’ In that resolution, the Assembly, viewing with
the utmost concern the attempt to introduce extraneous
elements to the United Nations plan for Namibia as contained in resolution 435 (1978) categorically rejected the
so-called linkage or parallelism and viewed the insistence
on these extraneous elements as undermining the current
efforts towards the implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) by holding the freedom and independence of the people of Namibia hostage to the presence of
Cuban forces in Angola. The Assembly also considered
such an insistence as flagrant interference in the internal
affairs of a sovereign State, the People’s Republic of
Angola.

cil can, furthermore,
reassert its responsibility
in the
matter and enhance its relevance to the maintenance of
international peace and security, to which South Africa’s
illegal occupation of Namibia poses a challenge. We there;
fore strongly urge the Council to reject all attempts to link
Namibia’s independence with any extraneous and irrelevant issue, such as the presence of Cuban forces in
Angola.
32. We also urge the Council to establish a time-frame
for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The just
cause of the Namibian people and international legality
demand that the implementation of the plan no longer be
delayed. If, however, South Africa persists in its dilatory
tactics, the Council should seriously consider measures
against that regime under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. We have said time and time again
that those who fail to heed the law should be brought to
suffer its sanction. And so it should be with South Africa.
33. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of India, who wishes to
make a statement on behalf of the Movement of NonAligned Countries. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

28. At the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, the Heads of State or
Government “categorically rejected the linkage or parallelism being drawn by the United States Administration
between the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola.” [s/Z5675 and Corr. I and 2,
annex, sect. I, para. 48.1

34. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Mr. President, I should
like first of all to thank you and, through you, the other
members of the Council for the courtesy extended to me
to address the Council as representative of India and also
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

29. The International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in
Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983, as well as numerous subsidiary organs of the General Assembly-particularly
the
United Nations Council for Namibia-and,
above all, the
General Assembly itself, have all rejected this linkage.
Indeed, at its thirty-seventh session, the General Assembly
in paragraph 3 of its resolution 37/233B firmly rejected
the persistent attempts by the United States of America
and South Africa to establish any linkage or parallelism
between the independence of Namibia and any extraneous
issues, in particular the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola, and emphasized unequivocally that the persistence of such attempts would only retard the decolonization process in Namibia as well as constitute interference in
the internal affairs of Angola.

35. I should also like to begin my statement with the
traditional expression of felicitations to you, Sir. We are
happy to see a diplomat of your experience and accomplishments presiding over the deliberations .of this august
body. It is a matter of particular satisfaction to my delegation to find the stewardship of the Council in the able
hands of the representative of a friendly and fellow nonaligned country, particularly at a time when the Council is
again seized of an issue of very special concern to the
Non-Aligned Movement.
36. We meet in this chamber for the second time this
year to address ourselves to the question of Namibia. We
last met here almost five months ago to deliberate upon
this vexed question, which has thus far defied resolution
and which continues to pose one of the biggest challenges
to the very principles of the United Nations. In these five
intervening months, we cannot claim to have come any
nearer to an internationally acceptable solution. MeanwhBe, the oppressed people of Namibia continue to languish in bondage, looking to the world, and to the United
Nations in particular, for deliverance from their ordeal.

30. These and other formal pronouncements by individual Governments and international organizations clearly
show the emergence of an international consensus rejecting the so-called linkage or parallelism with regard to Namibia’s independence. Regrettably, however, an important
organ of the United Nations-more
particularly the Security Council-has
yet to pronounce itself on the matter. To
remain silent much longer is but to acquiesce in the delay
in the implementation of the United Nations plan. It is also
a denial of the central role and unique responsibility of the
United Nations in the decoionization of Namibia.

.-.
. -.
:
:_
;:. .
-_..
-.-.
::.
::_

37. If there rs one lesson we have learned from the bitter
experience of the last few years, it is not to harbour optimism or expectation when dealing with the intransigent
regime at Pretoria. Be that as it may, one would have
hoped that the unanimous adoption by the Council of
resolution 532 (1983) on 3 1 May 1983, following closely on
the,heels of a debate marked by remarkable restraint and
lack of rancour, might signal a turning-point in the efforts

31. By taking an uequivocal stand in rejecting linkage,
the Council can surely help remove the artificial obstacle
to the implementation of the plan and advance the process of the liberation of Namibia. By so doing, the Coun4

::

.
:.

::.
. ..’

.

to implement the United Nations plan for Namibian independence. Some were indeed led to believe that this unanimous expression of support from the Council, apart from
mandating the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with the parties to the proposed cease-tire, would set
in motion more intensive and resolute efforts by those in a
better position to make Pretoria see reason. The situation
that currently obtains seems to point to the contrary and
yet once again our hopes have been belied.
38. The report of the Secretary-General [S/2594.?] only
emphasizes the irony of the present situation. On the one
hand, as the Secretary-General informed us, the prolonged
and intensive consultations relating to the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978) have now brought us to a
situation where, to use the Secretary-General’s own words,
“we have never before been so close to finality on the
modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978): At the
same time, we are informed that, however, “the position of
South Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal
of
Cuban troops from Angola as a pre-condition for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) still makes it
impossible to launch the United Nations plan.” [Ibid,
paras. 24 and 25.1
39. How ironic it is that the stage should be set in every
way for putting into effect the United Nations plan but
that this should be thwarted by considerations which have
no relation to, or bearing upon, that plan. And how paradoxical it is that some of those who had themselves played
a leading role in the elaboration of the United Nations
plan and had committed themselves to securing its implementation should now openly be siding with Pretoria in
making its implementation contingent upon the fulfilment
of irrelevant and extraneous conditions. My Government
cannot accept the distortion of a decolonization problem,
into one of ideological or East-West confrontation.
It
would be a travesty of justice to link Namibian independence with unrelated issues like the presence of Cuban
forces in Angola.
40. In the course of his statement to the Council on 23
May 1983 [2439rh meeting], the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of India, speaking also on behalf of over 100 nonaligned countries, set forth in detail the position taken by
the Non-Aligned Movement in respect of the Namibian
question. It is a well-known position and I need not repeat
it here. Nor do I need to dwell on the position of my own
country, which was among the first to raise the question
at the United Nations, in 1946. Only a few weeks ago, in
her address to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India and
Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
described the question of Namibia as one which arouses
our common indignation. She reaffirmed
“our total support for the freedom struggle of the
people of Namibia, under the leadership of the South
West Africa People’s Organization, and to the Governments and peoples of the front-line States, which have
to endure pressure and provocation.“4

41. I should also like to bring to the attention of the
Council the fact that the Meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Heads of Delegations of the Non-Aligned
Countries to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session, held from 4 to 7 October 1983, devoted considerable attention to the question of Namibia and pronounced
itself in unequivocal terms in this regard. In its final communique, the Meeting, inter alia, expressed its “strong
indignation at the continued non-implementation
of the
United Nations plan” and categorically rejected
“persistent attempts by the United States and racist
South Africa to obstruct the implementation of the
United Nations plan by insisting on ‘linkage’ and ‘parallelism’ between the independence of Namibia and
extraneous and irrelevant issues, in particular the withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola, and unequivocally emphasized that such attempts not only retard the
decolonization process for Namibia, but also constitute
a reprehensible and gross interference in the internal
affairs of Angola.” [S/Z6035, para. 27.1
42.

At that Meeting, the non-aligned

countries

also

“expressed their firm determination to counter all
attempts to undermine the central role of the United
Nations Security Council in the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) and urged the Security Council to
assume fully its responsibilities,
including taking
urgent action to implement its decisions, if necessary
by the adoption of enforcement measures against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.” [Ibid., para. 29.1
43. Speaking in the Council last May, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs .of India stated the following:
“My delegation is convinced that the Council must
now stipulate a definite time-frame for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and remain actively seized
of the question until that process is completed. If South
Africa continues to defy the Council’s decisions, the
Council should be prepared to consider appropriate
action under Chapter VII of the Charter.”
[2439rh
meeting, para 23.1
44. I should like to take this opportunity to reiterate
that conviction. The time has surely come to force the
pace. If South Africa continues to turn a deaf ear to the
voice of reason, the United Nations has the moral and
legal right, and indeed the obligation, to make it heed the
will of the world community.
We hope that all the
members of the Council will appreciate the limits to forbearance and display the necessary political will to implement the Council’s own decision without further delay.
45. Let us not convey to the Namibian people the impression that we have taken them or their patience for granted.
Let us also not lose sight or make light of the situation in
southern Africa, where a renegade and racist regime continues to be permitted to spread its reign of terror-in
Namibia, in the independent African States of the region

and, last but not least, in South Africa itself, The voice of
freedom can never be stilled. If we cannot bring freedom,
justice and dignity to the people of Namibia and South
Africa without further delay, events will surely take their
own uncontrolled and bloody course in southern Africa,
with disastrous consequences for international peace and
security. It is time, therefore, for the Council to act, and
act decisively, so that it can vindicate the trust reposed in it
and so that Namibians can awaken to the freedom that is
their right.

pendence were adopted-namely,
the Paris Declaration on
Namibia and the Programme of Action for Namibia:
54. Beyond the internationally recognized and accepted
principles those two documents reaffirm in unequivocal
terms, the Conference, as everyone knows, solemnly reiterated the inalienable right of the Namibian people to selfdetermination and national independence in a united and
free Namibia in accordance with the purposes and objectives of the Charter of the United Nations.

46. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Senegal, who wishes
to make a statement in his capacity as Chairman for the
month of October of the Group of African States. I call on
him now.

55. On that occasion, the international community once
again most energetically condemned the Pretoria regime
for its illegal occupation of Namibia in violation of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Council calling upon South Africa to withdraw
from
Namibian territory and to promote, within the framework of the settlement plan set forth in resolution 435
(1978), the accession to independence of the people of
Namibia.

47. Mr. SARRfi (Senegal) (interpretation from French):
First of all, Mr. President, I wish on behalf of the African
Group and on my own behalf to congratulate you most
warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of October. I am certain that, thanks to
your wide diplomatic experience in international affairs,
the Council’s debates will be crowned with success.

56. As a result of the express recommendation of the
Conference, the Council met in May 1983. At that meeting, in which several ministers of Africa and of the NonAligned Movement took part, the Council adopted its
resolution 532 (1983) by which inter aiia, it decided to
mandate the Secretary-General
to undertake consultations with the parties to the proposed cease-fire, with a
view to ensuring the speedy implementation of resolution
435 (1978). The resolution ’ further
requested the
Secretary-General to report to the Council on the results
of those consultations not later than 31 August 1983.

48. I wish also to pay a welldeserved tribute to your
predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair, the representative of Guyana, who effectively and ably guided the work of the Council last month.
49. Finally, I should like most sincerely to thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Council for
your kindness in inviting me to address the Council, in my
capacity as Chairman of the African Group, during this
debate on the question of Namibia, a question which is of
great concern both to Africa, which is directly involved,
and to the entire international community.
:
SO. The details of the question of Namibia are familiar to
everyone, and I shall not dwell on them. For nearly 38
years, indeed, this question has been a regular item on the
agenda of the General Assembly. It has already been dealt
with in several special sessions, international conferences,
seminars, round-tables discussions and interminable negotiations. The Council, the guarantor of international peace
and security, has devoted several series of meetings to it.

57. At this stage I am pleased, on behalf of the Group of
African States, to pay a tribute to the Secretary-General
for the diligent and responsible manner in which he carried out the mandate entrusted to him by the Council. His
report [S/25943] reflects the lucidity and concern for clarity and objectivity that characterize him.
58. The following emerges from an analysis of the document: first, the Pretoria regime agrees to-Council resolution 435 (1978) and 532 (1983) as a basis for negotiations;
secondly, the parties directly concerned, namely, South
Africa and SWAPO, are solemnly committed to abiding
by the arrangements agreed upon during stages one and
two of the negotiations undertaken in 1982 in the context
of resolution 435 (1978), without any change of any kind
whatsoever; thirdly, that agreement in principle has been
reached with regard, on the one hand, to the electoral
system, concerning which it remains only to define the type
and modalities, and, on the other hand, the composition
and status of UNTAG.

51. There is no need, therefore, to go.into the historical
background of a problem which is still topical. It would,
however, be of interest to recall, for the sake of clarity in
the debate, a number of key events, which will help to
make it easier to grasp the purport of the case of Namibia.

. .
_‘_.
_-*’
_-,’
‘d

52. Members will recall that, between 25 and 29 April
1983, the International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence was
held in Paris, convened in accordance with the provisions
of General Assembly resolution 37/233 C.

59. In sum, all the aspects of a technical and operational
nature, including the question of impartiality, leading to
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) have been considered and largely agreed upon.

53. During that important Conference, over which my
country, Senegal, had the signal honour of presiding, two
documents that to our mind embody a crucial stage in
the struggle of the people of Namibia to regain their inde-

60. However-and
this clearly emerges from the
Secretary-General’s
report-South
Africa persists in an
,unacceptable position that we reject: it seeks to link implementation of resolution 435 (1978), and hence the indepen6

dence of Namibia. to reauirements
that are the nurview of
.
the sovereignty of independent States of the region. Furthermore, the Pretoria regime makes this question a pmrequisite for any settlement of the problem of Namibia.

tinent of Africa and the world at large the risk of a worsening armed conflict that could endanger international peace
and security.
68. The Group of African States sincerely hopes that,
from the Council’s deliberations, will emerge specific measures to enable the Namibian people finally to be independent, the better to devote themselves to the tasks of
economic and social development that await them. In so
doing, it will have rekindled in us all the faith and credit we
attach to the United Nations.

61. There is no need,to recall that this linkage has been
condemned by the international community, during the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held in March last at New Delhi,
and at the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in
Paris in April. Better yet, in its special resolution on Namibia,3 the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the OAU, at its nineteenth ordinary session at Addis
Ababa in June, categorically rejected that linkage, which it
regarded as a serious obstacle to the efforts undertaken to
implement resolution 435 (1978).

69. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Arabic): I now
call on Mr. Lusaka, President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.
70. Mr. LUSAKA:
Sir, at the outset permit me to congratulate you, in my capacity as President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and on my own behalf, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. We are confident that your
eminent qualities as an experienced and skilled diplomat
and your wide and varied experience in international
affairs will stand us in good stead in our deliberations on
the question of Namibia, a question of grave concern to
the international community and for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The strong support of
your country, Jordan, and its people for the legitimate
struggle of the Namibian people for national selfdetermination and independence is a matter of record and
needs no elaboration.

62. Must we remind everyone that the question of Namibia essentially and fundamentally remains strictly a
problem of decolonization that must, if possible, be settled
peacefully in the spirit of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples? Must
we recall that the question of Namibia is a problem that is
still before the United Nations and that it is precisely in
this framework that, in accordance with the wishes of the
international community and of SWAP0 itself, the sole
and authentic representative of the people of Namibia, an
appropriate solution must be found?
63. The message that the Group of African States has
instructed me to transmit to the Council-and,
indirectly,
to-the contact group-is
in the spirit of justice and peace,
for which the Council is responsible throughout the world.

71. I wish also to express our appreciation to the representative of Guyana, who during the month of September
guided the deliberations of the Council with great skill and
success.

64. Africa is patient but not resigned, and while there is
still time, it again offers the hand of understanding rather
than confrontation.

72. The Council has been convened once again to consider the question of Namibia in the light of the SecretaryGeneral’s further report concerning the implementation of
Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning
the question .of Namibia [ibid].

65. Africa, awaiting the outcome of the work of the
Council, urges it, in accordance with the responsibilities
conferred upon it by the United Nations, to consider the
question of Namibia not only in the light of the initiatives
recently taken by the Secretary-General but also in the
light of the explosive situation prevailing in Namibia and
southern Africa, and hence to exercise all its authority to
implement resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), so that
without further delay Namibia, which has suffered so
much injustice of every kind, may finally fulfil the legitimate aspirations of its people and join the concert of free
and independent nations.

73. It will be recalled that, pursuant to the call made by
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March
1983, and by the OAU, the Security Council met on the
question of Namibia in May 1983 to consider further
action to expedite the implementation of its resolution 435
(1978), endorsing the United Nations plan for Namibia’s
independence.
74. In the course of that debate, in which a large number
of delegations were represented at the level of Minister for
Foreign Affairs, unanimous expression was given to the
need to implement resolution 435 (1978) without qualification, modification or prevarication. Indeed resolution 435
(1978) is the only internationally accepted basis for a
peaceful settlement of the Namibian question.

66. Africa expects the Council to adopt appropriate
measures to restore to the Namibians their human dignity
and thereby enable them, because it is their right to do so,
to drink, at last, at the spring of freedom regained.
67. Africa unanimously calls upon the Council to discharge its responsibilities under the.Charter effectively and
faithfully, in order to redress a flagrant injustice against a
people whose only wrong is that it aspires to freedom. In
SO doing, without
a doubt, the Council will spare the con-

75. It is essential to recall that, during the Council’s deliberations on the question of Namibia last May, we spoke in
a measured and restrained voice, in the hope that racist
7

__. ;
,._’
,-se
..,’

South Africa would perhaps be induced to listen. Unfortunately, its response to the Secretary-General’s efforts indicates that it not only has misunderstood our moderation
but has also attempted to exploit it.

resulted, as far as UNTAG
virtually all the outstanding

was concerned, in resolving
issues.

82. It should be recalled that the problems relating to the
composition of UNTAG have been of South Africa’s making. As the Secretary-General’s report has made clear, the
long-standing support of SWAP0
for the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations
to the Security Council
regarding the military composition of UNTAG was reiterated by the President of SWAP0 during their discussions
at Luanda last August.

76. As members of the Council are aware, the SecretaryGeneral, in the exercise of the mandate entrusted to him by
resolution 532 (1983) to undertake consultations with the
parties to the proposed cease-tire, with a view to securing
the speedy implementation of resolution 435 (1978), and to
report to the Council on the results of those consultations
as soon as possible and not later than 31 August 1983,
initiated preliminary discussions with the parties to the
proposed cease-tire with a view to reaching an agreement
on the two remaining outstanding issues relating to the
electoral system and the few remaining points pertaining
to UNTAG and its composition.

83. As regards the electoral system, we know that
SWAP0 had for more than a year stressed its position that
it was prepared, in principle, to accept either proportional
representation or the single-member constituency system,
a position which was reaffirmed by Mr. Nujoma during his
discussion with the Secretary-General. Furthermore, Mr.
Nujoma also urged the imperative need for a decision to be
made on this matter as soon as possible and for the establishment of a time-frame for implementation [ibid, para.
231.

77. It is important to stress here that, during the Security
Council’s consideration of the situation in Namibia last
May, even South Africa’s friends acknowledge that those
two were the only remaining outstanding issues. Allow me
to refer to statements made in that connection by two
members of the Western contact group in the course of
that debate.

84. South Africa, on the other hand, has continued to be
evasive. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, the
South African Minister for Foreign Affairs indicated to
him that South Africa’s choice of electoral system “would
. . . be made by the Administrator-General
and communicated to the Special Representative as soon as a date for
implementation had been set” [ibid, para. 14. South Africa’s continued refusal to make known its preferred electoral system is yet another dilatory manoeuvre, contrary to
the agreement reached by all the parties concerned in New
York in July-August 1982 that this issue must be settled in
accordance with’the terms of Council resolution 435 (1978)
and that the issue must not cause delay in the implementation of the United Nations plan.

78. At the 2439th meeting of the Council, on 23 May, the
representative
of the United Kingdom recorded his
Government’s
agreement with the Secretary-General’s
statement that, as far as the United Nations was concerned, the only outstanding issues were the choice of the
electoral system and the settlement of some final problems
relating to UNTAG and its composition.
79. Addressing the Council on 25 May, the representative of the United States stated:
“only two major issues remain to be resolved in preparation for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
These are: the choice of the electoral system to be
employed in the elections . . . and final technical matters
concerning the composition of the military component
of UNTAG.”
[2443rd meering, paru. Z&5.]

85. After observing in his concluding remarks that “we
have never before been so close to finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978)“, the SecretaryGeneral stated that, however, “the position of South
Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal
of Cuban
troops from Angola as a pre-condition for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) . . . makes it impossible to
launch the United Nations plan.” [ibid, paras. 24 and 25.1
Not surprisingly, herein lies the characteristic dishonesty of
the racist South African regime. True to form, it appeared
to promise co-operation while intending defiance. Once
again, racist South Africa unashamedly manoeuvred to
exploit the good will and sincere intentions of those who
had hoped that apartheid South Africa would, for once,
show a human face.

80. In his further report concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
concerning the question of Namibia [S/15943J, the
Secretary-General stated that, having been assured in the
course of his preliminary discussions with South African
officials of their Government’s acceptance of resolutions
435 (1978) and 532 (1983) as the basis for further discussion and its readiness to discuss the two remaining outstanding issues, he travelled to southern Africa and held
talks with, among others, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa, the President of
Angola, Mr. dos Santos, and the President of SWAPO,
Mr. Nujoma.

86. It continues to be our firm position that the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) has absolutely nothing
to do with the presence of Cuban forces in Angola. The
international community has rejected with a united voice
the so-called linkage policy of South Africa. The Security
Council must totally and unequivocally reject the so-called
linkage policy of South Africa. The United Nations plan
must, therefore, be implemented without further delay.

81. Assessing his efforts to carry out the mandate given
to him by the Council in resolution 532 (1983), the
Secretary-General observed in his report that his consultations with the parties to the proposed cease-fire had
8

87. It would be unfair, indeed vulgar, to ask the people
of Namibia, who continue to suffer under Pretoria’s cruel
colonial domination and savage repression, to show still
more forbearance and still more patience. For how long
are they to continue to bear this ordeal? Nothing that
racist South Africa has done gives a modicum of hope. On
the contrary, from year to year racist South Africa has
devised new strategems to prevent the implementation of
the United Nations plan and has flouted the will of the
international community.

resolve to have the political will to save the present as well
as succeeding generations in southern Africa from the
scourges of a catastrophic war. Let us resolve to reassert
the authority, efficacy and moral superiority of the United
Nations. And let us begin with Namibia, the saddest chapter of our shared history.
92. Let the Security Council, in a united and firm voice,
send the message to racist South Africa that the international community will no longer tolerate its unending pretexts intended to prolong its illegal occupation of Namibia
and to continue its unprovoked aggression against the
neighbouring independent African States. Let the Council
unequivocally set a time-frame for South Africa’s pronouncement of its preferred electoral system so that the
Council may adopt the enabling resolution for the implementation of the United Nations plan. It should be made
clear that should South Africa fail to make that pronouncement within that period of time, the Council-in
the light of
the serious threat to international peace and security posed
by South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia, its war of repression against the Namibian people, its persistent acts of aggression launched
from bases in Namibia against independent African States
and its repeated refusal to expedite the implementation of
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) for the early independence of Namibia-would
respond positively to the overwhelming demand of the international community by
imposing against South Africa comprehensive mandatory
sanctions, as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.

88. Some three years ago, at Geneva, Pretoria sabotaged
the implementation of the United Nations plan by linking
Namibia’s independence to its spurious charge of United
Nations lack of impartiality to oversee the implementation
of the plan. Of late, South Africa has refined its stonewalling tactics by insolently linking the inalienable right of the
Namibian people to national self-determination
and
genuine independence to unrelated, extraneous issues, such
as the presence of Cuban forces in Angola. One wonders
what Pretoria’s next pretext will be. What will it link Namibia’s independence to? Most likely it will link it to
UNITA (National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola), to a nonaggression pact or to the question of
recognition of the African National Congress of South
Africa (ANC). The list is endless. In the meantime, Namibia will continue to be held hostage. The Security Council should not, therefore, create a precedent by linking
Namibia’s independence to any irrelevant and extraneous
issues, especially the presence of the Cuban forces in
Angola.

93. To do less is to fail to live up to our collective determination, under the Charter, to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
international law can be maintained, and to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security.

89. Many world leaders have spoken during the current
session of the General Assembly of the imperative need to
restore the prestige and efficacy of the United Nations.
They have warned that the lawlessness and immorality of a
few pariah States like South Africa that bedevil the collective search for peace, justice, equality and freedom have
ominous consequences. Many far-sighted and responsible
personalities have forewarned of a catastrophic war not
only engulfing the southern African region, but also
spreading its flames well beyond its confines, unless the
gross injustices and aggression visited upon the people of
Namibia and the region by racist South Africa are brought
to an immediate end.

94.

Let us act, and act now!

95. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is Mr. Peter Mueshihange, Secretary for Foreign Relations of SWAPO, to whom the Council extended
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure at the beginning of this meeting. I now call on him to
make his statement.
96. Mr. MUESHIHANGE:
Mr. President, I should like,
first of all, to express my thanks to you and to the other
members of the Council for giving our delegation the
opportunity to participate in this important debate on the
question of Namibia.

90. Just ‘a few days ago, on 17 October, South Africa
once again perpetrated acts of aggression against the sovereign State of Mozambique, demonstrating its insatiable
desire for adventurism, in complete disregard of international law. The United Nations Council for Namibia
strongly condemns these callous acts of aggression, which
threaten international peace and security.

97. Permit me also to avail myself of this opportunity to
extend to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the high office of President of the Council
for the month of October and to convey to one and all in
the Council the warm greetings and best wishes of Mr.
Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO, who participated personally in the deliberations of the Council on the very
same issue last May.

91. If, as many complain, the United Nations has lost its
effectiveness, its sense of justice and moral imperative, we
have no one to blame but ourselves. It is inconceivable
that, for nearly two decades now, apartheid South Africa,
whose social and political standards are indistinguishable
from nazism, has been allowed to make a mockery of our
shared sense of justice. Let us not allow ourselves to share
in apartheid South Africa’s burdensome guilt, Let us

98. The oppressed people of Namibia and SWAPO, their
sole and authentic representative, are looking forward with
9

keen interest to a successful conclusion of the debate leading to the achievement of freedom and genuine independence of Namibia without further delay. We repose our
trust and confidence in you, Sir, reassured by the fact that,
under your able guidance and outstanding statesmanship,
real and significant progress will be made.
99. I should like at this juncture to express fraternal
greetings to and admiration for my brother, Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, for the outstanding leadership that he
provided to the Council during the most trying month of
September.
100. It gives me great pleasure, on behalf of the Central
Committee of SWAPO, to express our deep appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his untiring efforts to expedite
the decolonization process of Namibia and for the close
co-operation that we have enjoyed from him. I wish to
reassure him that he can count on our continued support
and readiness in the expeditious implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
101. Since the conclusion of the Council meetings last
May, tension and hot-beds of conflict have continued to
increase, thus further endangering the peace and security
of the world.

collectively and severally their strong demand for liberation, justice and human dignity in favour of our people.
Needless to say, this has not only reassured us of the fact
that our friends and supporters remain committed in support of our cause but also that they are prepared to continue to render increased all-round assistance to us, which
we need now more than ever before to intensify the struggle on all fronts, including in particular the armed struggle,
as a matter of the birthright of an oppressed people to
liberate its motherland.
106. In this context, I take exceptional pride and comfort
in recalling the inspiring and brilliant address delivered in
the General Assembly on 30 September by Mr. Julius Nyerere, President of the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Chairman of the front-line States.
107. I can hardlv metend to have a better insight into the
complexities of the critical situation in southern Africa
than the Chairman of the front-line States. I should, therefore, like to cite a few relevant passages from his important
address, which was received with resounding and prolonged applause.
108. At the very beginning of his address, Mr. Nyerere
declared:

102. Naturally, our primary preoccupation in this regard
is southern Africa in general and Namibia in particular.
Our region is smouldering under the heat waves of brutal
racist repression, colonial domination, generalized State
terrorism and various other acts of aggression and destabilization, a litany of heinous crimes for which the aparrheid regime is solely responsible.

“The danger that the freedom struggle in southern
Africa will be confused by the East-West power conflict
has become greater and more,obvious. Namibia is still
occupied by South Africa, and the tentative movements
towards the isolation of apartheid South Africa from
the world community which could be discerned during
the 1970s are now apparently being reversed. Indeed,
far from being forced to the defensive by world pressure, South Africa has been allowed to attack its neighbours with little reaction from the international
community. It has received only verbal condemnation-if that-in response to its raids into Mozambique
and Lesotho, its destabilization activities in those countries and also in Zimbabwe and Zambia and its immmerable aggressive actions against Angola, culminating
in the occupation of part of Angolan territory.

103. I wish to begin my intervention by giving a brief
overview of the situation in southern Africa before I deal
with the central issue of my statement, namely, the linkage
pre-condition being insisted upon by the unholy alliance of
apartheid South Africa and the current United States
Administration.
104. Let me first of all say something about the recently
concluded general debate in the General Assembly. It is
important to note that this meeting is taking place following that debate in the Assembly. Many Heads of State or
Government, ministers for foreign affairs and other highranking officials addressed the Assembly on the burning
issues of the day. Undoubtedly, one such burning issue is
Namibia.

“South Africa’s attempts to destabilize its neighbours
are intensifying, yet South Africa is treated by many of
us as if it were a respectable member of the world community which could be encouraged by constructive
engagement into being a good neighbour. And when
these countries look for world support, some Members
of the United Nations advise that if they would only
avoid provoking South Africa they would not suffer
from the economic, social and political problems which
the South African attacks create for them. The provocation referred to is their open and public opposition to
apartheid and the reception of refugees from apartheid
South Africa.

105. It is with delight and appreciation that we recall that
the overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
United Nations have reiterated their unswerving and active
support for and solidarity with the embattled people of
Namibia and SWAPO, whose military wing, the People’s
Liberation Army of Namibia (PLAN), has been spearheading the. miiitantnational resistance of our people. We
are particularly grateful to the countries of the NonAligned Movement, of which SWAP0 is a proud member,
the socialist community of nations and other peace-loving
and justice-upholding nations for the ongoing, principled
and generous assistance to SWAP0 and for reiterating

“Unfortunately
for South Africa’s neighbours, the
real provocation they offer is their very existence. The
example, especially along its borders, of independent
nations which proclaim the equality of man and are
10

nity must assist the front-line States in every way
possible in order to enable them to defend better their
sovereignty and territorial integrity.“8

trying to promote human dignity is a continual threat to
the apartheid regime.
“The choice facing South Africa’s neighbours is
therefore very clear: either they become accomplices of
this racist regime or they must prepare to defend themselves against its attacks. And the United Nations has
either to support them in their defence or to become
itself an accompiice of the racist State’s attacks on its
own people and its neighbours. In this context the
United Nations means all our States, severally and
jointly. Neutrality on racism is immoral and politically
unsustainable in the long run’*6.
Concerning Namibia and the implementation of resolution
435 (1978), Mr. Nyerere had this to say:
/
“Negotiations
about implementation have since then
dragged on at a snail’s pace. South Africa has been
constantly stalling and manufacturing new objections to
the plan, while the South West Africa People’s Organiration makes concession after concession in the search
for peace.
‘6. . . but South Africa refuses to begin its implementation because Angola has troops from Cuba helping it
to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
“I must reiterate once more that Tanzania categorically rejects this attempt to link the independence of
Namibia with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola. We know that South Africa has adopted this
policy in the last two years on the encouragement of a
permanent member of the Security Council. We know
that South Africa is remaining stubborn with the
encouragement of that State. Tanzania still says that
Angola is an independent sovereign State which has
suffered from external aggression from the moment of
its birth. It has a right to decide for itself on its defence
needs. The attempts to link the independence of Namibia with Angola’s sovereign decisions has to be
rejected by the whole of the United Nations.“’

110. Who can forget the concerted efforts being made by
the illustrious Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira
Gandhi? In her capacity as the current Chairman of the
Non-Aligned
Movement, she made an important and
thought-provoking
statement at the 9th meeting of the
General Assembly and also conducted extremely useful
exchanges on the crucial issues of disarmament, development and liberation with other world leaders who, at her
initiative, converged on New York during the month of
September.
111. The consistent support being rendered to the
national liberation movements by the countries of the
Non-Aligned Movement was further consolidated at the
Seventh Conference of Heads ,of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March this
year, and we are most grateful to the ministers for foreign
affairs of the non-aligned countries for once again
reiterating their unswerving
support for and active
solidarity with the struggling peoples of South Africa and
Namibia under the leadership of their movements, ANC
and SWAP0 respectively, as well as for renewing their
principled position, which is further confirmation of the
fact that the front-line States should be given all the
necessary material and financial assistance to defend
themselves against racist South Africa’s persistent military
attacks and other acts of aggression and destabilization.
112. I wish to state once again here that we are greatly
indebted to the peoples and Governments of the front-line
States, which have been more than generous over the years
in their support of our struggle and are still, even today, in
the face of untold suffering and-the racist terror campaign
being daily inflicted on them by the apartheid aggressor,
prepared to stand firmly behind us, serving as a reliable
rear base and a refuge for the Namibian refugees.

109. This eloquent analysis of the ever-deteriorating
situation in southern Africa reflects the common concern
of all the front-line, States and, indeed, of Africa as a
whole. In this connection, the special message of the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State or
Government of the OAU, Mr. Mengistu Haile Mariam,
Head of State of Ethiopia, which was read out to the
Assembly on 11 October by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Goshe Wolde, unequivocally confirms Africa’s collective position. It reads, in part:

113. It is a painful but inescapable fact that the
reactionary forces in apartheid South. Africa and those
abroad, who have always stubbornly resisted the forces of
change and democracy, will intensify their notorious acts
of military pressure, intervention, economic strangulation
and sabotage in a sinister attempt to safeguard free access
to raw materials and strategic minerals and to maintain
geopolitical interests in southern Africa. That means to
protect the status quo.

“It is Africa’s view that these acts of aggression and
destabilization are designed not only to cripple the
armed struggle of the peoples of Namibia and South
Africa, but also to overthrow the Governments of the
front-line States because of their steadfast and selfless
support of the struggle of the oppressed peoples of
southern Africa. I submit that this evil design should
not be glossed over with more condemnatory and ineffective resolutions. Instead, the international commu-

114. Certainly, in these circumstances, it is quite obvious
that the liberation struggle will continue; the front-line
States will use all the means at their disposal in the legitimate exercise of self-defence and they will be justified in
inviting friendly countries to give them aid, and other
external complications will follow. All this is likely to
aggravate further the conflict and tension in southern
Africa, threatening the whole region with ghastly
consequences.
11

115. In his latest report, the Secretary-General aptly described this explosive situation as “both highly damaging to
the peoples and Governments of the area and also a threat
to the wider peace” [ibid., par-a. 24.

1978, when the Council endorsed the United Nations plan
in its resolution 435 (1978), all the necessary procedures
and requirements for the holding of free and fair elections
under the supervision and control of the United Nations
had already been agreed upon after protracted and exhaustive negotiations. Both SWAP0 and racist South Africa
are on record as having accepted resolution 435 (1978).

116. During the Council’s debate in May on the situation
in Namibia, the President of SWAPO, Comrade Sam
Nujoma, made two substantive interventions dealing not
only with the aspirations and expectations of our people
for political emancipation, but also, and above all, with the
delaying tactics and the intransigence of the Pretoria racist
regime as well as the recalcitrance of certain major Westem Powers whose policies continue to give encouragement
and support to that regime. I therefore have no intention
of recounting here the whole sordid history of our struggle.

121. The pertinent question now is why this particular
meeting of the Council is not dealing with the formulation
and adoption of an enabling resolution in a more congenial atmosphere, rather than being a forum of antagonism
in a hostile atmosphere. Something is wrong here and,
indeed, very much so. What is that something, and who
are the wrongdoers?
122. What is wrong is the unilateral and unwarranted
imposition of this outrageous issue of linkage by the
United States on the Namibian negotiations. It is an open
secret that it was the Reagan Administration
which
brought it up in 1981 and has since endeavoured to formalize it through offtcial communications. We see it as part of
the rescue operation Washington has launched within the
framework of its so-called constructive-engagement policy,
which is nothing but a pro-upartheid policy with demonstrable hostility towards the interests of millions of black
people in the region. Racist South Africa is now convcniently using this outrageous United States policy to buy
time while carrying out its diabolical schemes in Namibia
and in South Africa itself.

117. I wish to devote the rest of my statement to the issue
I raised earlier-namely,
the linkage or parallelism which
is today the primary source of unjustifiable catastrophe in
the negotiations and the only obstacle to Namibia’s full
independence.
118. Our careful reading of the Secretary-General’s
report [s/15943], submitted to the Council pursuant to its
resolution 532 (1983), has led us to the following conclusions: first, the Secretary-General has successfully carried
out his mandate to undertake consultations with SWAP0
and racist South Africa with a view to securing the speedy
implementation of resolution 435 (1978); secondly, all the
outstanding issues, which were in the first place mere deviations created by the racists and their collaborators as
bargaining chips, have been resolved, so that everything
strictly in terms of the United Nations plan is now in place;
thirdly, those matters that are essentially technical in
nature, such as the modalities of implementation, an enabling resolution to be adopted by the Council in order to
launch the implementation process, dates for a cease-fire
and for the emplacement of UNTAG,
including related
financial implications, and so forth, would be resolved
rapidly within the framework of resolution 435 (1978) and
on the basis of the understandings that were reached
among the negotiating parties in August 1982 here in New
York; fourthly, concerning South Africa’s choice of electoral system to be used for elections to the Constituent
Assembly-which
must be either proportional representation or a single-memberconstituency
system-we
took
note of the Secretary-General’s confirmation that Pretoria
will communicate its choice prior to the Council’s adoption of the enabling resolution; and, finally, SWAP0 has
once again reiterated its readiness to sign a cease-fire agreement and to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative in the judicious implementation of
the United Nations plan. There is a political will and determination to move forward on our part, and we challenge
the Boer regime to do likewise.

123. This is a very serious development for us. It is also a
direct challenge to the authority of the United Nations,
which has assumed a unique legal responsibility over Namibia until its independence. This callous display of arrogance of power to which we are being subjected by the
United States, which is a permanent member of the Security Council, raises a serious question about the relevance
of the Charter of the United Nations as well as about the
relevant resolutions of the Council itself and those of the
General Assembly with regard to our situation.
124. The record of racist South Africa’s non-compliance
with the demands of the international community, its
defiant behaviour towards the authority of the United
Nations and its intransigence and prevarication in the
negotiations are well known. All of us have come to expect
this from that pariah State of racist admirers of Hitler.
125. Ironically-and
perhaps not so ironically-today
it
is the United States, which otherwise professes commitment to the ideals of fair play, peaceful resolution of conflicts, democracy, the rule of law, human rights and free
elections, among others, that is obstructing Namibia’s
independence and holding to ransom our entire oppressed
people struggling for the right to self-determination and
freedom in their own motherland.

119. In other words, as the Secretary-General himself
concluded, “we have never before been so close to finality
on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978).”
[ibid., para. 24.1

126. Most regrettably. Namibia’s liberation has now
been tied to extraneousand irrelevant issues over which we
have absolutely no jurisdiction or control-issues,
for that
matter, with which we have no desire to be involved. Namibia is a clear and straightforward
case of decolonization.

120. Just to keep faith with our own convictions and to
keep the record straight, however, I must state here that, in
12

It is our people’s birthright to be free and to rule themselves, with the co-operation and assistance of peaceloving and justice-upholding mankind.

aim of overthrowing the revolutionary Government of the
MPLA-Workers
Party (Movimento Popular de Libertacgo
de Angola-Partido
de Trabalho).

127. It is quite obviously to us that if the unholy alliance
of Washington and Pretoria is going to be allowed to get
away with this despicable chicanery, Namibia’s hopes for
independence will once again have been dashed for many
more years to come.

133. Much has been written since 1975 about Angola and
the role of the Central Intelligence Agency and other clandestine activities by the enemies of the Angolan people,
who, after waging a long and bitter struggle, freed themselves after more than 500 years of Portuguese brutal
tyranny. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola, Mr.
Paul0 Jorge, in his brilliant recent statement at the 27th
meeting of the General Assembly exposed the magnitude of
the ongoing aggression in his country and offered facts and
figures about the cost both in terms of human lives and in
terms of property. The Angolan authorities have also prepared a “white paper” which gives more details about the
critical situation there, and, thanks to the Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations, this document is
being disseminated so that the truth may be known.

128. Our sources confirm that as far as the top Boer
leadership is concerned, especially its military-intelligencesecurity establishment, the implementation of resolution
435 (1978) is not contemplated for the next two to five
years, if at all. It has been demonstrated by many experts
that it is the South African military and military intelligence that call the shots, the racist Prime Minister himself
being a hard-line warmonger and die-hard reactionary.
129. In the meantime the racists, whose military might
and sophisticated weapons-technology
are the talk of the
town these days in the Western media;will continue to rely
on reckless military’ adventurism and brutal repression
inside Namibia and also on intensifying their various acts
of aggression against the front-line States and ANC. True
to type, the Pretoria racists launched yet another military
attack against Mozambique just a few days before the
convening of this meeting, in a manner that is supposed to
give a warning to those who are committed to end upurrheid and colonial tyranny. It is my sincere hope that the
Council will, at an appropriate time and in a most effective
way, add its unanimous voice to the public condemnation
of this naked aggression, which underlines the dangerous
siege mentality of the Afrikaaner racist minority.

134. Angola needs practical solidarity, and that solidarity should not be in terms only of tiring off exhortations, of
repeated expressions of outrage, or of strong condemnations of the apartheid terrorists and their imperialist collaborators. What Angola needs above all, are material,
financial and humanitarian resources in order more effectively to meet its pressing security, social welfare and economic priorities, which are daily being attacked by those
hostile forces.
135. We are grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
other members of the Council for having allowed me to
participate in this crucial debate. I have come to plead the
case of my people. If I at times sounded less than diplomatic or appeared to be emotionally charged, I assure you,
Sir, it was not without cause. For us the situation in Namibia is most alarming; it involves the lives of our
people-there are daily murders by the occupying colonial
army and the racist trigger-happy police-and
the very
survival of our people. It is for these reasons that we
strongly and unreservedly condemn the United States for
holding the independence of Namibia hostage to absolutely alien considerations which Washington is pursuing
all over the world for its own ideological and strategic
interests.

130. Right now, the primary focus of the Pretoria racists
is the implementation of the so-called internal constitutional reforms that are nothing but the old trick of “divide
and rule” being orchestrated under a new but transparent
guise of bogus power-sharing, with a view to divorcing the
so-called Coloureds and the Asians from the ranks of the
oppressed black population by offering them meaningless
representation in a reconstituted Parliament that will
always be dominated by the apartheid chieftains, further
entrenching apartheid and excluding the great majority.
131. Therefore, Pretoria could afford, purely for tactical
reasons, to create the impression, as part of its public relations offensive, of being flexible regarding the implementation of the United Nations plan. But the fact of the matter
is that both Washington, which is now posturing for presidential elections next year, and Pretoria, whose calculations do not countenance a SWAP0 victory in Namibia
for a very long time to come, have their own hidden agendas, which are clearly at variance with our demands for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) without any
further delay,
/

136. Now is the time for the Council to impose comprehensive and mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of
the Charter against racist South Africa. It is our firm conviction that such historic action by the Council, which is
the only remaining viable, realistic and peaceful means,
will without doubt compel the Pretoria racist regime to
co-operate fully in the speedy decolonization of Namibia
on the basis of resolution 435 (1978).
137. What our people expect from the Council is a
strong and unequivocal rejection of the linkage issue and a
condemnation of the Washington-Pretoria
unholy alliance
that is responsible for it. We represent only a national
liberation movement and a colonized people, whose yearning for freedom and daily suffering is the only justification
for our struggle. But let there be no mistake about our
courage to speak up loud and clear and look straight in the

132. In Angola, we see a replay of the 1975 nightmare by
the racist troops, the Angolan bandits and traitors, mercenaries and other proponents of covert operations who
readily provide cash and military aid to these nefarious
forces whose aim is to destabilize Angola with the manifest
13

eyes of those who would dominate us or weaken our
resolve and to tell them exactly what is on our minds. For
we know that no amount of force or arrogance of power
can break the will of a determined people to free itself from
foreign domination and colonial oppression. It is this conviction which assures us of the final victory of justice over
might and it is this faith which inspires the combatants of
PLAN to continue to heighten the pace of the armed struggle until every inch of the motherland is liberated.
138. In conclusion, I wish to register our profound
appreciation to the non-aligned caucus and other friends
in the Council for their support and good will and for the
efforts they are making to ensure that the resolution the
Council adopts at the end of the debate will clearly address
the major concerns of our people.
139. The most ‘pressing task for the Namibian patriots
and the combatants of PLAN is to ensure that we leave no
stone unturned as we forge ahead, knowing that the people’s struggle will continue until final victory is achieved.
140. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
141. Mr. von SCHIRNDING
(South Africa): May I convey to you, Sir, our sincere congratulations and our best
wishes on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council.
142. When I last addressed the Council on 23 May this
year, I gave a full exposition of the South African Govemmerit’s position regarding the question of South West
Africa and that position remains unchanged.
143. In the meantime, in pursuance of the mandate given
to him by the Council by virtue of resolution 532 (1983),
the Secretary-General paid visits to South Africa and to
South West Africa during August 1983, and the Council
has before. .it his report [S/159433.

the remaining outstanding issues to be addressed in the
context of resolution 435 (1978), namely, the choice of the
electoral system and some problems relating to the composition of UNTAG.
147. As the Secretarv-General’s
renort confirms. these
two issues have now bekn resolved as iar as South Africa is
concerned. In addition, certain outstanding
matters
regarding the agreement on the status of UNTAG were
also resolved.
148. The result is that the Secretary-General has been able
to report that ,“we have never before been so close to finality
on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978)”
[ibid., para. 241 and that there had been, as he put it,
“substantial progress** since the Council last met. I would
hope that we shall therefore hear no further irresponsible
allegations in the Council that South Africa is somehow
responsible for delaying the implementation of a settlement,
such as we have already, predictably, heard this afternoon.
149. There is now only one major issue to be resolved
and that is the withdrawal of the Cubans from Angola on
the understanding that they will not be replaced by any
other hostile forces. As is reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report,, the position of the South African
Government on this question is that it will not be possible
to put into practice any settlement plan unless a clear
agreement is reached on Cuban withdrawal. The Govemment of South Africa is irrevocably committed on this
issue. Firm agreement will have to be reached on the fundamental requirements of Cuban withdrawal and a commitment will have to be obtained from the Angolan
Government regarding the implementation of such an
agreement. And I should add that the South African
Government’s position on the question of Cuban withdrawal is acknowledged and has support within the international community.
150. The Secretary-General has stated in his report that
he does not accept the socalled linkage between a settlement in South West,Africa and the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola. However, in his annual report on the
work of the Organization, the Secretary-General acknowledged that:

144. Let me say at the outset that this ,mport accurately
reflects the position of the South African Government as
conveyed to the Secretary-General during his discussions
in Cape Town. I should like to place on record the appxeciation of my Government .for the objective manner in
which the Secretary-General has approached this task.

“Furthermore,
‘when East-West tension. is superimposed on regional, conflicts and serves to exacerbate
them, the already destructive nature of such disputes is
likely to be aggravated and the danger of widening strife
becomes an ominous prospect.“9

145. I wish now briefly to restate the South African
Government’s position on the matters raised during the
Secretary-General’s visit to South Africa and South West
Africa, which are the subject of the report before us.

151. The presence of 30,000 Cuban troops in Angola is
not a figment of South Africa’s imagination. It is a fact.
There is irrefutable evidence that SWAP0 and FAPLA
(Forcas Armadas Populares de Liberasibn de Angola)
forces are becoming ,increasingly integrated and the
FAPLA forces are advised by Cubans. That is the linkage,
and it takes a great deal of wishful thinking to deny that
this connection exists.

146. The South African Government remains tirmlv
committed to seeking a peaceful settlement of the South
West Africa question on the basis of Council resolution
435 (1978) within the framework of the understandings
reached with the United States and the Western contact
group. It was in furtherance of that commitment that the
South African Government agreed to hold discussions
with the Secretary-General in order to attempt to resolve

152. SWAP0 operates from Angola with active FAPLA
and Cuban support. The relevance of the presence in
14

Angola of the Cuban forces is therefore indivisible from
the efforts to put an end to conflict in the area and to
establish long-term peace in the region. It is absurd to deny
that the introduction of surrogate forces of the Soviet
Union into southern Africa is not a cause for the gravest
concern, not only to South Africa and South West Africa,
but to all the countries of the region.

Information Ministry, a Mozambique Government document was discovered by journalists in the rubble of the
terrorist headquarters, which was situated in a penthouse
and a flat on the fourth floor of a building in Maputo. This
document listed two South Africans residing in Maputo as
“soldiers” and suggested that such terrorists were known to
and aided by the Mozambique Government. Let me quote
from the British Broadcasting Corporation’s report of 18
October on the discovery of this document:

153. The members of the Council would surely not deny
the commitment of the Soviet Union to world-wide revolution and the imposition of its own ideological system on
other peoples and its openly proclaimed policy of supporting hostile action and subversion against South Africa and
South West Africa. Its surrogate, Cuba, makes no secret of
its efforts to destabilize its neighbours in Latin America
and to export revolution wherever it can. Is further evidence necessary of the prohibitive and menacing effect
which the Cuban presence in Angola has on the progress
towards a peaceful settlement in the region?

“Most of the literature which we saw lying around in
the debris was mainly anti-South African propaganda:
books on reported left-wing causes, that kind of thing.
There was also a bust of Lenin and various personal
effects. But we did come across one document which
referred to ANC soldiers-and
we did question ANC
officials about this, and there was considerable embarrassment, both among the officials themselves and
among Mozambique security officers who presumably
spent all day yesterday going through the office removing any incriminating evidence, if there was any such
evidence there. And we questioned them about this reference to ANC soldiers, and first we.were told that this
referred to political soldiers, but then it was suggested
that we ourselves had planted this document while we
were walking around the offices.*’

154. I should like to reiterate that South Africa has consistently rejected resolutions of the General Assembly which
have declared SWAP0 to be the “sole and authentic representative of the people of South West Africa**. Under no
circumstances will South Africa now or in the future receive
any representative of the United Nations in South West
Africa on that basis. We are aware of the continuing bias in
favour of SWAP0 on the part of certain United Nations
bodies, and I must emphasize once again that no settlement
plan can be implemented unless the Secretary-General and
his personnel act with strict impartiality. We have taken
note of the assurances which the Secretary-General has
provided in this connection in his report.

160. It is from headquarters such as the one destroyed in
the preemptive raid that acts of terror against civilian
targets and the killing and maiming of blacks and whites
in South Africa are planned, controlled and supported.
The South African Government reiterates its warning that
it will seek out and destroy such facilities, wherever they
may be.

155. The South African Government fully supports the
Secretary-General’s
sentiments that the attainment of a
peaceful, prosperous and independent South West Africa
would be an achievement of which all members of the
international community could be proud. South Africa has
given evidence of its willingness to co-operate in the attainment of this worthy goal. It is the, baleful and ominous
presence of the Soviet surrogate forces in Angola which
prevents its realization.

161. The PRESIDENT
(inter-rerarionfium
Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
162. Mr. KOROMA
(Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I
should like to thank you and the other members of the
Council for acceding to my request to be invited to participate in the deliberations on this all-important matter, the
question of Namibia.

156. Therefore, it would be futile for the Security Council to attempt to set any deadlines or time-frames for implementation until the matter of the Cuban presence in
Angola has been resolved, and it should be understood
that South Africa would not accept any such deadlines.

163. Let me also express my warm congratulations to
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. My country enjoys excellent relations with
Jordan, and I should like to assure you of our fullest
co-operation as you carry out-your onerous responsibilities. In the same vein, my delegation would like to
acknowledge and pay a special tribute to Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana for the commendable way in which he
conducted the affairs of the Council last month.

157. Finally, reference has been made this afternoon to
the pre-emptive operation carried out against a terrorist
target at Maputo by a small task-group of the South African Defence Force on 17 October.
158. The South African Government has given adequate
warning to ‘the Mozambique Government not to harbour
or to grant facilities to terrorists and in so doing permit
them to launch and plan attacks and aggression against
South Africa.

164. While the United Nations has been seized of the
question of Namibia since its inception, it was on 29 September 1978 that the Council, for the first time, put
together a package with the concurrence of all the permanent members of the Council, in the form of resolution 435
(1978). The aim of that resolution was to ensure the peaceful transition of Namibia to independence. The United

159. During a tour of the terrorist target in Maputo
organized for foreign correspondents by the Mozambican
15

Nations plan for a settlement of the Namibian situation,
approved by that resolution, among other things called for
a cease-fire agreement, the creation of a demilitarized
zone, the deployment of UNTAG and the holding of free
and fair elections under United Nations supervision and
control. When that resolution was adopted, the expectation was that, within a period of 18 months at the most,
Namibia would achieve its independence. But today, five
years later, that resolution has remained unimplemented,
and Namibia-a
United Nations Territory-is
still under
the illegal military occupation of South Africa.

170. Significantly, after so many years we are again being
told that we should exercise patience, and what is even
more baffling is the assertion that progress is being made
towards Namibian independence. Time and time again,
when the Council is seized of the question of Namibia,
members of the Western Five speak as if independence
were around the corner in Namibia. But we know that
these soothing expressions cannot be a substitute for the
exercise of effective political will with a view to agreeing on
comprehensive sanctions, which, in my delegation’s view,
could alone make the difference as far as the racist regime
is concerned.

165. Most-regrettably,
immediately following the adoption of that resolution, the South African Government
cynically, and in defiance of the decision of the Council,
started putting up one artificial obstacle after another,
with the intention of frustrating implementation of the
resolution and preventing the independence of Namibia.
166. But, even more alarming, and as if to provide succour and encouragement to the South African racists for
their defiance of the will of the Council and, indeed, that of
the international community as a whole, one of the permanent members of the Council, who had played the role of a
prima donna in the negotiation and adoption of resolution
435 (1978) introduced matters extraneous to, or nongermane to, the contents of that resolution-to
wit, the
presence of Cuban internationalist forces in the sovereign
and independent State of Angola. The intrusion of such an
extraneous matter, or what has come to be known as the
“linkage issue”, has not only provided South Africa with a
further pretext to sabotage the Namibia package but has in
fact continued to hold the independence of Namibia and
its people hostage to circumstances outside their control.

171. The people of Namibia are certainly not in a position to deliver a mortgage, as has been demanded of them.
Angola is a sovereign, independent State, and must, free
and unfettered, act in its own national interest as it sees tit.
172. Moreover, as the report of the Secretary-General
clearly stated, the “linkage issue” is outside the ambit of
resolution 435 (1978), calling for the independence of Namibia. In his excellent report the Secretary-General
declared:
“I have repeatedly made it clear that I do not accept
this linkage and that the question of Cuban troops was
not envisaged in resolution 435 (1978)” [ibid., para 251.
Therefore, the linking of Namibia’s independence with the
presence of Cuban troops in Angola is a serious travesty of
justice, an unjust demand of the people of Namibia and a
human tragedy. I again quote the report of the SecretaryGeneral:
“The people of Namibia . . . are suffering not only
denial of their legitimate aspirations for genuine selfdetermination and independence, but from the effects
of procrastination and the uncertainty of their future.
. . . I have now witnessed at first hand their impatience
and disillusionment.”
[ibid., para. 24

167. Thus when the United States Government, with the
concurrence of the South African regime, insists that the
independence of Namibia is contingent upon the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, this is like asking
for a mortgage on the people and Territory of Namibia,
which they are not in a position to deliver.

173. The foregoing position is not oblivious to the need
for the lessening of tension in southern Africa. The irony is
that the continued illegal occupation of Namibia coupled
with the “linkage issue” and the non-implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) threatens international peace and
security in the whole area, thus leading to instability and
conflict in the whole of southern Africa, with South Africa
itself carrying out unrelenting armed attacks and acts of
aggression against neighbouring States, especially its wilful
and criminal occupation of large parts of southern Angola.

168. It is useful at this point to recall the circumstances
that gave rise to the diplomatic efforts that resulted in the
adoption by the Council of resolution 435 (1978). The
African Group, with the overwhelming
support of
members of the Non-Aligned Movement, and indeed of
the socialist countries, affirmed at that time that only effective, comprehensive and economic sanctions would influence the racist regime in Pretoria to relinquish its illegal
control of Namibia. It is fair to say that we were lectured
to the effect that only peaceful diplomatic efforts could
bring about an equitable solution in Namibia.

174. On the other hand, faced with South Africa’s intransigence and its continued illegal occupation of Namibia,
SWAP0 is left with no alternative but to intensify the
armed struggle to liberate the Territory.

169. Despite our serious doubts about such an approach,
we reluctantly agreed to allow the Western five to undertake appropriate contacts with South Africa. One may ask:
What is the pay-off for the moderation and understanding
that has been shown by the African States, not even to
mention the people of Namibia, during the past five or six
years? We all know it to be a fact that Namibia, despite the
intervening
period, has not advanced towards
its
independence.

175. Again, as the Secretary-General

stated in his report:

“The instability and conflict generated by the failure
to resolve this problem have had disastrous results for
the neighbouring countries, and especially for Angola.
. . . It is both highly damaging to the peoples and
16

Governments of the area and also a threat to the wider
peace.” [ibid., para. 27.1

NOTES
’ Official
Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-eighth
Session,
Supplement No. 23, chap. VIII, sect. B, para. 17.
’ Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
SecurityCouncil
Resolution
276 (1970). Advisory
Opinion, I.C.J. Reports 1971. D. 16.
.
’ See A/38/312,
annex, res&tkm
AHWRes.165
(XIX).
4 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-eighth
Session,
Plenary Meetings. 9th meeting, para. 18.
5 See Report of the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle
of the Namibian
People for Independence.
Paris, 25-29 April. 1983
(A/CONF.
120/13), part three.
’ Official Records of the General Assembly.
Thirty-eighth
Session.
Plenary Meetings,
14th meeting, paras. 5-8.
’ Ibid., paras. 9-l 1.
a Ibid., 27th meeting, para. 85.
’ Ibid., Thirty-eighth
Session, Supplement
No.1. p. 1.

176. If peace and stability are to return to that area,
resohrtion 435 (1978) must be implemented unconditionally, and Namibia’s independence must not be made contingent upon the withdrawal
of Cuban internationalist
forces from Angola,
177. We therefore call on the Council to assume its
responsibility for the political fate of Namibia, for its decolonization and for its independence. We also call for the
speedy and immediate implementation of resolution 435
(1978) without any conditions.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

17

HOW TO OBTAIN
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences &positaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
?I : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

I-IOJlYYMTb

MSfiAHIBI

OP~AHI43A~Hki

06BEAMHEHHbIX

ki3AiU,H,l
OpraJ1H3auaaO6aenHHeHHbtXHaunti
MOxHOKyIlUTbB
EiiWeHTCTBaX
BOBCeXp~OH~Mspa.H~OA~TeCnpaBKN06a3A~a~BB~eMKH)I~KHOM

Maraxi”e

unu niiui&iTe

nponaxe

l43AaHHZ1,

no anpecy:

HbH)-t'iCq.x

Iimi

OpraHti3auiin

O6?SAkiHeHHbIX

HALWfl

KHH)KHbIX

MaI7i3&iliU

HauHfi,

CeKuar

no

XeHeaa.

COMO
CONSEGUIR
PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esti en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00400

9C-6020%February

1992-2.050
