United Nations

A/RES/65/113

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 January 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 59

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2010
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/65/430)]

65/113. Question of New Caledonia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples for 2010 relating to New Caledonia, 1
0F

Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and
1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New
Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the
population, to promote political, economic and social development in the Territory,
including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with respect
to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful
progress to self-determination,
Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social
development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved in New
Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New Caledonia,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia
and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region,
1.
Welcomes the significant developments that have taken place in New
Caledonia since the signing of the Nouméa Accord on 5 May 1998 by the
representatives of New Caledonia and the Government of France; 2
1F

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 23 and corrigendum
(A/65/23 and Corr.1), chap. VIII.
2
A/AC.109/2114, annex.

10-51932

*1051932*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/113

2.
Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New
Caledonia, to maintain, in the framework of the Nouméa Accord, their dialogue in a
spirit of harmony, and in this context welcomes the unanimous agreement, reached
in Paris on 8 December 2008, on the transfer of powers to New Caledonia in 2009
and the conduct of provincial elections in May 2009;
Notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord aimed at taking
3.
more broadly into account the Kanak identity in the political and social organization
of New Caledonia, and welcomes, in this context, the adoption on 18 August 2010
by the Government of New Caledonia of the law on the anthem, the motto and
banknote designs;
Acknowledges those provisions of the Nouméa Accord relating to control
4.
of immigration and protection of local employment, and notes that unemployment
remains high among Kanaks and that recruitment of foreign mine workers continues;
Notes the concerns expressed by a group of indigenous people in New
5.
Caledonia regarding their underrepresentation in the Territory’s governmental and
social structures;
Also notes the concerns expressed by representatives of indigenous people
6.
regarding incessant migratory flows and the impact of mining on the environment;
7.
Takes note of the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect
that New Caledonia may become a member or associate member of certain
international organizations, such as international organizations in the Pacific region,
the United Nations, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the International Labour Organization, according to their
regulations;
Notes the agreement between the signatories to the Nouméa Accord that
8.
the progress made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the attention of
the United Nations;
Recalls the fact that the administering Power invited to New Caledonia,
9.
at the time the new institutions were established, a mission of information which
comprised representatives of countries of the Pacific region;
10. Notes the continuing strengthening of ties between New Caledonia and
both the European Union and the European Development Fund in such areas as
economic and trade cooperation, the environment, climate change and financial
services;
11. Calls upon the administering Power to continue to transmit to the
Secretary-General information as required under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
12. Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the
peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all
options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all sectors of the
population, according to the letter and the spirit of the Nouméa Accord, which is
based on the principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how
to control their destiny;
13. Recalls with satisfaction the efforts of the French authorities to resolve
the question of voter registration by adopting, in the French Congress of Parliament,
on 19 February 2007, amendments to the French Constitution allowing New
Caledonia to restrict eligibility to vote in local polls to those voters registered on the
2

A/RES/65/113

1998 electoral rolls when the Nouméa Accord was signed, thus ensuring strong
representation of the Kanak population;
14. Welcomes all measures taken to strengthen and diversify the New
Caledonian economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures in
accordance with the spirit of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords;
15. Also welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the Matignon
and Nouméa Accords to greater progress in housing, employment, training, education
and health care in New Caledonia;
16. Notes the financial assistance rendered by the Government of France to
the Territory in areas such as health, education, payment of public-service salaries
and funding development schemes;
17. Acknowledges the contribution of the Melanesian Cultural Centre to the
protection of the indigenous Kanak culture of New Caledonia;
18. Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment
of New Caledonia, including the “Zonéco” operation designed to map and evaluate
marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia;
19. Welcomes the cooperation among Australia, France and New Zealand in
terms of surveillance of fishing zones, in accordance with the wishes expressed by
France during the France-Oceania Summits in July 2003 and June 2006;
20. Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples of
the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French and territorial
authorities to facilitate the further development of those links, including the
development of closer relations with the countries members of the Pacific Islands
Forum;
21. Recalls with satisfaction, in this regard, the participation of New
Caledonia at the 41st summit of the Pacific Islands Forum, held in Port Vila on
4 and 5 August 2010, following its accession to the Forum as an associate member
in October 2006;
22. Recalls the continuing high-level visits to New Caledonia by delegations
from countries of the Pacific region and high-level visits by delegations from New
Caledonia to countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum;
23. Welcomes the cooperative attitude of other States and Territories in the
region towards New Caledonia, its economic and political aspirations and its
increasing participation in regional and international affairs;
24. Recalls the endorsement of the report of the Forum Ministerial Committee
on New Caledonia by leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum at its 36th Summit, held
in Papua New Guinea in October 2005, and the continuing role of the Forum
Ministerial Committee in monitoring developments in the Territory and encouraging
closer regional engagements;
25. Welcomes the successful conclusion of the Pacific regional seminar of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
held in Nouméa from 18 to 20 May 2010, and expresses its appreciation to the
people and Government of New Caledonia for hosting the seminar and to the
Government of France for its support in organizing it;

3

A/RES/65/113

26. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New
Caledonia as a result of the signing of the Nouméa Accord;
27. Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of the
question of the Non-Self-Governing Territory of New Caledonia and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session.
62nd plenary meeting
10 December 2010

4
