General Assembly-Twelfth Session

14

1216 (XII). Confirmation of the allocation of funds for the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance in 1958

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Technical Assistance Committee has reviewed and approved the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance for the year 1958,
1. Confirms the allocation of funds authorized by the Technical Assistance Committee to each of the organizations participating in the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance as follows:
Allocation

Participating organization

From
contributions
and general
resources

United ·Nations Technical Assistance Administration ......... .
International Labour Organisation .......................... .
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .... .
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
International Civil Aviation Organization ................... .
World Health Organization . . . .
. .................. .
International Telecommunication Union .................... .
World Meteorological Organization ........................ .

6,530,000
3,226,000
8,085,000
4,532,000
1,240,000
5,462,000
323,000
345,000

657,000
290,000
774,000
482,000
149,000
707,000
27,000
32,000

7,187,000
3,516,000
8,859,000
5,014,000
1,389,000
6,169,000
350,000
377,000

TOTAL

29,743.000

3,118,000

32,861.000

From
local costs
assessments

Total

( Equivalent of US dollars)

2. Concurs in the Committee's authorization to the Technical Assistance Board to allocate to the participating organizations an undistributed amount of $180,822 not included in the amounts shown above, and to make
such changes in these allocations as may be necessary to provide as far as possible for the full utilization of
contributions to the Expanded Programme, provided that such changes shall not in the aggregate exceed 3 per
cent of the total amount allocated to the organizations participating in the Expanded Programme.

730th plenary meeting,
14 Deceniber 1957.
1217 (XII). Demographic questions

The General Assembly,
Considering that there is a close relationship between
economic problems and population problems, especially
with regard to countries which are in the process of
economic development,
Bearing in mind the resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social Council which
refer to the relations existing between economic development and social change,
Recalling that international co-operation towards economic development will be more effective when more
is known about the population changes that accompany
such development,
l. I nruites States Members, particularly those which
are in the process of economic development, to follow
as closely as possible the interrelationships existing
between economic and population changes;
2. Invites the attention of the Economic and Social
Council and of the specialized agencies concerned to
the growing importance of this question;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure the co-ordination of the activities of the United
Nations in the demographic and economic fields, particularly with reference to countries which are in the
process of economic development;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
include pertinent information concerning the demographic activities of the Council in the chapter on

economic development of its annual report to the Gen·
eral Assembly.
730th plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.

1218 (XII). Study of international commodity
problems

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is essential to the economic
development of under-developed countries that they
should be able to derive appreciable resources from
their own national savings,
Mindful that export revenues are basic for the economic development of many countries, and in particular of the under-developed countries,
Noting that the general level of primary commodity
prices continues to be unstable and has been falling
during 1957,
Considering that such conditions have harmful effects
on the economy of countries exporting primary products, including their balance of payments, their programmes for economic development and their purchases
from other countries,
Bearing in mind the serious economic and social
effects which arise in both exporting and importing
countries from excessive fluctuations in prices of primary products,
1. Endorses the decision of the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 656 (XXIV) of 30 July

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second t.:ommiuee

1957, to discuss the subject of international commodity
problems at its twenty-sixth session;
2. Draws the attention of the Governments of Member States to General Assembly resolution 1029 (XI)
of 20 February 1957 and invites them, in terms of
paragraph 1 of that resolution, to submit their commodity problems to the Commission on International
Commodity Trade which, at its sixth session in May
1958, will prepare a report for consideration at the
twenty-sixth session of the Economic and Social Council;
3. Draws the attention of the Economic and Social
Council to the importance of the United Nations assisting in the promotion of international commodity
agreements as an effective means of improving and
stabilizing commodity prices ;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
communicate to the General Assembly, at its thirteenth
session, the conclusions drawn from its action under
this resolution.
730th plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1219 (XII). Financing of economic development

The General Assembly,
In conformity with the determination of the United
Nations, as expressed in its Charter, to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom,
and for these ends, to employ international machinery
for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Conscious of the particular needs of the less developed countries for international aid in achieving accelerated development of their economic and social
infrastructure,
Recalling its resolutions on the establishment of an
international fund for economic development within
the framework of the United Nati')ns and, in particular, reaffirming its unanimously adopted resolutions
724 A (VIII) and 724 B (VIII) of 7 December 1953,
Noting the recommendation of the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 662 B (XXIV) of 31
July 1957,
Recognizing that the United Nations Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance is of proven effectiveness in promoting the economic development of
the less developed countries,
Recognizing _however that neither the Expanded Programme nor other existing programmes of the United
Nations or the specialized agencies can now meet certain urgent needs which, if met, would advance the
processes of technical, economic and social development
of the less developed countries, and, in particular,
would facilitate new capital investments of all types
-private and public, national and international-by
creating conditions which would make such investments
either feasible or more effective,
Convinced that a rapidly achieved enlargement in the
financial resources and scope of technical assistance
rendered by the United Nations and the specialized
agencies to the less developed countries would constitute a constructive advance in United Nations assistance and would be of immediate significance in
accelerating their economic development,

15

Recognizing that, while long-term pledges are desirable, some Governments are unable to make financial
commitments except with the approval of their legislatures and on an annual basis,

I
Commends the Ad Hoe Committee on the Question
of the Establishment of a Special United Nations
Fund for Economic Development for the work embodied in its final7 and supplementary8 reports prepared in accordance with General Assembly resolutions
923 (X) of 9 December 1955 and 1030 (XI) of 26
February 1957;

II
1. Decides that, subject to the conditions prescribed
hereunder, there shall be established as an expansion of
the existing technical assistance and development activities of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies a separate Special Fund which would provide
systematic and sustained assistance in fields essential
to the integrated technical, economic and social development of the less developed countries,
2. Decides further that, in view of the resources
prospectively available at this time, which are not likely
to exceed $100 million annually, the operations of the
Special Fund shall be directed towards enlarging the
scope of the United Nations programmes of technical
assistance so as to include special projects in certain
basic fields to be defined by the Preparatory Committee
provided for in paragraph 4 below, for example, intensive surveys of water, mineral and potential power
resources, the establishment-including staffing and
equipping-of training institutes in public administration, statistics and technology, and of agricultural and
industrial research and productivity centres;
3. Considers that while, without impairing the separate identity of the Special Fund, the fullest possible
use should be made of the existing machinery of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies-including the
existing international financial institutions-and the
Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, the
Special Fund will require some new administrative and
operational machinery ;
4. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee
composed of representatives of sixteen Governments
to do the following, taking into account the principles
set out in the annex to the present resolution and the
views and suggestions forwarded by Governments pursuant to paragraph 7 below:
(a) Define the basic fields of assistance which the
Special Fund should encompass and, within these fields,
the types of projects which should be eligible for assistance;
( b) Define in the light of paragraph 3 above the
administrative and operational machinery to be recommended for the Special Fund, including such changes
as may be required in the present legislation and procedures of the Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance ;
( c) Ascertain the extent to which Governments
would be willing to contribute to the Special Fund;
5. Invites the President of the General Assembly
to appoint the members of the Preparatory Committee;
7
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 28, documents A/3579 and Add.1.
• Ibid., document A/3580.
