A /69/PV.98

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

98th plenary meeting

Monday, 6 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Rambally
(Saint Lucia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
(a) Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/69/L.50/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13 and
its sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, and
adopted resolution 69/15 at its 51st plenary meeting, on
14 November 2014. Members will also recall that, under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 13, the Assembly adopted
resolution 69/282 at its 92nd plenary meeting, on 3 June
2015.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.50/Rev.1.
Mr. Malawane (South Africa): I have the honour,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.50/Rev.1, entitled “Follow-up
to the Second International Conference on Nutrition”.

In response to some editorial changes, we would like to
make some revisions to the draft resolution.
First, we would request that, in the first preambular
paragraph, a reference be included to resolution 68/231
of 20 December 2013.
Secondly, with respect to the third preambular
paragraph, we would request that the language of the
draft text revert to that agreed on at the negotiations. It
should read:
“Recognizing with concern the need to eradicate
hunger and prevent all forms of malnutrition
worldwide,
particularly
undernourishment,
stunting, wasting, underweight and overweight in
children under five years of age and anaemia in
women and children, among other micronutrient
deficiencies, as well as reverse the rising trends in
overweight and obesity and reduce the burden of
diet-related non-communicable diseases in all age
groups.”
The last revision relates to the fourth preambular
paragraph, which would read:
“Taking note with appreciation of the role
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the World Health Organization,
the World Food Programme, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development, in collaboration with
other relevant agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system and other international
organizations, to support national Governments,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-20868 (E)

*1520868 *

A/69/PV.98

upon request, in developing, strengthening and
implementing their policies, programmes and plans
to address the multiple challenges of malnutrition.”
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
facilitator of the draft resolution for her efforts to bring
the informal consultations to a speedy conclusion.
I would also like to express my appreciation to all
delegations for their constructive engagement and
to the Secretariat for its assistance. I commend draft
resolution A/69/L.50/Rev.1 to the General Assembly
for adoption by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.50/Rev.1, entitled
“Follow-up to the Second International Conference on
Nutrition”, as orally revised.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Italy has become a sponsor of A/69/L.50/Rev.1.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.50/Rev.1, as orally revised.
Draft resolution A/69/L.50/Rev.1, as orally revised,
was adopted (resolution 69/310).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 13.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries
Draft resolution (A/69/L.78)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and
its sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2014.
I give the floor to the representative of Timor-Leste
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.78.

2/7

06/07/2015

Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): On
behalf of the States members of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) — Angola,
Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and
my own country, Timor-Leste — it is my honour to
introduce, under agenda item 123 (h), draft resolution
A/69/L.78, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries”.
The Community encompasses 240 million people in
nine countries and four continents bound by a common
language and strong cultural ties. Its main goals are to
strengthen diplomatic and political dialogue, enhance
cooperation in all areas and promote the Portuguese
language. The CPLP is committed to reinforcing
cooperation among its member States with other States
and regional and multilateral organizations, such as the
United Nations and its agencies, funds and programmes.
At the tenth Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the CPLP, held in Dili on 23 July 2014,
on the theme “The Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and globalization”, the leaders recognized
the need to strengthen economic and entrepreneurial
cooperation and reiterated their commitment to
reinforcing the human right to adequate food in
national and community policies. At the conference,
Equatorial Guinea was admitted as the ninth member
of the Community, while Georgia, Japan, Namibia and
Turkey were admitted as associate observers.
As stated during the high-level thematic debate on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, the draft
resolution aims at deepening the CPLP’s partnership
with the United Nations in the pursuit of common
objectives, particularly in the sectors of human rights,
health, education, science, culture, food and agriculture,
public administration, science and technology, among
others.
The draft resolution commends Guinea-Bissau’s
return to constitutional order, noting the active
engagement of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for Guinea-Bissau, as well as of
international bilateral and multilateral partners,
in particular the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the CPLP and the
European Union, and recognizing the role played by
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
15-20868

06/07/2015

The draft resolution also welcomes the reactivation
of the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau
as a prime example of cooperation between the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries to the benefit of the people of Guinea-Bissau.
The draft resolution also takes note of the successful
holding of the international conference that took
place in Brussels on 25 March 2015, co-hosted by the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, the European Union
and the United Nations Development Programme, in
which the CPLP also participated.
In conclusion, on behalf of the CPLP member
States, allow me to express our deep appreciation to
the countries that contributed to enriching the text and
those that sponsored the draft resolution. We are very
pleased with such a high number of sponsorship and
support this year, and therefore kindly request that the
draft resolution be adopted without a vote.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.78, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have become sponsors of A/69/L.78:
Canada, Ecuador and the Republic of Moldova.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.78?
Draft resolution A/69/L.78 was adopted (resolution
69/311).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (h) of agenda item 123.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of Peace
Draft resolution (A/69/L.76)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 14 and
adopted resolutions 69/139 and 69/140 at its 72nd
plenary meeting, on 15 December 2014. Members will

A/69/PV.98

also recall that, under the same item, the Assembly
adopted resolution 69/281 at its 91st plenary meeting,
on 28 May 2015.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Spain to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.76.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am greatly pleased to see the second draft resolution
on the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations being
introduced to members of the Assembly for adoption
today.
When in 2004 Spain called on the General Assembly
to promote an alliance of civilizations, it did so in
response to the need for the international community
to undertake decisive steps, both at the institutional
level and that of civil society, to embrace diversity as a
means to make progress, overcome prejudice and work
together to promote tolerance. Since the SecretaryGeneral formally launched it in 2005, when the draft
resolution presented by Spain became a United Nations
initiative under the co-sponsorship of Spain and Turkey,
developments have evolved in a way that I cannot label
as anything but successful. The Group of Friends
includes more than 140 members, drawn from all major
geographic regions and international organizations. Six
forums have been convened. In the international arena,
the initiative has been geared towards concrete actions
in the four main priority areas. At the regional level, the
focus has been on strategies focused on South-Eastern
Europe, the Mediterranean and Latin America, with
regional consultations held in the Asia-Pacific region
and the countries of the League of Arab States.
Two
High
Representatives
appointed
by
the Secretary-General to lead the Alliance of
Civilizations — former President of Portugal
Jorge Sampaio and current High Representative
Al-Nasser — have contributed to its growth through
various biennual projects and a strategic review. I
would like to express deep appreciation to both of
them for the work they have done. But what is most
important is that in the past 10 years the initiative
has served as a platform for dialogue and cooperation
that has connected civil society with local authorities,
universities and much more. The balance now is clearly
positive, but that should not prevent us from continuing
to renew and strengthen this shared tool to more
efficiently respond to the changing threats we face
today. The recent increase in terrorist attacks, violence
with religious motivations and violent extremism
compel us to strengthen the Alliance’s functions and

15-20868 3/7

A/69/PV.98

response. We call on its leadership to respond to the
expectations of all of us who support the initiative.
We hope that draft resolution (A/69/L.76), the
second to be adopted since resolution 64/14, in 2009,
which includes more than 100 sponsors — demonstrating
the full support of the General Assembly for the
initiative — will clearly serve as a working instrument
for us for the next several years. I would like therefore
to highlight some issues on which I hope this draft
resolution will make it possible for the Alliance to
focus its activities.
First, the Alliance has the capacity to serve as
an instrument to promote the prevention of conflict
through mediation and reconciliation. The projects
developed should meet the growing need to prevent
conflicts before they emerge, thereby contributing
positively to resolving conflicts and achieving peace
through mediation programmes that promote dialogue
and respect among different cultures and religions.
Secondly, the increase in radicalization and violent
extremism requires more interinstitutional cooperation
throughout the United Nations system and its agencies
and programmes, including designing policies that
increasingly take into account intercultural and
interreligious aspects.
Thirdly, the greater participation of members of
national parliaments in promoting intercultural respect
and the eradication of the causes of conflicts would be
extremely beneficial.
The Group of Friends and the focal points have
an important role to play in defining strategies and
actions for the Alliance. To that end, we call on the
High Representative to make greater use of them. With
this draft resolution, Spain and Turkey, the other main
sponsor of the initiative, have sought to consolidate the
institutional response of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations while also better defining its mandate
through its four pillars of action: education, youth, the
media and migration.
Finally, we wish to express our deep appreciation
to all delegations that actively participated in the
negotiations, especially the experts, as well as all
those that demonstrated their support through their
sponsorship, We now must move from words to deeds
that favour greater intercultural and interfaith dialogue.

4/7

06/07/2015

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.76, entitled
“United Nations Alliance of Civilizations”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/69/L.76, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Belarus,
Benin, Brunei Darussalam, Cape Verde, Cameroon, the
Czech Republic, Colombia, Egypt, Georgia, Grenada,
Iraq, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Mongolia, Mozambique,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Seychelles, the Sudan, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu
and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.76?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/312).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers who wish to speak in explanation of position,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Nitzan (Israel): Israel joined the consensus
on resolution 69/312, on the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations. We support intercultural dialogue and
cooperation. However, we would like to place on the
record that we do not view the unified Arab strategy
mentioned in the resolution as binding on Israel.
Mr. Sargsyan (Armenia): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to commend the leadership
and professionalism of the President in advancing the
agenda of the General Assembly and to thank him for
this opportunity to share our views under this important
agenda item.
Armenia recognizes the importance of resolution
69/312, entitled “United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations”, and appreciates the efforts of its main

15-20868

06/07/2015

sponsors based on the strong belief that respect and
tolerance regarding the other’s identity, ethnicity,
cultural and religious heritage are among the important
prerequisites for harmonious and peaceful coexistence.
As stipulated in the resolution, the scourges of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in all their forms and manifestations are
deeply troubling. In that context, we are seriously
concerned about the spread of the scourge in our
immediate neighbourhood, where the official
machinery of the State and the Head of State are the
actual instigators of hate speech and vilification of the
other.
In reference to the location for the seventh Global
Forum, envisaged for 2016, we would like to reiterate
our enduring concern about the persistent dissemination
of and incitement to hatred against Armenia and the
Armenian people, including at the highest level, by the
leadership of the host country. Such an environment
of hatred and intolerance does not bode well for the
principles of the Alliance. It also raises significant
concerns about the safety and security of potential
participants from Armenia at the Forum. It raises
questions about the ability of the host country to provide
fair, secure and equal conditions for participation and
to guarantee the integrity of the Forum. We therefore
urge the host country to provide solid guarantees for the
safe, secure and equal participation of Armenia at the
Forum. We also draw the attention of other members of
the Alliance and its secretariat to our concerns.
In conclusion, Armenia hopes that the Alliance will
sustain a continued focus on its proclaimed positive
message of diversity and harmony among civilizations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
I shall now give the floor to members who wish to
make statements following the adoption of resolution
69/312.
Mrs. Arfaoui Harbaoui (Tunisia) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to welcome the role
played by the United Nations in promoting a culture
of peace, tolerance and non-violence. We thank the
delegations of Spain and Turkey for having prepared
resolution 69/312 under agenda item 14, entitled
“Culture of peace”.
We are all promoting peace. It is the aspiration of
all humankind and the very core of the Charter of the

A/69/PV.98

United Nations. It is also important that it be at the heart
of conflict resolution, given the many problems the
world is facing as a result of discord and intolerance of
others, which make it difficult to achieve our common
objectives of peace, progress and stability.
That situation in turn leads to inequality,
discrimination, misunderstanding and radicalism
throughout the world. It is therefore necessary to build
and strengthen the culture of peace throughout the
world, and disseminate tolerance and love of the other
and respect for diversity without regard to religion,
skin color, gender or religious belief. That is absolutely
necessary if we wish to move away from the present
situation of inequality and violence.
The initiative endorses those principles and calls
for coexistence among cultures and civilizations and
the dissemination of the values of tolerance, justice and
equality in order to rise to the challenge of chaos and
violence. That is why Tunisia is pleased to have been
among the first States to adhere to this initiative to
bring peoples and nations together. We also support the
four pillars of the Alliance of Civilizations.
I take this opportunity to reiterate my country’s
respect for the initiative’s principles and promotion of
exchange of knowledge and experiences through young
representatives from North Africa and the Middle East,
Europe and North America. We are very proud to host
a delegation of representatives from Europe and North
America, which will take place in October. We are also
pleased to be a sponsor of the resolution. We look forward
to working tirelessly to strengthen understanding
among cultures, religions and civilizations.
Peace must be one of the strategic elements of the
post-2015 development agenda. We also agree with the
recommendation of the UNESCO Director-General,
and her statement that peace is not simply the absence
of war; peace requires respect for the rights of people,
their dignity and diversity and dialogue among cultures.
To implement all of that, we must work tirelessly to
build a more stable and peaceful world for our children
and future generations.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
the Permanent Missions of Spain and Turkey for
introducing the important resolution 69/312, which
Bangladesh is pleased to have co-sponsored. Bangladesh
believes that all cultures and civilizations contribute
to the enrichment of humankind, thereby recognizing
the importance of respect and understanding for

15-20868 5/7

A/69/PV.98

religious and cultural diversity throughout the world
and encouraging tolerance, respect, dialogue and
cooperation among different cultures, civilizations and
peoples.
Bangladesh attaches great importance to
intercultural and interreligious dialogue in promoting
tolerance and reconciliation in matters related to
peaceful coexistence among cultures, religions and
beliefs. We emphasize the role of the Alliance of
Civilizations in advancing that agenda within the
United Nations system in cooperation with the relevant
agencies of the system, under the respective mandates,
and with Governments and civil society.
The United Nations Alliance of Civilizations is one
of the major United Nations platforms for intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation. It has
connected Governments, lawmakers, local authorities,
civil society organizations, the media and individuals
devoted to promoting understanding across diverse
communities.
In that connection, it is my pleasure to inform the
Assembly that Bangladesh has pioneered the culture of
peace resolution since 1999. Last year we observed its
fifteenth year with the adoption of resolution 69/139,
entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace”, sponsored by over 100
countries and adopted by consensus on 15 December
2014.
Resolution 69/312, on a culture of peace, also
recognizes the role of the Alliance of Civilizations.
The culture of peace resolution notes that all
misunderstandings, violence and words emanate from
a mindset of intolerance and hatred; and therefore it is
worthwhile to create a mindset of tolerance and respect
for all, irrespective of religion, ethnicity or color. Let
us work together in our endeavour to establish a propeople, pro-planet and more inclusive and equitable,
transformed and peaceful world for all — where no one
is left behind.
Mrs. Ibrahimova (Azerbaijan): Azerbaijan joined
the consensus on resolution 69/312, and, on behalf of
my country, I would like to emphasize its importance.
The scope and objectives of the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations incorporates humanistic values in
societies and reiterates that religion and diversity are a
source of peace and coexistence. In this vein, I would
like to thank the main sponsors, Turkey and Spain, for

6/7

06/07/2015

their tireless efforts in addressing important elements
in the resolution.
My country has always offered a place for
religious tolerance. Members of all multi-ethnic
and multi-religious groups live as one family in
Azerbaijan. It is at this historic time that we all are all
facing challenges to the values of the Charter of the
United Nations — when neglecting them threatens the
values of diversity, identity, pluralism and freedom of
religionthat we hold so dear.
Over many decades, the subject of intercultural
dialogue played a significant role in building my
country’s leadership on an international scale. In fact,
it gives me a great sense of pride to highlight that
my country hosted the World Forum on Intercultural
Dialogue last spring and, immediately following it, the
first-ever European Olympic Games, which included
participants from neighbouring countries, despite their
political agendas, antipathy, mono-national views or
negligence of international law.
As a consequence of my country’s dedication to
this subject, Azerbaijan will host the Alliance’s seventh
Global Forum and will welcome the participation of all
countries.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): On behalf of the main sponsors,
I would like to express our sincere gratitude to all
delegations for the consensus adoption of resolution
69/312, on the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations.
We are particularly encouraged by the broad crossregional sponsorship of the resolution. We consider
that that support is for the noble cause that the
Alliance has been standing and working for since its
inception. Countering discrimination, xenophobia
and extremism — our common effort — is now more
important than ever. The resolution also clarifies the
institutional standing of the Alliance, which is of
critical importance for carrying out its tasks.
On this occasion, we would like to express our
heartfelt thanks to all the delegations that actively
participated in the negotiation process and enriched the
text of the milestone resolution through their valuable
contributions. We are confident that, with this renewed
political guidance and support, the Secretariat will
continue pursuing its activities in an effective manner.
The Acting President: I now call on the observer
of the European Union.

15-20868

06/07/2015

A/69/PV.98

Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

reconciliation, is paramount to addressing the current
challenges we face. The resolution stresses the role of
the Group of Friends and focal points. We encourage
the High Representative to hold a continuous dialogue
with both the Group of Friends and the focal points
on strategic priorities, as well as concrete activities,
thereby ensuring the necessary ownership of the
Governments and partners supporting the Alliance.

Let me, at the outset, express our deep appreciation
for the leadership of Spain and Turkey as the main
sponsors of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
as well as the excellent work that they have conducted
as main sponsors of resolution 69/312, which the
Assembly has just adopted.

We also want to acknowledge the work of
UNESCO and the Secretariat in this area, as well as
other initiatives, among them the Anna Lindh EuroMediterranean Foundation for the Dialogue between
Cultures and the King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue. We encourage the Alliance to benefit from
the synergies and complementarity of all actors working
in its remit.

In the past year, we have witnessed a dramatic
increase in radicalization and violent extremism. The
adoption of this resolution comes at a time when the
United Nations, its States Members and the international
community more than ever need to step up efforts in
promoting greater understanding and respect among
civilizations, cultures, religions and beliefs, based on
the human rights of all persons and the prevalence of
the universal values at the heart of the Organization.
The task of the Alliance in promoting its four pillars
of activity — youth, education, media and migration — as
well as the values of conflict prevention, mediation and

The consensual adoption of this resolution is a clear
sign of the importance that Member States attach to the
role of the Alliance and provides the necessary political
guidance to pursue its important work.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

15-20868 7/7
