S/PV.8310

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8310th meeting

Friday, 13 July 2018, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-22199 (E)
*1822199*

S/PV.8310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/691, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the vote.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): First,
I would like to thank our new colleague from Côte
d’Ivoire. We are very excited to have Ambassador
Adom with us and look forward to working with him.
We welcome him.
I take the floor before the vote because we have
reached a critical moment. The people of South Sudan
have endured unimaginable suffering and unspeakable
atrocities. Their leaders have failed them. They are
desperate to get the most basic food, medicine and
shelter, but above all, they just want the violence to
stop. Anyone who has been to South Sudan knows that.
The stories of the victims haunt us. One 14-year-old
girl from Leer county in South Sudan recently put it
like this:
“All the violence I have witnessed is something I
can never forget. How can I forget the sight of an
old man whose throat was slit with a knife before
being set on fire? How can I forget the smell of
those decomposed bodies of old men and children
pecked and eaten by birds? How can I forget those
women who were hanged and died up in the tree?”
This girl is 14-years-old. She will never forget the
atrocities she witnessed, and neither can we.
2/10

13/07/2018

We can do more than just sit here and listen to these
horror stories. We can do more than just express our
sympathy with empty words. We can take action.
Today, the United States has introduced a draft
resolution (S/2018/691) that would impose an arms
embargo and new sanctions against some of the people
responsible for the violence. The goal of the draft
resolution is simple. If we are going to help the people
of South Sudan, we need the violence to stop, and to
stop the violence we need to stop the flow of weapons
that armed groups are using to fight each other and
terrorize the people. We must stop the weapons and stop
the violence. This is a draft resolution that everyone on
the Security Council should support.
Sadly, the idea of an arms embargo for South Sudan
is not a new one. In 2016, the United States proposed
it. We certainly should have imposed the embargo at
that time and probably a lot earlier, but the proposal
failed. We can only imagine how many weapons have
made their way to parties in South Sudan since then and
how many more people have had to die. These are the
weapons that armed groups use to shoot fathers in front
of their wives and children, to hold up convoys of food
aid or to assault women and girls. The Security Council
had an opportunity to help put a stop to this, but we
failed. We carry that burden with us.
The United States is determined that we will not
turn our backs on people of South Sudan again. We
have tried everything to achieve a real ceasefire in
South Sudan. We have given the parties many chances
to change their behaviour, and it is impossible to keep
track. We have waited and waited for negotiations to
make a difference. Time passes but the fighting in
South Sudan never stops.
The United Nations recently came out with a report
that looked at the violence in just one state of South
Sudan in the brief period from 16 April to 24 May of this
year. Over those six weeks, the United Nations found
that armed forces had attacked 40 villages; 120 women
and girls were raped or gang-raped; 232 civilians were
killed, including 35 children; 25 people were killed by
hanging; 63 children, elderly persons and people with
disabilities were burned alive. Armed groups in South
Sudan are literally burning people alive and hanging
them from trees. This is barbaric, and again all of this
violence happened over a period of just six weeks in
one state.
18-22199

13/07/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The irony in this context is that all of this fighting
took place after the parties signed the cessation of
hostilities agreement in December. Every few months,
it seems, we see announcements that the parties have
agreed to a new ceasefire. Sometimes they even call
these ceasefires “permanent”. These ceasefires have
never held. The only certainty about a ceasefire in
South Sudan is that the parties will violate them in a
few hours.
So the issue before us today is quite simple. Why
would we possibly want to give the people responsible
for this madness more weapons? Why would we give
the parties more opportunities to attack the people of
South Sudan? How do we explain to the people of South
Sudan that we are willing to let their tormentors get
new weapons? More arms for South Sudan cannot be
the answer.
We have heard the argument that an arms embargo
might undermine the peace process. To be clear, the
United States supports the peace process in South
Sudan. We want nothing more than to see this dialogue
work out. The arms embargo is a measure to protect
civilians and help stop the violence. For negotiations to
work, we must end the cycle of broken promises to stick
to the ceasefire. Peace in South Sudan will not come
by letting the parties get their hands on more weapons.
The opposite is true. Supporting an arms embargo will
show the parties that we are fed up with the delays and
the stalling. It will show our resolve to make life better
for the people of South Sudan.
For too long, the Security Council has failed these
people. We failed to impose an arms embargo years ago
when we could have helped prevent so much suffering.
We have failed to stop the fighting. We have failed to
hold South Sudan’s leaders accountable for the misery
they have caused. But today we can and we must defy
this history. We can come together to show South
Sudan that the era of impunity is over. We can show
the world that the Security Council will live up to its
responsibility to help maintain international peace and
security. Above all, we can send a small signal of hope
to the people of South Sudan. By adopting the draft
resolution, we can stand in solidarity with them and at
long last show that we are able to help.
The United States urges all members of the
Security Council to do what is right for the people of
South Sudan. We urge them to vote in favour of this
draft resolution.

S/PV. 8310

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I want to more formally
welcome my brother the Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire.
We are at a very critical juncture in the peace
process in South Sudan. The High-Level Revitalization
Forum has made notable progress and for the first
time in a long while there is some hope for a possible
breakthrough. The parties have already reached an
agreement on security arrangements and the reports
from Khartoum are indicating that they are closer
than they have ever been to reaching an agreement on
governance issues.
The decision we are going to make today in
connection with sanctions would have very serious
implications for the peace process. That is why the
region and, I might add, the continent are asking for
the situation to be handled with prudence and patience.
Why? It should be handled with prudence and patience
because without them whatever human rights violations
there are today, they could be even worse. Averting the
worst is our objective.
For the Security Council to take such action without
synchronizing its position with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union (AU) will not only be unhelpful, but it will
seriously undermine the peace process and does not
reflect well on the cooperation and partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations, which
all of us strive to see strengthened.
While in no way opposed to punitive measures, it
is the view of the AU and IGAD that now is not the
appropriate time for taking such measures. The IGAD
Council of Ministers has made it clear that pursuing
such a course of action at this stage would not behelpful
at all. That is a matter of judgement, taking into
account the complexities of the situation. The same
view is also reflected by the AU Peace and Security
Council. Lending deaf ears to the opinion of the two
organizations that have invested so much in the peace
process and would be the most affected by its failure
runs roughshod over the principles that underpin the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The cause of peace and the protection
of civilians, which we so much want to see advance,
would have less chance of succeeding if, in the light
of the position being taken by IGAD and the AU, the
Security Council ended up being an outlier and in sharp
disagreement with the two regional organizations. That

18-221993/10

S/PV.8310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

is why we call upon each member of the Council to heed
the calls of the region and cast their vote in a manner
that would enhance the unity of purpose among the
three organizations. After all, it is that unity of purpose
which will break or make the peace process.
Resorting to immediate sanctions at this point
in time would amount to not taking into account the
progress that has been made so far. Under those
circumstances, it would not be surprising if, were
draft resolution S/2018/691 to be adopted, it ended up
confusing the parties for they would find it difficult
to reconcile the action of the Council with the reality
of the peace process. The parties would be absolutely
justified in expecting encouragement from the Council
for the progress made no matter how far they might still
have to go to achieve a breakthrough. But what they
might see is the opposite in what, for them and for those
who follow the South Sudanese peace process closely,
is a paradox. One does not get punished for having
made progress.
We have heard the argument being made that
nothing has changed in the peace process, in that the
parties are simply going through the motions, but what
we have seen lately is quite different. The Council
should indeed be appreciative of what the Presidents
of Uganda and the Sudan did in engaging in a wellcalibrated joint effort to nudge the parties towards
peace, which culminated in a possible scenario whereby
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Machar might be in the
Government together — the former returning to his
position and the latter as the First Vice President. If
that is not progress, then what is? That is why we find it
difficult to vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us (S/2018/691) and why, in our view, other Council
members should not as well. That is the advice both
IGAD and the AU are giving to the Council.
We wish to thank in advance all Council members
who are respectful of the views of regional organizations
and act accordingly. There should be no confusion.
There is a solution that does not reflect the spirit and
principle that should underpin the cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union. What is
equally troubling is that this proposed course of action
does not meet the consensus of Council members. A
divided Council in this issue, we all know, will not be
helpful to the peace process because it will send the
wrong message to the parties, the result of which will
be a loss of the Council’s credibility and therefore its
4/10

13/07/2018

leverage. That is what we have been trying to avoid, but
to no avail.
Before concluding, I must express appreciation to
our colleagues, representatives of the three African
States members of the Council, for all the efforts we
made together to support the position of the AU on this
critical matter.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea fears
that today is a sad day for the relationship between
the Organization and the African continent. The text
that has been proposed and draft resolution S/2018/691,
which will be voted on, is a step backwards in the
many efforts that are being made on both sides to build
a sound relationship based on mutual trust and on the
pursuit of common goals.
Our position is well known. The Council’s
imposition of sanctions at this time would involve
not just a counterproductive interference in the
undeniable positive progress that has been made
on the ground, but also reflect a clear lack of
consideration for the States and regional organizations
involved. We deeply regret that our colleagues in the
Council have decided to take that course of action.
Equatorial Guinea believes that the message that
should go out from this Chamber is one of recognition,
support and encouragement for the efforts that both the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, in particular President Al-Bashir of the
Sudan and President Museveni of Uganda, have been
making and which, in recent weeks, have produced
tangible results.
Clearly, one cannot expect the signed agreements
to change the situation radically overnight. That would
be naive, and I do not believe that anyone sitting in this
Chamber is naive. It takes time for the compromises
reached to take effect and all the more so in a conflict
like this one, in South Sudan, that involves many
actors and different situations. Time — that is what we
have been asking for — a little more time. A prudent
time frame is required to evaluate and monitor the
implementation and viability of those agreements and,
where necessary, to take appropriate action against
those who breach them or obstruct peace. Meanwhile,
none of us has the moral authority or legitimacy to rule
out such efforts a priori.
We all agree that the parties must be pressured to
establish a secure and lasting peace in South Sudan,
18-22199

13/07/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

but we urge that such pressure be exerted, as it is now,
by regional actors, with the support and faith of the
Council, and without any lack of consideration or the
disregard that is being shown. However, like every
other member of the Council, we wish the best for the
young people of South Sudan who have already suffered
more than enough. Similarly, we express our support
for the country’s leaders so that they can rise to the
occasion and take advantage of this new opportunity
to achieve peace. For that reason, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea will abstain in the voting on draft
resolution S/2018/691 so as provide the political actors
and institutions of the region with the opportunity to
consolidate their efforts under way to achieve definitive
peace in South Sudan.
The President: I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Côte d’Ivoire, France, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru,
Poland, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States
of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received
9 votes in favour and 6 abstentions. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 2428 (2018).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes adoption of resolution 2428 (2018), which
renews the sanctions regime on South Sudan for one
year. France nevertheless listened attentively to our
colleagues from Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea,
and shares their desire for the Security Council to
remain united in supporting the political process and
initiatives led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and African Union.
The resolution is not intended to undermine
negotiations conducted by IGAD. Its goal is to protect
civilian populations. It enables the establishment of an
arms embargo that France has been urgently calling

S/PV. 8310

for several years. By limiting the flow of weapons
towards South Sudan, the arms embargo is one of the
most important measures that the Council can adopt
to protect South Sudanese civilians. Furthermore, by
adopting individual sanctions against two important
military leaders from both sides, the Security Council
is sending the clear message that impunity for acts of
violence against civilians and violations of the most
basic human rights and international humanitarian
law can no longer be tolerated. Those who seek to
prolong the conflict in contempt of their our own fellow
citizens must be made aware that they will suffer the
consequences of their actions.
The situation in South Sudan will improve in
concrete terms only when the conflict is ended. France
is encouraged by recent progress in the political process.
France welcomes the commitment of IGAD and calls
on the South Sudanese parties to finalize an agreement
as soon as possible so that weapons are laid down once
and for all and that the South Sudanese people can
finally return to living their lives in the peace to which
they aspire. Members may rest assured of France’s
determined commitment to that end.
Lastly, let me conclude by welcoming our
new colleague from Côte d’Ivoire, His Excellency
Mr. Kacou Houadja Léon Adom. It gives me great
pleasure to welcome him here. Let me take this
opportunity to commend the outstanding work of His
Excellency Mr. Djédjé, who successfully carried out his
interim duties following the passing of Bernard TanohBoutchoue, who is sadly missed but whose memory is
very much alive for us all and will remain a source of
inspiration for the Council and myself — and whom I
will never forget.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Poland voted in favour of
resolution 2428 (2018), and we regret that we were
unable to reach a consensus on that important text.
We supported the resolution because we are appalled
by the continuing violence in South Sudan, and we
believe that it is the Security Council’s responsibility to
introduce adequate measures within its capacity with
a view to scaling down and preventing the ongoing
human tragedy in South Sudan.
Poland appreciates the regional efforts of African
leaders and their leadership of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development in elaborating a viable
political solution to the conflict and ending civil war in
South Sudan. We see the measures adopted today by the

18-221995/10

S/PV.8310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

13/07/2018

security Council as an important means to advance the
peace process. We believe that stopping the uncontrolled
flow of arms to the territory of South Sudan will result
in a decrease in the number of clashes on the ground
and violations of the ceasefire, but more important, it
will significantly reduce violence and brutality against
civilians. It is the resolution’s key objective to protect
civilians. In its previous resolutions, the Council has
made it clear that the fighting in South Sudan must
stop and that there will be consequences for those who
violate the ceasefire and obstruct the peace process.
We welcome the fact that today the Security Council
decided to put its words into actions.

Finally, we welcome the strength of the reference in
the resolution to the link between conflict and hunger.
It is a particular point of concern for the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, and it is pertinent to the situation in South
Sudan. We thank the penholder for her initiative, and
the Council has given a very clear signal. It is now high
time for the parties involved to achieve a sustained,
peaceful political solution.

Lastly, let me extend my delegation’s very warm
welcome to the new Permanent Representative of Côte
d’Ivoire, and we look forward to working with him and
with his excellent team very closely.

The South Sudan political process is currently
at a crucial stage. With the mediation efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union (AU), Ethiopia, the Sudan, Uganda
and other regional organizations and countries, the
South Sudan political process has recently made positive
and recognized progress, clearly demonstrating that all
the parties in South Sudan have the will to pursue peace
and resolve issues through political channels.

Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I too would like
to welcome our new colleague from Côte d’Ivoire, and
we look forward to working with him very closely.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2428 (2018), especially the
measures contained therein. The Netherlands has
repeatedly called in the Council for the imposition of
an arms embargo. That imposition underscores the
fact that there is no military solution to the conflict.
We especially welcome the sanctions imposed against
two individuals. Their responsibility for gross human
rights violations has been well documented. Today
the Security Council is sending a clear message that
the international community no longer tolerates the
gross human rights violations in South Sudan, while
underscoring the need to achieve tangible results in the
ongoing political negotiations.
The Security Council will continue to monitor the
situation in South Sudan and stands ready to act further
if necessary. We very much welcome the insertion
of specific designation criteria for sexual violence
in resolution 2428 (2018). Through that extra set of
references the Security Council acknowledges the
systematic, structural and widespread nature of sexual
violence in South Sudan. The reports on South Sudan
bear witness to the horrific nature of those crimes time
and time again, and if anyone can stomach it, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights report of earlier this week is a clear indication
of that. Today the Council is sending a signal that this
violence has to stop. The impunity must end.
6/10

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire, His Excellency
Ambassador Adom, to the Council in his new capacity. I
look forward to our fruitful cooperation in the Council.

In today’s context, the Security Council must play
its constructive role to the full and continue to lend
all possible support to the mediation efforts of IGAD,
the AU and the countries of the region. While they
are working hard, we must continue to maintain our
confidence and patience so as to help to facilitate the
political process in South Sudan.
China has always maintained that sanctions should
serve only as a means, not an end in themselves. Any
measures taken by the Council should be conducive
to ensuring the political settlement of relevant issues,
not the reverse. The AU and IGAD have indicated on
several recent occasions that it is neither advisable nor
helpful to impose additional sanctions on South Sudan.
The Security Council must listen to the legitimate
aspirations of regional organizations and countries in
Africa and take a cautious stance when it comes to
imposing sanctions.
We have noted the fact that the penholders made
certain improvements to resolution 2428 (2018) at the
joint request of China and some other Council members.
Now, however, the resolution still insists on imposing
sanctions on South Sudan, including an arms embargo,
that could complicate the situation and work against the
advancement of the peace process. China abstained in
the voting on the resolution for these reasons.
18-22199

13/07/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would like to reiterate that the Chinese Government
has consistently supported the peace process in South
Sudan and has provided support to the country’s efforts
to restore national stability and development. Together
with the rest of the international community, China
stands ready to fully support the efforts to pursue peace
being made by South Sudan, regional organizations and
other countries of the region, and to make a constructive
contribution to achieving lasting peace and stability in
South Sudan and the African continent.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming the new Ambassador of
Côte d’Ivoire and assuring him of our full support in
his endeavours.
Bolivia regrets that the Security Council has not
been able to maintain unity on this issue just when South
Sudan needs it most. The gravity of the situation in the
country is clear, and we deeply regret the suffering of
the South Sudanese people.
Our decision to abstain in the voting on resolution
2428 (2018) is based on various elements that have gone
unheeded regarding the imposition of an arms embargo
and sanctions on the persons identified in annex 1 to the
resolution. Bolivia believes that the only way to achieve
stable and lasting peace in South Sudan is through a
serious, inclusive and carefully constructed political
process between the parties to the conflict and above all
with the support of the region. That is exactly what the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union have been developing over the
past year and that could be seriously compromised by
today’s decision.
We regret that the express request of IGAD, the
African Union, Uganda, the Sudan and Ethiopia
that punitive action not be taken at this stage of the
negotiations was not heeded, considering that positive
progress has been made in recent weeks in the dialogue
between the country’s top leaders, who had not met
in person for more than two years. The region has
also set aside divisions that seemed irreconcilable in
order to provide unanimous support to South Sudan.
We believe that the best decision would have been to
support the region until the conclusion of the ongoing
talks, particularly since they are at a crucial stage, and
to consider appropriate measures against those not
demonstrating the necessary willingness to commit
only if the parties failed to reach a genuine commitment.

S/PV. 8310

We must not underestimate the capacity of the region
to resolve its conflicts, since they more than anyone
want to achieve peace and stability. Unfortunately, we
once again find ourselves making decisions over the
recommendations of the region. We insist that such
measures should be agreed on in principle with the
relevant regional organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the
tireless work of the members of IGAD, the African
Union and especially Uganda, the Sudan and Ethiopia,
which have been essential stakeholders in mediating
the reconciliation and agreement processes in their
region, and with whom we are grateful to work on a
daily basis in the Council. We are witnesses to their
efforts and commitment to peace, and we reiterate our
unconditional support for the work they are doing for
their region.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the voting
on resolution 2428 (2018), on extending the sanctions
on South Sudan. We are not trying to whitewash the
situation in the country. We know that various parties
continue to violate the ceasefire regime there and that
the humanitarian situation is still serious. However, it is
also clear that there has been some positive movement in
the settlement process. Besides the meetings that have
already taken place between the South Sudanese leaders
Salva Kiir Mayardit and Riek Machar, it includes the
signing on 27 June of the Khartoum Declaration and the
plans made for holding the long-awaited negotiations in
Nairobi in the very near future. In less than a month,
thanks entirely to the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the format set up
for contact between South Sudan’s politicians has been
transformed into a full-on negotiation platform before
our eyes. We agree with our Ethiopian colleague when
he said, “If that is not progress, then what is?” Can
those who genuinely care about seeing peace come to
this long-suffering country really believe otherwise?
In the circumstances, it would make sense to support
the approach of the African Union — the importance of
strengthening our partnership with which we will be
discussing in the Security Council next week — as well
as to express our solidarity with the mediation efforts
of IGAD, whose members, as we know, have declared
unequivocally that expanding the sanctions pressure
on South Sudan is highly inopportune. We regret
that today our Council has taken this disappointing
approach. Instead of listening to the regional position,

18-221997/10

S/PV.8310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

13/07/2018

our colleagues mindlessly brandished the sanctions
stick. We believe firmly that imposing sanctions on
active participants in the political process or members
of the Government is counterproductive. Nor will an
arms embargo have a positive effect on the political
settlement process. To hear our American colleagues,
one might conclude that the embargo is a panacea for
almost all ills.

My delegation believes that despite today’s adoption
of resolution 2428 (2018), it is critically important to
ensure that the Council remains united in its support
for the efforts of IGAD and the African Union to
achieve peace and stability in South Sudan. We must all
stand up for a greater role for regional organizations in
the Security Council’s work and support them in their
efforts to achieve progress.

We all know perfectly well that South Sudan is
indeed flooded with weapons, but attempts to restrict
the supply should not be directed only at Government
forces. The experience of the neighbouring countries
in the region shows that it is not embargoes that bring
about an end to armed violence but systematic efforts
to reform security structures, the implementation of
weapons-collection programmes from the people, and
the disarming and demobilizing of combatants.

We also urge the Government and opposition in
South Sudan to work proactively and genuinely to
implement the agreement and continue their inclusive
and constructive peace talks to resolve the outstanding
issues relating to governance and security arrangements.
As an observer member of the African Union, we want
to express our solidarity with the position expressed by
the representatives of Ethiopia and Equatorial Guinea.

Lastly, I should not omit to say that we have
increasing questions about the working methods of the
penholders, thanks to whose efforts the deep split in
the Council over the South Sudan dossier continues.
Such actions can hardly contribute to strengthening
the authority of the Council or of the United Nations
generally, a subject that those who supported today’s
resolution claim to care so much about. As we can see,
their actions prove the opposite. As for Russia, we did
not support and will not support a policy of imposing
decisions on independent countries and regions that suit
forces outside the region for domestic political or other
reasons. It is to be hoped that despite today’s destructive
step, the fragile process of establishing a constructive
dialogue between the parties in South Sudan will not
be undermined, and that IGAD’s mediation efforts
will continue.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation abstained
in the voting on resolution 2428 (2018) because it does
not reflect the positions and concerns of the countries
of the region and the relevant regional organizations,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the African Union, with regard to the
timing of these actions. We want to point out that on
30 June the IGAD Council of Ministers decided that
it was not helpful to pursue punitive measures at this
stage. We highly commend the concerted efforts of the
United Nations, the African Union and IGAD, as well
as the mediation efforts of the countries of the region
that helped to secure the Khartoum Declaration.
8/10

Lastly, we would also like to welcome the new
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and to
cordially wish him every success in all his endeavours.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to join speakers before me in welcoming the
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire and wishing
him every success in his work.
At the outset, we thank all the delegations of
Member States for their flexibility during the conduct
of the negotiations on resolution 2428 (2018), and we
thank the United States delegation for cooperating in
the negotiations on the draft text. We also welcome
the important and positive developments and the
efforts made by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to achieve a comprehensive
political settlement. In that regard, we want to stress
our full support for those efforts, while we also share
the serious concern of other member States about the
continuing conflict in South Sudan and its disastrous
consequences for the civilian population and for peace
and stability in the region.
The twenty-first report of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism has confirmed the existence of continuing
severe violations of the ceasefire that are worrying for
all of us. But we believe in the importance and necessity
of the mediation efforts of IGAD and the African Union
countries, which should continue with the support of
the international community and the Security Council.
African crises first and foremost demand African
solutions if they are to achieve permanent settlements.
I believe that the technical extension in resolution
18-22199

13/07/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

2418 (2018), the previous one on this topic, represents
an opportunity to give the negotiations more time
for achieving progress, while highlighting the tools
that the Charter of the United Nations provides to
the Security Council. The annex to today’s resolution
accords with the role of those who have been positively
involved in the political process. We hope that today’s
resolution represents an opportunity that can enable the
various parties in South Sudan to pursue their talks in
order to achieve a comprehensive, just and appropriate
settlement that puts an end to the conflict and stops the
flow of more arms into the country so as to preserve
people’s lives, support peace and save South Sudan
from the destructive cycle of war.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to join
my colleagues in welcoming our new colleague from
Côte d’Ivoire. We look forward to working with him
and would like to thank Ambassador Alcide Djédjé for
his excellent cooperation in the interim.
We voted in favour of resolution 2428 (2018), but
listening to some of the explanations of vote around the
Chamber today, an outside observer could have been
forgiven for thinking that the resolution was about
the peace process. It is not. It is a resolution designed
to protect the people of South Sudan. It imposes a
long-needed arms embargo that will limit the flow
of weapons that fuel the conflict in South Sudan, as
well as further targeted sanctions on two individuals
whose acts have expanded and extended the conflict
and caused immeasurable suffering to the people of
South Sudan. Both targets are military officials, and
there is decisive evidence of responsibility on their
part for human rights abuses. It would be a very sad
commentary on the prospects for peace if those two
measures designed to help the people of South Sudan
were allowed to get in the way of and complicate the
peace process. One cannot and does not advance peace
by ignoring atrocities, and in my experience, if people
are looking for a reason to abandon a peace process,
they will find one, regardless of whether the Council
takes action to protect the people of that country or not.
I would like to make it very clear that we expect
the peace process to continue. We support the efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and other regional organizations to that
end, and we urge all leaders in South Sudan to work
with them to advance the peace process.

S/PV. 8310

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.
For millions of people in South Sudan, the long
wait for their leaders to put an end to the fighting is
not over. Despite the commendable efforts of the region
to broker an agreement, the parties have not yet made
the necessary compromises, and the fighting continues.
Indeed, the ongoing efforts to unilaterally extend the
mandates of Salva Kiir and the transitional Parliament
raises questions as to whether participation in the
negotiations is taking place in good faith.
The Secretary-General, in his report (S/2018/609)
following resolution 2418 (2018), has confirmed that
the fighting has not ceased. In addition, the recent joint
report by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as reports from the Panel of
Experts on South Sudan, contain harrowing accounts of
violence against civilians, including widespread sexual
and gender-based violence. The situation for women and
girls is extremely difficult. This must come to an end.
Along with other Council members, we share a
deep sense of frustration. The Council has stated its
determination to ensure that the parties abide by their
commitments, obligations and responsibilities. As
the violence and mass atrocities continue, in flagrant
disregard of international law and in violation of agreed
ceasefires, the international community cannot stand
idly by.
It is clear that the last thing needed in South Sudan
at this moment is more weapons. Indeed, in the light
of the commitments to a ceasefire made in Khartoum,
which we welcome, the parties should have no need
for them. Instead, all efforts and resources should be
urgently directed at responding to the dire humanitarian
situation. Doing so would help alleviate the suffering of
the 7 million South Sudanese in need of humanitarian
assistance. Unhindered humanitarian access must
be ensured.
As the Emergency Relief Coordinator said in May,
“Ending violence is the first and single most important
thing needed to alleviate human suffering”.
Additional weapons should not be able to reach
parties that seem set on prolonging the conflict. We
therefore support the imposition of a United Nations
arms embargo on South Sudan, and it is for this reason

18-221999/10

S/PV.8310

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

that we voted in favour of resolution 2428 (2018),
adopted today.
A regionally brokered and inclusive political
solution remains the only viable means of achieving
peace. We commend the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the wider region for their efforts
towards such a political solution. This process must
continue with vigour, and the Council must carefully
consider how to best support the regional effort in order
to also make a real difference on the ground, including
by striking the right balance between encouragement
and credible pressure. But most importantly,
genuine goodwill and compromise must be shown
by the countries’ leaders, putting the interests of the
people first.
The Council should stand ready to consider
further targeted measures against individuals who
incite violence or seek to derail the peace process. At
the same time, we should also be ready to respond to
positive developments.
To give the peace effort the best possible prospects
for success, it is imperative that, as we move forward
now, we stand unified and speak with one voice to
the parties.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Mr. President, let me at
the outset congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month.
I would like to thank the members of the Council
that abstained in the voting on resolution 2428 (2018),

10/10

13/07/2018

which included the representatives of Ethiopia and of
Equatorial Guinea. They are arguing that the resolution
is not helpful and will undermine peace. How does it
undermine peace? It is not the resolution itself, but
the adoption of a resolution at a time when the peace
process is making positive advances will actually now
tilt that balance for those parties that are negotiating.
The opposition will think that the Security Council is
on their side, so why should they continue to negotiate
peace? That is why this resolution is unfortunate.
But my delegation really considers this resolution
as an issue not between the Security Council and South
Sudan, but between the Council, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African Union
and the continent. We keep hearing in the Council from
time to time about a slap in the face. If there is a slap in
the face, I think that this resolution is a slap in the face
of those organizations that are trying to bring peace to
South Sudan and Khartoum even as we speak.
We would like to commend IGAD and the African
Union, and in particular President Omer Al-Bashir,
President Yoweri Museveni and the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, Mr. Abiy Ahmed, for actually switching and
coming up with a different approach that appears to
be succeeding in bringing peace to South Sudan. The
resolution, as we have said, will not help, but IGAD and
South Sudan are still committed. We will seek peace
within the region, within IGAD and within the African
Union, and we hope that in the next few days there will
be more positive news in that regard.
Again, I would like to thank those members that
abstained, and we look forward to better news coming
from Khartoum and South Sudan in the near future.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

18-22199
