A /67/PV.69

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

69th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 26 March 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kanda (Ghana),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Zillur
Rahman, President of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh
The Acting President: Before we proceed to the
items on our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute
to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Zillur Rahman,
President of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, who
passed away on 20 March 2013.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
to convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Bangladesh and to the bereaved family of His
Excellency Mr. Zillur Rahman.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Zillur Rahman.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to His
Excelelncy Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I am honoured to be here
to pay tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Zillur
Rahman, who served as President of Bangladesh since
2009. He was one of Bangladesh’s most respected
statesmen, with over 50 years of dedicated service to the

country and its people. He was elected as the fifteenth
President in 2009 and made important contributions
to the country’s democratic transition throughout his
political life. I share the sadness of his bereaved family
and the Government and the people of Bangladesh.
My heart also goes out to the families who lost loved
ones, homes and livelihoods as a result of the tornado
that struck the Brahmanbaria district this past Friday.
That is one more reminder of the vulnerability of the
people of Bangladesh to climate change, a vulnerability
we all increasingly share.
However, despite such sad news, the people of
Bangladesh have many reasons to feel positive about
their future, and the late President can rest proud in the
knowledge that his country has advanced dramatically
since independence, 38 years ago. Bangladesh is
setting an example in building resilience and disaster
preparedness. It is a leader on sustainable development
and in seeing great progress in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals.
More and more boys and girls are attending school.
The maternal and child mortality rate is dropping.
The country is strengthening social protection and
improving public services, including sanitation and
fresh water. Bangladesh has long been a pioneer in
microcredit, and its economy is thriving. As a result,
Bangladesh is on track to graduate from the ranks of
the least developed countries.
Bangladesh is also a leader in women’s
empowerment. I am particularly proud of the efforts
of the Bangladeshi women police officers who serve

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-27079 (E)

*1327079*

A/67/PV.69

with United Nations peacekeeping missions. They
show the women and men in the countries where they
serve that there is nothing that a woman cannot do.
Women’s empowerment is a top priority for me. The
women of Bangladesh, from its Prime Minister, Her
Excellency Sheikh Hasina, to its police officers, are in
the vanguard.
Of course, Bangladesh continues to face serious
challenges. Population growth, inequality, rising food
and energy prices and the need to create decent jobs
for young people will all continue to test the country.
So, too, will the challenges of democracy and the
reconciliation, healing and justice related to the struggle
for independence.
President Rahman believed in independence for
Bangladesh. He worked for that and was one of the
country’s leading political figures. His reward in his
final years was the presidency — an acknowledgement
of a lifetime of dedication. Today, we mourn his loss
but take comfort in the fact that the country that he
helped to found is growing stronger by the day.
The Acting President: I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chad,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I speak on
behalf of the African Group at this solemn event of the
General Assembly to pay tribute to the vivid memory
of His Excellency Mr. Zillur Rahman, President of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh, who has just departed
from us. The African Group honours the memory of
a person who, with courage and self-sacrifice, made
an invaluable contribution to the democratization and
the economic and social development of his country
throughout his exemplary political life.
On this solemn occasion, the African Group,
through my modest person, offers its deep condolences
to the family of the late President Rahman, as well as to
the Government and the people of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh on the great loss. The Group also
expresses its sympathy during these days of sadness
and grief that they are experiencing. May the soul of
the deceased rest in peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States.

2

Mr. Laram (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of the Asia-Pacific Group, allow me to extend our
sincere condolences on the passing of the President of
Bangladesh, Mr. Mohammad Zillur Rahman. I would
also like to express our sorrow to his bereaved family
and to the Government and the people of the Republic
of Bangladesh. Our heartfelt sympathy also goes to His
Excellency Ambassador Mr. Abdul Momen, Permanent
Representative of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
to the United Nations, and to his staff. We hope that
Allah may give them strength after the tragic loss.
The late President was a leader of strong principles
and devotion. His commitment to moving his country
forward and to improving the living standards of his
fellow citizens manifested itself since he was a student.
His first steps in serving his country occurred in 1952,
when he played a vital role in the language movement.
His political commitment became more apparent when
he participated in the 1971 liberation war.
When he joined the Awami League, he already had
a vision of the role that his country should play at the
regional and international levels. From the time that he
was elected a Member of Parliament in 1973, and later
as President of Bangladesh in 2009, he showed a strong
resolve to foster equality among his fellow citizens
and to promote the principles of democracy and social
justice.
His track record shows how keen he was to improve
the living conditions of the have-nots among his own
people and to promote the culture of solidarity among
the various strata of Bengali society. To achieve those
lofty goals, he set out to deal with a number of pressing
issues, such as population growth, food shortage,
sustainable development, the fight against poverty and
the empowerment of women.
During his political career, Bangladesh became
a Member of the United Nations, the Non–Aligned
Movement and the Group of 77 and China. Thanks to
his vision and leadership, Bangladesh enjoyed good
relations with its neighbouring countries and increased
its cooperation with South Asia and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Moreover, his strong commitment to promoting
international peace and security turned his country
into one of the leading nations that play a vital role
in the various United Nations peacekeeping missions.
As such, Bangladesh has had a leading role in

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Rwanda, Mozambique and Kosovo.

transition throughout his political life. We support such
an appraisal.

What makes the late President’s trajectory a source
of inspiration for generations to come in his country
and elsewhere is the fact that the hardship that he
faced during different periods of his life did not affect
his resolve to steer his country towards prosperity
and progress and to it taking its rightful place in the
international community. His life was not without
difficulties and sorrow. He was jailed twice during his
struggle and suffered a great loss when his wife and
fellow combatant, Mrs. Ivy Rahman, was murdered in
2004.

It is an irrevocable loss for the country of Bangladesh
and for its people. His Excellency Mr. Mohammad
Zillur Rahman will be remembered in his homeland
and abroad. May he rest in peace.

The Asia-Pacific Group reiterates its deep sorrow
on the loss of a visionary man, whose wisdom and
leadership will be missed and remembered.
We wish the people of Bangladesh well in the future
and reaffirm the Asia-Pacific Group’s commitment to
working in close cooperation with his successor. May
he rest in peace.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States.
Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): On behalf of
the Eastern European Group, allow me to convey our
deepest and heartfelt condolences to the grieving family
of His Excellency Mr. Mohammed Zillur Rahman,
to the Acting President of the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh and to the Government and the people of
Bangladesh on the passing away of President Rahman.
The late President was regarded as a respected
political figure of Bangladesh who gained the respect of
the political forces inside his country and outside alike.
He was one of the veteran organizers of the creation
of Bangladesh from 1971 and the key personality in
defending and consolidating the country’s democratic
evolution.
Thanks to his dedication and loyalty to the progress
of his country, he succeeded in improving the welfare of
citizens and in increasing their quality of life, including
by strongly promoting regional economic integration in
South Asia. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon recognized
the contribution of the late President Rahman, saying on
the day that the leader of Bangladesh passed away that
the late President Mohammad Zillur Rahman had made
important contributions to the country’s democratic

13-27079

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Lucia, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Ms. Louis (Saint Lucia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Latin American
and Caribbean Group to pay tribute to the memory of
His Excellency Mr. Zillur Rahman, the late President
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. We honour a
man who was widely revered and hardly reviled, who
rose from a mere member to the highest office of the
State and who participated actively in the watersheds
in Bangladesh’s political history. As a career politician,
he was eminently equipped to be part of a process that
consistently emphasized the primacy of democratic
order in the country. He embodied an unyielding
dedication to the people of Bangladesh. Although
he endured trials and challenges during his long and
distinguished public service, he always overcame them
and emerged even more determined to uphold the cause
of the masses.
President Zillur Rahman was born of a generation
whose resolute allegiance to democracy and its ideals
inspired a nation to fight a liberation war in 1971.
Forty-two years to the day, we pay homage to the man
who was an active participant in the establishment of
his country as an independent nation. He is survived
by his children, his legacy, the dignity that he brought
to politics, his steady compassion and his unflinching
courage. His was always the spirit of a determined
fighter for democracy. May that spirit endure in the
people of Bangladesh as an indelible honour to a
patriotic statesman.
The States members of the Latin American and
Caribbean Group offer their sympathies to the family of
the late President Rahman and mourn with the people
of Bangladesh during this sad time.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Taalas (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Western European and other States Group.

3

A/67/PV.69

I would like to convey our deepest condolences to the
people and the Government of the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh on the sad passing away of their Head
of State, His Excellency President Mohammad Zillur
Rahman.
President Rahman had a long and highly regarded
career in Bangladesh politics, earning recognition and
respect at home and beyond the country’s borders.
He was already active during Bangladesh’s path to
independence. Later on, Mr. Rahman’s engagement
was essential in shaping the country’s development
towards democracy.
Mr. Rahman was an avid supporter of regional
economic integration in South Asia. Due to his and his
colleagues’ devotion and hard work, Bangladesh can
today offer its citizens improved standards of living
and a brighter outlook for the future. Bangladesh also
stands strong internationally and remains one of the
mainstays of United Nations peacekeeping globally.
Our thoughts and sympathies are with the family
and friends of the late President Rahman. We are
confident that the people and the Government of
Bangladesh will overcome the loss and work together
to advance his vision.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States, who will speak on
behalf of the host country.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the United States
Government. We offer our condolences to the people
and Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
on the passing of His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Zillur
Rahman, the late President of Bangladesh.
Today, Bangladesh marks the forty-second
anniversary of its independence. It is therefore all
the more proper, fitting and poignant that we gather
here today to pay tribute to President Rahman, who
dedicated his life to the nation that he loved. President
Rahman’s service to his country and his dedication to
strengthening Bangladesh’s democracystretch back to
the country’s struggle for independence, when he was
a student and political activist. That struggle continued
for decades, up to and including his term as President.
Today, on a day that unites all Bangladeshis,
we honour President Rahman and offer our sincere
sympathies to his family and the Bangladeshi people
during this time of sadness.

4

Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): As a member of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the
delegation of Sri Lanka, on behalf of its Government and
its people, wishes to express its deepest condolences to
the family and to the people and the Government of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh on the passing away of
the late President Mohammad Zillur Rahman.
Former President Rahman became prominent in the
politics of the Bengali language movement and was a
heroic actor in Bangladesh’s liberation struggle. Every
country produces a great leader at its most critical
time. President Rahman was such a leader. He was
instrumental in the creation of the Awami League party.
As an active member of each of those movements, he
contributed not only to the independence of Bangladesh
but also to charting its new journey as an independent
and democratic State. He was sent to jail in postindependence Bangladesh.
His vast reservoir of experience made him an astute
politician and a party stalwart but, more important, a
statesmen who was genuinely respected by his peers
across the political spectrum. Deeply imbued with
democratic ideals and values, he enriched the Awami
League party.
The late President Rahman’s stellar leadership
qualities endeared him to the public. He was also
actively involved in social development activities and
environmental conservation. He remained committed
to democratic politics despite losing his wife, a fellow
Awami League member, to a terrorist attack in 2004.
His passing away leaves a void not only in the Awami
league party but also in Bangladesh’s national political
arena.
South Asia, too, has lost a leading statesman.
However, we hope that his fine legacy will continue to
inspire and serve the people of Bangladesh in the years
to come.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Today is 26 March,
our Independence Day. On this very day in 1971, when
the enemy forces let loose a genocide, we started a life
of death and destruction, a life of hope and sorrows.
However, after nine months of bloody war in which
3 million sacrificed their sacred lives and 10 million
were forced to take shelter in the neighbouring country,
India, after the carnage of the chastity of thousands
of courageous females, and after the total eclipse of
the economy and the destruction of the development
sector of the country, we achieved our independence.

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

It is pathetic that two days prior to our victory, our
intellectuals were rounded up and were all butchered
blindfolded. Throughout the history of Bangladesh,
therefore, our Independence Day is the observance
of joy and sorrow together. While we rejoice in that
victory, we cry for dear and near ones. No wonder
Shelley very rightly mentioned, “Our sweetest songs
are those that tell of saddest thought”.

11 January 2007, when the future of multiparty
democracy and stability were at stake and when the
nation was is total disarray, Mohammed Zillur Rahman
rose to the occasion and took the lead and played a
critical role in the restoration of democracy. His wisdom,
experience, expertise and political maturity triumphed,
and the nation felt a sigh of relief. No wonder he was
elected President unopposed.

This year, yet another sorrow has impinged on us to
endure and commemorate with the passing away of our
honourable President Mohammed Zillur Rahman, the
most venerated political personality in our country after
the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. We have gathered here today with heavy
hearts to reminisce about his life and achievements. I
sincerely thank the President of the General Assembly,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and representatives of
United Nations States Members for showing respect to
this towering personality of Bangladesh.

The sad news is that Mr. Rahman passed many
valuable years of his life behind bars. He was arrested
during our language movement and during our
anti-military movements in the 1960s. A verdict was
given for 20 years of prison time when he joined the
liberation war, but nothing could shake his strong
conviction. Sadly, his wife, Mrs. Ivy Rahman, President
of the women’s section of the Bangladesh Awami
League party, was assassinated by a bomb blast at an
anti-terrorism public rally in August 2004, along with
23 others. That attack was intended to kill the opposition
leader at the time and current Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina, who was injured but survived.

President Rahman was born on 9 March 1928,
and he died in the same month on 20 March 2013. He
was 84 years of age. Born as a British Indian, he spent
his youth struggling against injustice and died as a
national hero. President Rahman was a beacon of light
and wisdom. Because of his amiable disposition — a
perfect gentleman in the truest sense of the term — he
earned respect among all in a country where political
polarization is acute and disturbing. He graduated with
a Master in History and a law degree and started his
career as a lawyer.
While he was a student, young Rahman participated
in the historic Bengali language movement of 1952
when people shed blood to protect and preserve their
mother language and, of course, culture and values. He
was first elected as a member of Pakistan’s National
Parliament in 1970 and, during the Bangladesh
liberation war, Mr. Rahman actively participated in the
Bangladesh Government in exile. After the assassination
of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, in 1975,
he was arrested by the military junta and spent four
years in prison. Mr. Zillur Rahman served as a Cabinet
Minister from 1996 through 2001. He was sworn in as
the nineteenth President of Bangladesh on 12 February
2009, and he discharged his responsibilities until his
death this year.
Mr. Rahman was elected as the General Secretary
of his party for a record four times in the history of
Bangladesh. After the debacle in Bangladesh on

13-27079

President Rahman was a father figure full of
wisdom and patience. I echo Prime Minister Sheikh
Hasina, who rightly observed that “the country has lost
a guardian”. I believe we can really pay our homage
to late President Zillur Rahman if we truly follow his
mantra of friendship towards all and malice towards
none, and if we truly follow his wisdom and maturity of
working together, working for the good of humankind
and for participatory democracy with commitment and
determination. His departed soul will rest in eternal
peace. May Allah bless his soul.
I thank the United Nations and I thank all the
delegations once again for being with us at this very
special event.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/67/693/Add. 9)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/67/693/Add.9, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/67/693/Add.8,
the Marshall Islands has made the payment necessary
to reduce its arrears below the amount specified in
Article 19 of the Charter.

5

A/67/PV.69

May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in that document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries Draft resolution (A/67/L.54)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on agenda item 121 and
its sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Mozambique to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.54.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): On behalf
of the member States of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP) — Angola,
Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Portugal, Sao
Tomé and Principe, Timor-Leste and my own country,
Mozambique — I have the honour to introduce, under
agenda item 121, draft resolution A/67/L.54, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
Encompassing 240 million people in eight countries
and four continents, the CPLP is an organization
determined to promote relations of multifaceted
cooperation among its member States. The organization
is at same time strengthening bilateral and multilateral
cooperation with other States, as well as with regional
and international organizations, including the United
Nations and its agencies, funds and programmes. With
the United Nations, the CPLP promotes cooperation
in vital areas such as health, education, agriculture,
public administration and technology, among others,
contributing greatly to the economic and social
development of our countries. Those cooperation
initiatives make the United Nations one of the most
relevant partners of the CPLP and its member States.
As part of its political coordination, the Community
and its member States are deeply involved in developing
efforts, with the United Nations and other regional and
international partners, to restore the constitutional
order, stability and respect for human rights and to
strengthen democratic institutions and the rule of

6

law in Guinea-Bissau through an inclusive political
process. In that respect, we welcome the appointment
of His Excellency Mr. José Ramos-Horta, former
President of Timor-Leste, as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau.
As we had the opportunity to inform Member
States on 19 November 2012 (see A/67/PV.40), when
the Assembly discussed the agenda item entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations”, this draft resolution is
aimed at strengthening the cooperation between the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
specialized agencies and other bodies and programmes
of the United Nations.
The draft resolution highlights the measures
adopted by the ninth Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the CPLP, held in Maputo on 20 July
2012, in particular those aimed at strengthening the
human right to adequate food in national and community
policies and the objective of eradicating hunger and
poverty in the CPLP through the deepening of political
and diplomatic coordination and cooperation in all
fields.
The draft resolution commends the efforts aimed at
promoting the restoration of the constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau in the light of Security Council resolution
2048 (2012), and calls for the need to harmonize the
positions of international partners, particularly the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the CPLP and European Union, with
a view to a consensus-based, inclusive and nationally
owned transition process.
Lastly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly, at its sixtyninth session, a report on the implementation of the
current draft resolution.
We would like therefore to kindly ask that the draft
resolution be adopted without a vote.
In conclusion, allow me to express, on behalf of
the CPLP member States, our deep appreciation to the
countries that contributed to the text and those that
sponsored the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.54.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.54, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, the Philippines, Poland,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, Swaziland,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Ukraine, the United States of America,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Zambia
and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.54?
Draft resolution A/67/L.54 was adopted (resolution
67/252).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 31 and 107
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/67/715)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/67/711)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh, former Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): On behalf of the
members of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
I am pleased to present the report of the Commission
on its sixth session (A/67/715). The report is organized
around the main functions and work of the Commission
and places particular emphasis on the results achieved
and the challenges and opportunities related to the
impact of the Commission in the field and its relations

13-27079

at Headquarters. It mainstreams the implementation of
the relevant recommendations from the 2010 review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and
incorporates a forward-looking agenda for 2013 as an
implementation framework for the recommendations.
Allow me to highlight a number of issues from the
report that are of particular importance.
First, there was particular focus on institutional
consolidation during the reporting period, which is
crucial for the Commission’s future role and impact.
The Commission launched an ambitious exercise to
improve and clarify the Commission’s working methods,
especially as it relates to its linkage and collaboration
with the work of key actors in the field. It also aimed at
facilitating the workload of the Chairs of the countryspecific configurations to achieve goals on the ground.
That process was among the main highlights of the
Commission’s work in 2012.
Secondly, during the reporting period, the
Commission embarked upon a work programme
designed to support the Commission’s engagement
with the six countries on its agenda, namely, Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. The peacebuilding process
in each of those countries is at a different stage, which
presents different opportunities and poses different
types of challenges.
Some highlights of the Commission’s countryspecific engagement during the reporting period
included, first, the provision of support for the
launching of a national reconciliation strategy and the
first regional hub for security and justice in Liberia;
secondly, support for the successful conduct of elections
in Sierra Leone; thirdly, resource mobilization for
the peacebuilding pillar of a new poverty-reduction
strategy in Burundi, including through support for
the successful organization of the Burundi partners’
conference in Geneva in October 2012; and, fourthly, the
initiation of a resource-mapping exercise in Guinea as
an initial step in the eventual development of a national
aid management and coordination system. I thank the
leadership in those countries for their commitment
and support, without which the Commission would
not have been sufficiently effective in achieving its
goals. Conversely, the disruption of the presidential
electoral process through an unconstitutional change of
Government in Guinea-Bissau on 12 April undermined
the progress in peacebuilding that had begun to take

7

A/67/PV.69

place in that country. That and, more important, the
violence and instability witnessed in the Central
African Republic, underline the fact that the role of the
Commission has to be more comprehensive, targeted
and well coordinated.
Second, in the absence of broader, more vigorous,
dynamic and continuing national commitment, and
without coordinated efforts to address the root causes
of instability, the role of the Commission may be
challenged.
Third, parallel to the Commission’s countryspecific engagement, the work undertaken by the
Commission on policy development in 2012 gave priority
to partnership as an area that gives substance and value
to the Commission’s main functions in sustaining
attention, fostering coherence and facilitating resource
mobilization for the six countries on its agenda.
The work of the Commission therefore has focused
on strengthening its partnership with the World Bank
and the African Development Bank. The Commission
has taken important steps towards better alignment of
national peacebuilding priorities in the countries on the
agenda, with the engagement of both banks in those
countries, thus ensuring a greater degree of coherence
of efforts and sufficient focus on peacebuilding
objectives in those countries. Given the nexus between
peace and development, the Commission is also
pursuing a thematic focus on job creation and rule-oflaw assistance, in partnership with the banks and other
stakeholders.
Fourth, similarly, the Commission sought to deepen
its working relationship with key United Nations actors
in the field, especially the regional political leadership
and the senior United Nations leadership. An informal
dialogue with Executive and Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General in agenda countries was
launched in April 2012. In addition, in September 2012,
initiatives were undertaken to forge better relationships
with regional groups such as the African Union. That
partnership is certainly a crucial one, requiring deeper
and continuing commitment and support from the
Commission’s membership and the top management of
United Nations alike.
Fifth, partnership with the principal organs of the
United Nations is of no less significance. The report
stipulates that members elected from each of the three
principal organs need to lead the efforts to deepen
and give substance to relations with the Peacebuilding

8

Commission. We held meetings with the Economic
and Social Council, the Security Council and the
Secretariat, which is an area in which we expect to
make progress in 2013. In 2012, however, in view of
the need to strengthen the links with United Nations
field missions and to enhance impact in the field,
the Commission placed particular emphasis on the
relationship with the Security Council, starting with its
very meaningful interactive dialogue with members of
the Council last summer. In fact, the consideration of
the Commission’s report on its fifth session last July in
the Security Council offered an opportunity to revive
the discussion on what the 2010 review described as
the potential to create a new dynamic between a more
forthcoming Security Council and a better performing
PBC.
Suggestions to energize the relations between the
two bodies have been followed up, including through the
Commission’s working group on lessons learned, which
last December explored the scope of the Commission’s
advisory role to the Council on transitions of United
Nations missions in countries on the agenda. The
Commission has the potential to demonstrate value
added by supporting a process of draw-down and
withdrawal of United Nations missions that is not only
grounded in sound analysis and in country-specific
realities and national needs, but which also ensures
that the international community remains committed
to, and cognizant of, the essential links between peace
and socioeconomic development beyond the lifetime of
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions.
Sixth, much discussion has taken place around the
extent to which the Commission is delivering on the
high expectations that accompanied its creation, in
2005. Therefore, 2012 was a year when the question
of collective responsibility and commitment of the
membership took centre stage in the Commission’s
deliberations. I must say that, while we collectively
managed to instil some sense of urgency in that topic,
the task of translating such commitment into concrete
actions and contributions remains unfulfilled. To that
end, the high-level event on the theme “Peacebuilding:
the way towards sustainable peace and security”, which
was presided over by the Prime Minister of Bangladesh
in September 2012, brought together for the first time a
number of Heads of State and Government, ministers and
senior officials from among the Commission’s broader
membership. The consensus political declaration that
emanated from the event reaffirmed and reinvigorated

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

the political commitment to key principles, objectives
and priorities that the Commission has consistently
promoted, both at the policy and at the country-specific
levels.
Seventh, the Commission also arranged a session
with the Peacebuilding Fund to harmonize the allocation
of resources to priority areas.
Finally, the Commission continues to receive
direct and substantive support from the Peacebuilding
Support Office (PBSO). As the Commission further
seeks to strengthen those linkages and to ensure
deeper collaboration and synergy with the PBF and
other stakeholders, including the philanthropic, civil
society, private and business sectors, it is imperative to
strengthen the PBSO.
Let me end by stressing the need to envisage
a new paradigm for South-South and triangular
cooperation, which could reinforce national ownership
in peacebuilding through focused support on national
capacity development and institution-building in critical
peacebuilding priorities, and which is an area that
requires further commitment from Member States and
the United Nations system at large. The Peacebuilding
Commission is uniquely positioned to become a
platform for the development of that new paradigm by
piloting concrete cooperation projects in the countries
on its agenda. The Peacebuilding Commission can
certainly facilitate the matching of needs identified by
those countries with the most relevant experience and
expertise, especially from the global South.
In conclusion, the pace at which the United Nations
and the global peacebuilding agenda are evolving
testifies to the urgency of the need to address sources of
protracted instability and drivers of relapse into conflict.
To that end, we can no longer afford to remain in thrall
to traditional and business-as-usual approaches to the
link between security and socioeconomic development.
We shall continue to face systemic challenges, but we
must commit to face those challenges with the requisite
resolve and determination. We have to take bolder and
more courageous steps to ensure sustainable peace and
security.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia in his capacity as the current
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I thank the President for
organizing today’s important debate on the report of the

13-27079

Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on its sixth session
(A/67/715) and on the sixth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/67/711).
At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Momen for his presentation of the PBC report, as well as,
once again, for his able stewardship of the Commission
in 2012. At the same time, I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Judy Cheng-Hopkins for the continuous support
she and the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO) have
given to the Peacebuilding Commission.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in today’s debate. However, I would like to briefly add
a few additional comments in my capacity as Chair of
the PBC, as well as in my national capacity.
Today’s timely debate, which is taking place
relatively early in the year, presents us with an
opportunity to take stock of the achievements
attained and the challenges that emerged during the
Commission’s work during the past year. At the same
time, today’s debate opens space for broader strategic
discussions on the constantly evolving United Nations
peacebuilding agenda and the Commission’s crucial
role in ensuring that that agenda remains at the centre
of the Organization’s priorities for the upcoming year.
Furthermore, I wish to briefly touch upon the forwardlooking part of the 2013 report and reintroduce this
year’s priorities and the way we intend to implement
them. It is our sincere hope that the General Assembly
will live up to its role as one of the founders of the PBC
and substantially contribute to its work, drawing on its
broader policy perspective of the security, political and
developmental elements of our common endeavours.
The benefits that the Commission confers — which
may sound quite familiar — could be abbreviated with
the brand “triple A”, that is, attention, accompaniment
and advocacy. The three As should be connected
and put into practice based on the Commission’s
comparative advantage in being able to bring together
all the relevant stakeholders within the United Nations
and beyond. That is precisely why the Commission
was established and, in ultima linea, the reason why
its membership is drawn from the Organization’s three
principal organs and from the top financial and troopand police-contributing countries in the United Nations.
We fully support adopting a new format for the
PBC report to give particular emphasis on the results
achieved in the main areas of the Commission’s

9

A/67/PV.69

mandate, as well as to the challenges and opportunities
in relation to its impact on the ground. In that context,
the report includes particularly important detailed
references to the relevant country-specific experiences
and examples, as well as suggestions for the way ahead.
Let me now turn briefly to the Commission’s
priorities as established in the concluding part of the
annual report, which contains the agenda for action
for 2013. As many members will remember, actions
adopted in the report were further developed during my
inaugural statement. Accordingly, I can be brief now.
First, we all agree that the PBC’s role and influence
very much depend upon its capability to develop
and exploit the sense of collective and individual
responsibility and engagement on the part of all
members of the Commission. Accordingly, it is our firm
intention to re-engage the PBC’s main constituencies,
encourage a more proactive contribution to the work and
objectives of the PBC and further build upon ongoing
discussions, with the aim of helping the Commission to
finally take on its legitimate role and fully realize its
vast potential.
Secondly, with regard to the essential issue of
resource mobilization, our intention is to entrench
old avenues and explore new ones in order to achieve
stronger cohesion among the political, security and
developmental components of the Commission’s
mandate, including through much stronger cooperation
with, and the engagement of, the private sector and
foundations. As announced, we will continue to explore
those topics through thematic discussions on related
issues and through direct contacts with the entities I
have mentioned, including further engagement with
them.
Thirdly, keeping in mind the Commission’s crucial
policy-coordination role, our intention is to pursue the
path of bringing together all the relevant stakeholders,
including in particular the international financial
institutions, with a view to strengthening relations with
them.
Fourthly, in our view, the role of the Commission
to which I have referred also includes efforts aimed at
a proper understanding of, and rapprochement with,
all the other relevant initiatives and processes. Our
main goal in that area is to achieve cooperation and
synergy in order to improve the situation of populations
on the ground and to bring about sustainable peace
and economic development in the countries on the

10

Peacebuilding Commission’s agenda. Eventually, we
should be guided in our deliberations and actions by the
goal we are trying to achieve, and not be preoccupied
by the means at our disposal.
Fifthly, through discussions on the Commission’s
working methods, our intention is to reach a common
understanding aimed at enabling the PBC to conduct its
work with a greater degree of predictability. We also seek
to help sustain institutional continuity and to enhance
its impact at the country-level in practical ways. In that
exercise, the PBC’s considerable experience in working
methods and the important lessons it has learned can
contribute to the standardization of approaches to work
at the country-level.
It is good to remember that the purpose of the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is to take action in postconflict environments in which Governments and
other national stakeholders have demonstrated a strong
commitment to peacebuilding. In that regard, it is only
logical that more than half of the Fund’s activities have
been carried out in the countries on the PBC’s agenda. As
I stated before, we welcome all initiatives and processes
aimed at furthering our common peacebuilding goals.
In that context, we see the Secretary-General’s initiative
for civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict as an
important contribution to our efforts aimed at national
institution-building and at ensuing transformation.
Accordingly, we welcome the Peacebuilding Fund’s
support for that initiative, including its efforts to draw
upon expertise from the global South.
We particularly welcome the Fund’s activities
aimed at the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women in peacebuilding, as stipulated
in the Secretary-General’s earlier reports. We would
encourage the Fund to continue efforts to meet the
Secretary-General’s target of allocating 15 per cent
of funds to women’s empowerment programmes in
the shortest possible time. In that context, we strongly
support the Fund’s gender-promotion initiative,
launched in 2011, in a number of countries, including
countries on the PBC’s agenda. We look forward with
interest to receiving the review of the PBF’s progress
on the initiative, which has been announced for the
second half of 2013.
In accordance with our previously introduced
priorities, we strongly encourage the Fund to
further undertake activities that can be scaled up or
complemented by the African Development Bank and

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

the World Bank, as well as to consider how the resources
of the Peacebuilding Fund may act as a catalyst in
supporting the priorities of other relevant processes,
including the implementation of the New Deal in some
of the countries on the PBC’s agenda. At the same
time, bearing in mind the fact that United Nations
missions in some of the countries on the PBC’s agenda
are drawing to an end, we look forward to exploring,
together with the Peacebuilding Fund, opportunities
for supporting the sustainable peacebuilding impact of
national institutional activities during any transition of
a United Nations presence.
Finally, let me welcome the appointment of a new
Peacebuilding Fund Advisory Group. I support the
themes it has selected to pursue throughout its twoyear mandate. We strongly believe that the appropriate
consideration of those issues would significantly
strengthen internal and external peacebuilding links,
be they here at Headquarters, in the capitals or in the
field, and improve the efficiency of our engagement.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the Commission
is only as strong and functioning as its individual
components, that is, its member States and the
supporting United Nations system entities and
mechanisms. In this critical period in the Commission’s
life, with the upcoming comprehensive review in 2015
and other important parallel developments, including,
in particular, the consideration of the post-2015
development agenda, we should join forces and help the
Commission to enhance its added value and to take its
rightful place within the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and beyond.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)
in this joint debate on the annual report (A/67/715)
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the
report (A/67/711) of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF).
I would like, at the outset, to thank the President for
organizing this meeting. I also thank His Excellency
Mr. Ranko Vilović, Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Croatia to the United Nations and Chair
of PBC, for his comprehensive statement. Allow
me also to extend my sincere thanks to Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, Permanent Representative
of Bangladesh, for his introduction of the PBC report
and for his dedication and strong commitment to the
work of the Commission during its sixth session in order

13-27079

to enhance its impact on the ground. The Movement
would like as well to note with appreciation the new
format of the PBC report on its sixth session, which
provides a comprehensive analysis of the progress
made so far in the implementation of the 2010 review’s
recommendations, as well as of the challenges that
the Commission still faces and on the way forward in
enhancing its added value.
With its unique membership, the PBC is designed
for and well placed to fulfil its objectives in assisting the
countries on its agenda by providing sustained attention
and political accompaniment and by marshalling
adequate resources for post-conflict countries, as well
as forging coherence and coordination among actors
on the ground. The Movement supports the focus
of the Commission in achieving its objectives on the
following points. With regard to relations with the
principal organs of the United Nations, the Movement
underlines the importance of building on the important
elements emanating from the Security Council debate
(see S/PV.6805) and the informal interactive dialogue
of 12 and 13 July 2012, respectively, and of articulating
the advice that the Security Council requires from the
Commission, including during discussions pertaining
to mandates.
Despite those positive developments, further
progress is still needed in promoting an institutional
relationship between the PBC and the main organs
of the United Nations, mainly the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Without prejudice to the functions and powers
of the other principal organs of the United Nations in
relation to post-conflict peacebuilding, the General
Assembly must play a key role in the formulation and
the implementation of post-conflict peacebuilding
activities. We underline as well the central role of the
PBC in the formulation and implementation of such
activities and functions. With regard to marshalling
resources, we reiterate the necessity of providing the
resources required in a timely manner in order to help
to ensure predictable financing for recovery activities
and sustained financial investment over the medium
to long term. We stress as well the need to ensure the
sustainability of funding for countries on the agenda
of PBC.
In the same connection, we are concerned by the
lack of coordination and coherence among financial
donors, which results in duplication and redundancy
in particular areas and in neglecting other catalytic

11

A/67/PV.69

projects. Therefore, we call for the setting up of a
mechanism within the PBC to review, within each
country configuration, the ways and means to ensure
the unity of efforts by donors in close collaboration
with host countries.
With regard to forging coherence and improving the
coordination of actors, the PBC is operating in a crowded
field. The respective roles and responsibilities of the
PBC and the senior leadership of the United Nations
need to be further clarified to enable the Commission
meet those crucial functions. The Movement therefore
stresses the importance of ensuring follow-up to the
May 2012 coordination meeting between the PBC and
senior leadership on the ground.
With respect to the work of the PBC’s specific
configurations, we consider that additional efforts
should be deployed to operationalize the principle of
national ownership through the adoption of a demanddriven approach based on joint assessments with host
countries. Furthermore, we stress the importance of
ensuring that the country-specific configurations
develop effective and cooperative mechanisms that are
based on a sustained dialogue with the host countries
under review.
Concerning the working methods of the PBC,
the Movement emphasizes that the Commission’s
provisional rules of procedure need to be revisited
regularly in the light of the experience gained by the
Commission since its operationalization. The Movement
also concurs with the identification of working methods
in the annual report of the PBC on its sixth session as
a key priority requiring additional progress in 2013 in
order to ensure an efficient and proper functioning of
the Commission.
On the specific issue of the conduct of the PBC’s
meetings, the Movement highly commends the
delegation of Bangladesh for its initiative in convening
the first high-level meeting of the PBC last September,
where the declaration entitled “Peacebuilding: the
way towards sustainable peace and development”
was adopted. The meeting set dates for the activities
of the PBC and demonstrated the strong interest of
the Commission’s entire membership in its work. We
look forward as well to a systematic follow-up to that
high-level event by demonstrating the relevance of the
PBC’s work to capital officials, thereby increasing their
engagement.

12

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General on
the Peacebuilding Fund, the total contributions to the
Fund significantly increased from $58.1 million in 2011
to $80.5 million in 2012. We thank the Member States
that made that valuable contribution, as we also thank
the new donors to the Fund. We reiterate as well the
importance of increasing the funding target of the PBF,
to make it more capable of financing additional projects
in post-conflict countries.
The PBF must continue to be geared towards
providing critical support during the early stages of the
peacebuilding process to avert relapse into conflict.
There is an urgent need for closer synergy between
the PBC and PBF through a strategic relationship that
ensures greater coherence and coordination between
the two organs and avoids duplication.
In that regard, we take note of the recommendations
and the revised terms of reference of the Peacebuilding
Fund as contained in resolution 63/282. We also
reaffirm the roles of the General Assembly and
the Peacebuilding Commission in providing policy
guidance on the use of the Fund in order to maximize
its impact in the field and to further increase its impact
and improve its functioning; to make the fund more
efficient, transparent and flexible; and to facilitate the
disbursement of funds, particularly for quick-impact
and emergency projects. We stress as well the need for a
mechanism to assess whether allocations from the PBF
are directed towards the appropriate channels that will
lead to peacebuilding.
Let me conclude by reiterating the Movement’s
assurances of continuing constructive and meaningful
engagement in all future peacebuilding activities.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The acceding country
Croatia; the candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I thank the President for having convened today’s
important meeting on the annual report (A/67/715) of the

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on its sixth session
and on the report (A/67/711) of the Secretary-General on
the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). This is a good occasion
to look back and to take stock of the achievements
made over the past 12 months. It is also an opportunity
to draw some lessons and to apply them for the future.
Indeed, the next two years mark a new juncture for the
PBC. Ahead of the upcoming comprehensive five-year
review, in 2015, the Commission needs to demonstrate
accelerated progress, cohesion in New York and around
the world, better cooperation with the international
financial institutions and various United Nations
bodies, including the Security Council, and concrete
impact in the countries on its agenda.
Peacebuilding is a long-term enterprise. It goes
beyond short-term crisis management and incorporates
longer-term efforts to consolidate stability and build
just and effective States by preventing the recurrence of
conflict through sustainable socioeconomic and human
development and support, which ranges from capacitybuilding for institutions and civil society, all the way to
in-depth structural reforms.
We have learned from our common experience over
the past years that no single template can be applied to
fluid and complex situations where priority areas span
across the areas of peace and security, development,
humanitarian needs and human rights. The United
Nations system, and the Peacebuilding Commission
in particular, has a pivotal role to play in that respect.
That is why the European Union has shown a strong
commitment and has fully participated in the PBC’s
work since its establishment. The European Union
has also been a member of all country-specific
configurations of the PBC since their inception. The
European Union is holding an ongoing exchange on
how best to continue to support the PBC, specifically
in each of its country-specific configurations.
The two annual reports before us today are
both comprehensive documents thast illustrate the
multifaceted challenges ahead. We appreciate the
efforts by the country-specific configurations and
the Peacebuilding Support Office team to provide a
more analytical assessment of the PBC’s work in 2012.
That really helps to identify the areas where progress
has been made and those where further collective
engagement may be needed.
On the upside, we saw a great sense of dynamism
within the Liberia configuration, which provided

13-27079

support for the launching of a national reconciliation
strategy in the country and has put the issue of the
responsible management of natural resources on the
agenda. The Burundi configuration played an important
role in support of that country’s development, in the
context of resource mobilization and support for
coherence and coordination of international efforts,
by supporting the organization of a very successful
partners conference in Geneva in October 2012. The
progress witnessed thus far on security sector reform in
Guinea, notably the retirement of almost 4,000 military
personnel with the help of the Peacebuilding Fund, also
represents an encouraging step. A joint mission by the
Sierra Leone and Liberia configurations underscored
the importance and timeliness of regional cooperation
among configurations, notably in West Africa and in
the context of the Mano River Union.
The efforts to unleash the PBC’s full potential need
to continue. There are still great challenges ahead. One
such challenge is the reformatting of the United Nations
presences in Sierra Leone and Burundi, which needs
to be closely monitored. Important other test cases are
the restoration and respect of the constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau and the organization and holding of
long-overdue legislative elections in Guinea. In view
of the most recent developments on the ground, it is
also obvious that the situation in the Central African
Republic deserves our utmost attention. In all those
cases, the PBC has a role to play through its convening
power and central mandate as an intergovernmental
advisory body at the service of the countries on its
agenda.
Let us not forget, however, the most important
aspect, namely, national ownership. Peacebuilding
will succeed only if it is home-grown and nationally
led. Our duty as the international community must
consist of aligning behind nationally owned strategies.
At the same time, our role in political accompaniment
is possible only if there is genuine commitment by
national authorities to address the root causes of
instability. However, it is just as important to ensure the
ownership and political will of all the members of the
country-specific configurations; otherwise the element
of mutual accountability for results in peacebuilding is
lost. In that context, we welcome the fact that the role
of members of the PBC is given special attention in the
2013 agenda for action.
In times of financial crisis, the PBC should seek
alternative ways for resource mobilization, such as

13

A/67/PV.69

engaging the private sector and forging partnerships
with international financial institutions. We look
forward to this year’s review of the effectiveness of
the PBF’s global strategy by the Peacebuilding Fund
Advisory Group, notably in connection with the
development of the next planning cycle of the Fund
for the next three years. We also welcome the PBF’s
intention to continue its efforts in the area of country
evaluations and results reporting.
Before concluding, I would like to extend our
sincere gratitude to the former Chair of the PBC,
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh,
whom I would like to thank for his strong and continued
commitment.
We also look forward to working hand in hand with
the new Chair, Ambassador Ranko Vilović, the PBC
membership and the Peacebuilding Support Office to
move things forward.
The European Union stands ready to continue
to support the efforts to enable the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture to live up to the expectations
that accompanied its establishment.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like, at the outset,
to thank Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen, outgoing Chair
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for the effort exerted to prepare the report
of the Peacebuilding Commission on its sixth session
(A/67/715). I wish to also express my appreciation to
the current Chair, Ambassador Ranko Vilović, for
his comprehensive plan to broaden the scope of the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Egypt aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Tunisia as coordinator of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus on peacebuilding.
The peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations is currently witnessing important developments,
most notably the implementation of the exit strategy of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone in the coming 12 months and the transfer
of its responsibilities to a United Nations country team.
That transition experience represents an opportunity
for the Peacebuilding Commission to liaise between
the United Nations teams working on the ground in the
countries where peacebuilding assignments have been
accomplished, on one hand, and the Security Council
and the General Assembly, on the other hand; and to

14

take advantage of the experience accumulated by the
Commission and its outreach to international partners
to prevent those countries from relapsing into conflict.
In April 2012, the peacebuilding architecture
witnessed a military coup d’état in Guinea-Bissau. The
course of events in that brotherly country ever since
has served to emphasize the importance of dealing with
the developments in the region at large according to a
comprehensive regional perspective that addresses the
problems associated with the trafficking in arms, drugs
and persons. It is that approach specifically that would
add new momentum to the peacebuilding efforts and
successes.
Egypt emphasizes the importance of the ongoing
efforts to develop the working methods of the
Peacebuilding Commission to become more effective
and responsive to the actual needs of the countries
on the ground. In that regard, we wish to reiterate the
following elements: the pertinence of national ownership
of peacebuilding programmes so that they can be more
responsive to the national priorities of each country;
the need to consolidate cooperation frameworks with
international and regional financial institutions and
to search for innovative and sustainable solutions for
funding problems facing peacebuilding programmes,
in accordance with national priorities; and the need for
broader coordination among the Peacebuilding Fund
and international partners, especially the International
Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank, as
well as United Nations agencies working on the ground,
so as to increase the effectiveness of the resources
allocated from the Fund.
Egypt stresses the relevance of the recommendations
set out in the sixth report of the Peacebuilding
Commission, especially with regard to activating the role
of the general membership of the Commission, which is
selected from a number of the principal organs of the
United Nations, in order to enhance communication and
coordination between the Peacebuilding Commission
and those organs, mainly the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council. We also advocate
for partnerships to provide sustainable funding for
peacebuilding programmes, with a special emphasis on
partnerships with international and regional financial
institutions.
The ultimate objective of the ongoing process of
developing the working methods of the Peacebuilding
Commission should continue to be to increase the

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

effectiveness and credibility of the Commission in
performing its functions and duties and to further
mainstream the efforts exerted in the peacebuilding
architecture by building on lessons learned, with
a special focus on priority themes related to
peacebuilding, such as national reconciliation and
achieving sustainable economic development in the
countries on the Commission’s agenda.
Egypt is working, in full coordination with the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Chair of the
Organizational Committee, to enhance communication
and coordination between the peacebuilding
architecture in the United Nations, on the one hand, and
the African Union, on the other, to further peacebuilding
activities in the six African countries on the agenda of
the Commission. In that context, Egypt has proposed
establishing an African Union centre for post-conflict
reconstruction and development in order to enhance
African capabilities in those domains.
Egypt also stresses the importance of having proper
coordination between the peacebuilding architecture
and the programme to enhance civilian capacities in
the aftermath of conflict, given the many crosscutting
issues between them, in order to maximize their
outcome in the light of the limited resources available
within the United Nations, and in the Peacebuilding
Fund in particular.
In conclusion, the expertise available to the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
after six successful years of work on the ground represent
an important resource that should be fully utilized to
achieve a breakthrough in future. Egypt expresses its
readiness to coordinate with the Peacebuilding Support
Office and members of the Peacebuilding Commission
to make peacebuilding programmes and activities a
true success story in Africa and elsewhere in the world.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I welcome
Ambassador Momen’s introduction of the report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on its sixth session
(A/67/715). We also welcome the Secretary-General’s
report (A/67/711) on the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF).
The work of peacebuilding after conflicts will help
eliminate the root causes of conflicts and is important
for the lasting peace and sustainable development of the
countries and regions concerned. As a body within the
United Nations system to rebuild after conflicts, the
PBC has played an important role by implementing the
relevant decisions of the General Assembly and Security

13-27079

Council. We appreciate the achievements of the past
year. We also welcome the initiative by Bangladesh in
September 2012. At the same time, this type of work is
a long-term, complicated and difficult task. We would
like to highlight the following points.
First, the PBC and all the relevant parties should
respect the sovereignty of the countries concerned.
Post-conflict countries must assume the primary
peacebuilding responsibilities. In doing its work, the
PBC should strengthen its partnership with the country
concerned, respect the priorities set by the country
and help create a comprehensive development and
peacebuilding strategy in accordance with the country’s
specific situation and needs. During the peacebuilding
process, attention should be paid to enhancing capacitybuilding and personnel training, and the human
resources and the country team of experts should be
fully utilized so that the work can be done better.
Secondly, attention should be paid to the root
causes of conflict, in particular the issues of economic
and social development. In the countries concerned,
attention should be paid consistently to the issues of
political security and development. Issues pertaining to
judicial reform and the rule of law should be dealt with
only once the economic situation is restored. People
can enjoy the benefits of peace only conce political
harmony prevails and a stable security situation is
maintained so that a solid political basis can be laid.
Thirdly, the PBC should also enhance its
coordination and cooperation with major United Nations
organs and financial and regional organizations. We
hope that the PBC will strengthen its cooperation and
coordination with the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. The
World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
African Union and other organizations could also help
to promote peacekeeping work and to achieve concrete
results.
Fourthly, we call on the PBC to improve its
working methods. The Commission should improve its
internal work so as to achieve the best possible results.
It should also set priorities for its work and strengthen
its cooperation with the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and peacekeeping operations so that
they are able to help each other and improve their work.
Fifthly, the international community should
provide support and assistance swiftly and in a timely
manner. We appreciate the role played by the PBF and

15

A/67/PV.69

we support its work. We hope that its resources can
be used to maximal effect. We also appeal to other
countries to contribute to the PBF in order to provide
more resources. We are seeking more channels for
resources.

implement national policies on their own. As we are
all aware, building institutions and nurturing local
expertise are indispensable steps in order to enhance
national ownership and to allow for stronger public
administration.

We consistently support the PBC and PBF and
participate actively in their work. We hope they will
play an increasing role in the work of peacebuilding.
We hope that lasting peace will be achieved and we will
continue to contribute actively to that end.

The mobilization of resources continues to be a
key component in peacebuilding efforts in order to
ensure that projects are implemented and objectives
are met. In the case of Guinea-Bissau, efforts were
being made to align partners behind the priorities set
with the Guinea-Bissau authorities in various areas.
However, the coup d’état last April has neutralized
those efforts and undermined the confidence of key
international partners. We hope that decisive steps will
be taken in Guinea-Bissau to allow for the restoration
of international cooperation with the country.

Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): This debate on the
annual reports of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) is a valuable occasion
for us to reflect on the work we undertook last year and
on the challenges that lie ahead. I take this opportunity
to thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen for
his leadership as Chair of the PBC in 2012. We also
welcome the new Chair of the PBC, Ambassador Ranko
Vilović, and pledge our full support to him. I also
want to express our appreciation to Ms. Judy ChengHopkins and her team for the support provided by the
Peacebuilding Support Office to the activities of the
PBC.

In a broader sense, broadening the pool of
partnerships with external actors is vital to ensuring
that the PBC and the PBF continue to have a positive
impact on the ground. Brazil welcomes the initiatives
aimed at developing strategic partnerships with the
international financial institutions in support of postconflict countries.

Brazil has actively supported the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture since its establishment.
As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific
configuration and member of the Organizational
Committee, we have continuously engaged, and will
continue to do so, in serious efforts to bring sustainable
peace to countries facing post-conflict challenges.

Let me take this opportunity to commend the
work undertaken by the Peacebuilding Fund. As the
report (A/67/711) highlights, the record in annual
contributions established in 2012 clearly demonstrates
the international community’s confidence in the Fund.
The PBF has proved to be a catalytic tool, kick-starting
projects and helping to generate virtuous cycles.

The PBC and the PBF made important strides in
2012 to improve coordination in the United Nations
system, to enhance their partnership with external
actors, to foster the development of national capacities
and to better mobilize resources to countries emerging
from conflict. There is still, however, space for further
improvement in those and other areas.

Brazil reiterates the importance of mainstreaming
peacebuilding within the United Nations system. It is
our hope that the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council will have more frequent exchanges
of views on the activities of the PBC in 2013.

Brazil is pleased to see the efforts of the United
Nations system to enhance its coordination and to
avoid overlaps. Forging coherence within the United
Nations and among international partners is a crucial
step towards delivering concrete results on the ground.
If there is one quintessential aspect that defines
peacebuilding, in our view, it is the development of
national capacities. Peacebuilding activities should be
designed first and foremost to strengthen institutions
and to allow countries to gradually conceive and

16

In the same vein, closer cooperation with the
Security Council should also be pursued. Given the
many countries with which the Security Council is
seized, the PBC represents a useful vehicle for giving
greater attention to individual countries in a postconflict situation. A dialogue between the Security
Council and the country-specific configurations on a
regular basis and the participation of the Chairs of the
configurations in Council debates and consultations
are useful tools to deepen that relationship.
Finally, let me reaffirm that the Brazilian
Government will continue to play an active role in

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

strengthening the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. Both the PBC and the PBF have
established themselves as important parts of the United
Nations and of its network of support for post-conflict
countries. We expect that they will continue to develop
meaningful work, with a growing impact in the field.
Brazil remains committed to that objective and to that
process.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to take this opportunity to express Japan’s gratitude to
Ambassador Momen, former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for his stewardship over the past
year. We also reiterate our desire to work together with
Ambassador Vilović, Chair of the Commission for 2013.
Today’s debate provides an important opportunity to
reflect on the work of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture over the past year and to outline steps
going forward.
Japan welcomes the analytical approach taken in
the report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its sixth
session (A/67/715). By structuring it around themes
rather than configurations, the report links the different
work undertaken by the various configurations and
outlines common challenges and opportunities. Our
delegation believes that the PBC has the ability to
analyse the effectiveness of its engagement and to
flexibly adjust it in accordance with the needs on the
ground. Continuous improvements must be sought to
ensure the relevance of the PBC. In that context, our
delegation would like to emphasize the following three
points:
First, the PBC needs to find tangible areas in which
it can provide added value. The relationship between the
PBC and the Security Council is one area where we saw
progress last year. Building on the discussions at the
Security Council open debate (see S/PV.6805) and the
informal interactive dialogue in July last year, Japan,
as Chair of the Working Group on Lessons Learned,
organized a meeting in November on the topic of the
transition of United Nations missions in PBC agenda
countries in order to identify areas where the two
bodies can substantively cooperate. With the transition
of United Nations missions in Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Burundi under way as we speak, it is paramount for the
Council and the country-specific configuration Chairs
to work closely together this year.
Secondly, the PBC must get the actors in the field
more involved. The Commission has often underscored

13-27079

the need to generate a greater impact in the field, yet
struggled to find good ways to do so. The initiative
to hold meetings between the Chairs Group and the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General,
which started last year, is welcome in that regard and
should be continued. In the same vein, we must look
for flexible ways to further involve Embassy personnel
covering the agenda country in the daily work of the
PBC, including through their participation in field
visits. They are a valuable source of expertise in the
peacebuilding process, as they are often already
working in the country with the responsibility for
development assistance implementation.
Thirdly, closely related to the second point, the
PBC needs to realign its meetings around countryspecific configurations in order to generate an impact
on the ground. The work of the PBC Organizational
Committee and the Working Group on Lessons Learned
should be organized in close coordination with that of
the country-specific configurations. Meanwhile, the
country-specific configurations should try to outline
follow-up actions that could be taken back by Member
States of those configurations for consideration. With
the 2015 review just around the corner, it is crucial that
the PBC step up its work to make 2013 a different year.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund (A/67/711) captures well the
progress made and the improved performance of the
Fund last year. My delegation highly appreciates the
diligent work of the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO). Key achievements include increasing donor
contributions, swift decision-making, the steady
and appropriate implementation of projects and
performance improvements in many areas, such as
security sector reform and the rule of law, as well as the
greater attention given to countries on the PBC agenda.
The function of the Joint Steering Committee
is crucial to enhancing the ownership and national
commitment of recipient countries, as well as to
implementing the projects of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) successfully.
The coordination with other developing partners
also needs to be enhanced. The catalytic nature of the
PBF would be further enhanced if we could improve
its strategic position by strengthening dialogue and
cooperation with the relevant partners on the ground.
We should also note that an upcoming
comprehensive review of the PBF will provide an

17

A/67/PV.69

excellent opportunity for us to identify clear priorities,
necessary improvements and remaining challenges.
Looking ahead to a new planning cycle beyond 2013,
the PBF’s effectiveness and catalytic role will continue
to be of importance.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan’s strong
commitment to peacebuilding and to the activities of
the PBC. Peacebuilding is the key to making peace
and development happen simultaneously. We would
also like to reiterate the importance of a field- and
people-centric approach to peacebuilding. We look
forward to good work being undertaken in the PBC,
as well as to the wise use of the PBF — all of which
requires the capable and sensible support provided by
the PBSO in 2013.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully associates itself fully with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union.
Allow me to congratulate and thank Ambassador
Abdul Momen for his very dynamic leadership of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2012. I also commend Ambassador
Ranko Vilović on assuming his responsibilities as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2013
and I wish him every success.
This is a good time to take stock, given that we
are midway between the 2010 and 2015 reviews of
the peacebuilding framework. The future programme
of work, which has already been taken up by the new
Organizational Committee, is full of specific activities
that can make the PBC actions more relevant.
The new peacebuilding architecture, established by
the 2005 World Summit Outcome, and more specifically
by General Assembly resolution 60/180 and Security
Council resolution 1645 (2005), is based on three
pillars, namely, the Commission’s intergovernmental
cooperation, the practical support of the Secretariat
provided by the Peacebuilding Support Office, and the
financing of the Peacebuilding Fund, which serves as
a catalyst. It is up to us, the Member States, to provide
that system with the resources to carry out its work and
the chance to prove itself, including by committing
ourselves fully to the specific configurations. For its
part, the Peacebuilding Support Office should help to
strengthen its position in the institutional architecture of
the United Nations by making full use of the resources

18

available to it, in particular to strengthen support for
the country configurations on the agenda.
With regard to the report (A/67/715) before us,
we must acknowledge the limits of that architecture
as it seeks to better use what is available to it. The
Commission is not an operational entity, but rather a
policy body. It is not in the field; it is based in New
York. It does not really have its own funds, but it can
call on the resources from a vast range of partners.
The Commission draws its legitimacy primarily
from its political accompaniment, the support for
the mobilization of resources and the involvement of
international partners at the request of countries on
the agenda. The PBC is an intergovernmental advisory
platform that can give considerable political weight to
the work of the operational bodies of the United Nations
system.
The work of the Guinea configuration, which I have
the honour of presiding over, has focused, during its second
year, on the implementation of mutual peacebuilding
commitments agreed between the Government and the
50 odd members of the configuration in September
2011. Efforts towards national reconciliation — one
of the three priorities identified for the engagement
of the Peacebuilding Commission in Guinea — were
put into question by discussions about the organization
and the deferment of the legislative elections until 2013
and by an overwhelming feeling of distrust. Political
dialogue seems to have won the upper hand now.
The Government, the Independent National Electoral
Commission and the political parties are together
seeking ways out of the deadlock. Once the parties
involved have agreed on modalities for the elections
and the Independent National Electoral Commission
has presented a new time frame, the President will be
able to hold the elections. Currently, the international
community and members of the Guinea configuration
must be ready to rise to the occasion to actively support
the preparation and holding of the elections.
Guinea reached some important milestones
in its development during 2012 by the reaching
the completion point of the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries Initiative and by the signing an agreement on
access to funds from the tenth European Development
Fund. International partners must now offer a new
ambitious framework for poverty reduction so that the
people of Guinea can quickly reap the dividends of
peace and sustainable development. Efforts to reform
the security and defence sectors have increased and are

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

being allocated more funds, with the encouragement by
the country’s President.

whose tackling of challenges and successes have been
essential to the conclusions of the report before us.

Many of the challenges facing Guinea are common
to peacebuilding throughout the subregion, such as
youth unemployment, public administration reform,
security sector reform, organized transnational
crime and economic integration. The three country
configurations of the PBC, including three members
of the Mano River Union, namely, the configurations
of Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia, have also begun
an exchange with the Secretary-General of that
organization to identify priorities and themes that could
be dealt with collectively at the regional level.

While there remain many persistent as well as
emerging challenges, the PBC continues to make
progress as a unique global platform, garnering
political and financial resources with the collaboration
of an expanding array of actors. The Commission does
not possess its own financing, and its decisions are not
binding. Yet, its gradual but concrete achievements with
regard to the countries on its agenda and its sharpened
focus on key global post-conflict themes over the past
six years are a testament both to the drive of its members
and the support from the United Nations system and its
partners. That backing, particularly from the Security
Council and the General Assembly, is critical for the
Commission in undertaking its mandates. We hope that
it will be further strengthened.

Luxembourg will remain actively committed to the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, whether it
be as Chair of the Guinea configuration, as a member
of the Guinea-Bissau configuration or as a financial
partner of the Peacebuilding Fund, to which we will
once again contribute approximately $520,000 in 2013.
We will also remain involved in the Security Council
to maximize the positive interaction between the
Council and the PBC, in particular its country-specific
configurations. In that regard, I continue to believe
that the configurations have a valuable contribution to
make to the work of the Council, including at the level
of closed consultations.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Ambassador Vilović for introducing the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) annual report (A/67/715). I wish to
also express my deep appreciation to the previous PBC
Chair, Ambassador Momen, along with the present,
as well as previous, Chairs of the six country-specific
configurations and the Working Group on Lessons
Learned, for their very valuable work.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement
made by the representataive of Tunisia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus of the PBC. We also
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
Support Judy Cheng-Hopkins for her leadership and
her work, together with her able Peacebuilding Support
Office (PBSO) team, in supporting the Commission’s
work and administering the Peacebuilding Fund.
Indonesia welcomes the 2012 PBC annual report,
which outlines many important developments and
achievements by the PBC and its mechanism during
the year. We congratulate all PBC members, as well as
other stakeholders, especially from the Governments
and civil societies of the six countries on its agenda,

13-27079

From providing support — inter alia, for the
launching of a national conciliation strategy in Liberia
to the successful holding of elections in Sierra Leone
and support for resource mobilization to reinforce
the new poverty reduction strategy in Burundi — the
PBC’s impact on the ground has improved in the past
year. However, we concur with the observation in the
2012 report that, without broader, more vigorous and
continued national commitment and leadership, as
well as efforts to address the root causes of instability,
the Commission’s political accompaniment will be
rendered ineffective. In that regard, we underline the
imperative for well-supported, nationally owned and
comprehensive peacebuilding. With that in mind, allow
me to share the following points.
First, Indonesia will steadfastly support the PBC
in continuing to implement its road map of actions,
especially the strengthening of partnerships both
for marshalling resources and for capacity-building.
In that context, we support the conclusions of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned that the PBC
could identify a few influential foundations and
private companies in areas of recurring priorities in
the countries on its agenda and engage with them. The
Burundi partners conference, for example, provided
some recent positive examples. The PBC policy task
force on engagement with the private sector, which
was facilitated by our delegation in 2008, came up
with some recommendations that we believe could be
very useful in forging collaboration with philanthropic
organizations and companies.

19

A/67/PV.69

We also concur with the report that, drawing on
country-specific experience, the PBC, together with
actors such as the World Bank and the United Nations
in-country presence, could identify specific examples
of collaboration that could be scaled up and broadened.
We believe that, in addition to fostering the sharing
of countries’ experiences and lessons, the PBC should
also advance discussions on how capacity-building can
be better enabled for the six countries on its agenda that
need it with practical models of engagement under the
United Nations civilian capacity’s initiative. Through
South-South and triangular cooperation, such projects,
implemented in collaboration with the Steering
Committee, would also help to assess the review
outcomes and to further build on them.
Secondly, the PBC’s call for greater integration
among the peacebuilding and development objectives
in the instruments of engagement among the different
United Nations and non-United Nations actors is very
important. The leveraging of efforts would improve
coherence, resource allocation and results. It would
also simplify reporting and other procedural work
for the national authorities of post-conflict countries.
It would help to strengthen national ownership and
better align external support with national priorities for
peacebuilding and development.
Thirdly, the 2010 review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture noted a lack of strong
political support from capitals as one of the reasons
for a less effective impact of the PBC in the field. We
welcome the first PBC high-level event last year on
the topic “Peacebuilding: the way towards sustainable
peace and security”, organized under Bangladesh’s
leadership. More institutionalized and regular annual
sessions of the Organizational Committee would serve
to bolster support and coordination with capitals,
thereby enhancing the Commission’s work.
Turning to the report of the Secretary-General on
the Peacebuilding Fund (A/67/711), I would first like
to commend the PBSO, as the Fund’s administrator,
on improving the performance of the Fund’s activities
and on deepening the Fund’s interface with the PBC.
We support the Fund’s two priority settings, namely,
in immediate post-conflict or post-political crisis
environments and in countries where it can make
longer-term grants. We note that the countries on the
PBC’s agenda received 40 per cent of the Fund’s 2012
allocation. While we are mindful of the factors behind

20

that allocation mentioned in the report, we want to
stress that it is vital that the Fund prioritize countries
on the agenda of the PBC, as stated by the SecretaryGeneral in the report.
Apart from South-South and triangular cooperation,
particularly in support of the civilian capacities of
the global South and those countries with a similar
experience of transition, we wish to reiterate the
importance of exploring the potential of the role of the
Peacebuilding Fund in assisting national authorities at
their request
In conclusion, Indonesia underlines the importance
of a comprehensive and properly supported approach to
mitigating conflicts. For our part, we are determined to
continue our contribution to further the efforts of the
PBC and the PBF to build lasting peace.
Mr. Okafor (Nigeria): Today’s debate provides an
opportunity to review the performance of the pillars
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. In
particular, it offers a unique opportunity for Member
States to assess the progress in, and the challenges to,
our collective efforts to support and sustain peace and
socioeconomic development in countries emerging
from conflict.
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank
the President for convening this important joint
debate on the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (A/67/715) and the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Peacebuilding Fund (A/67/711). I
wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Ranko Vilović,
Permanent Representative of Croatia and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his statement.
It provides some critical perspectives on the activities
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Allow me also to
sincerely thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh and former
Chair of the PBC, for his able and committed leadership
during his tenure.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to the Chairs of the various country-specific
configurations and to the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO) for their tireless efforts in supporting the work
of the PBC in countries emerging from conflict. Indeed,
the staff of the PBSO has demonstrated a remarkable
commitment to the United Nations peacebuilding
agenda.

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

While Nigeria associates itself with the statement
of the Non-Aligned Group, delivered earlier this
morning by Mr. Mohamed Khaled Khiari, Ambassador
and Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations, we would like to underscore a few other issues
of interest.
The recent developments in two countries on
the PBC’s agenda give cause for deep concern. Such
developments underscore the fact that peacebuilding is
not a linear and progressive process. It is a multifaceted
and all- encompassing initiative that must also
proactively focus on engendering sustainable peace.
Against that backdrop, I would like to underline the
following points.
First, when Nigeria convened the open debate on
preventive diplomacy at the Security Council in July
2010 (see S/PV.6360), we were motivated by a profound
concern that the nature of conflict was outpacing our
collective ability to respond effectively.
After seven years of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture’s existence, post-conflict
peacebuilding remains a fragile undertaking. While
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict is indeed
necessary, it cannot be an effective long-term strategy or
a solution. Global foresight through timely intervention
before a simmering crisis erupts into a conflict is
a crucial peacebuilding strategy. For instance, the
international community’s support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts for two of
the countries on the PBC agenda, which currently
face serious political difficulties, has been less than
sufficiently robust. Without an enhanced commitment
on the part of members of the Commission to providing
adequate financial, technical and institutional support
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
associated political processes in those countries, the
risk of relapse will remain high.
Secondly, there is a growing recognition that
enhanced institutional capacity is central to fostering
national ownership of peacebuilding efforts. Therefore,
the PBC must ensure that its engagement with the
countries on the agenda results in strengthening the
capacity of those countries to undertake the tasks of
peacebuilding.
Thirdly, we believe that members of the PBC
have an individual and collective responsibility to
support countries on the agenda. Such expressions
of support must move beyond mere proclamations to

13-27079

specific action. It must be reflected in results-oriented,
concrete contributions to the countries on the agenda.
Those countries are on the agenda because they need
international support, as well as assistance from their
regional and subregional organizations. Such support
should be reflected in financial contributions or
sharing experiences. The overarching aim of the PBC
should be to reflect on how to best systematically
utilize all the accumulated lessons learned in dealing
with peacebuiling in the countries on its agenda.
Nigeria today offers its expertise through its Technical
Aid Corps, which is a framework for South-South
cooperation to support the countries on the PBC agenda
for their civilian capacity-building needs.
Fourthly, the PBC should intensify its efforts
to strengthen interinstitutional cooperation and
partnership with all relevant stakeholders, including
the principal organs of the United Nations. In that
connection, Nigeria welcomes Security Council
resolution 2086 (2013), which highlights the importance
of the advisory, advocacy and resource mobilization
roles of the PBC in peacebuilding activities, as well as
in advancing a coherent approach to multidimensional
peacekeeping mandates. Forging coherence and
complementarities of action, as well as improving the
coordination of actors, would help to reduce the overlap
and duplication of efforts. It would also ensure greater
clarity of responsibility and accountability.
There can be no meaningful peacebuilding without
funding. That is why we attach great importance to the
work of the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF). The report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the PBF in 2012
(A/67/711) reveals that, in spite of the global recession,
the Fund witnessed an increase in contributions from
$58.1 million in 2011 to $80.5 million in 2012. It is
also encouraging to note that the Peacebuilding Fund
is maturing and has developed a rich set of experiences.
We commend Member States and other donors for their
financial contributions.
For its part, Nigeria has made a significant
contribution to the pursuit and sustenance of peace
and security within the West African subregion and
the Sahel at both the bilateral and the regional levels.
Nigeria is supporting the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States to bring stability
and constitutional order to Guinea-Bissau, Mali and
other conflict-afflicted countries in Africa. Those
efforts have taken the forms of financial, material, as
well as troop contributions.

21

A/67/PV.69

I wish to reiterate Nigeria’s commitment to the
United Nations peacebuilding process. As a member
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission and all the country-specific configurations
of the PBC, as well as one of the leading contributors
of troops to the United Nations peacekeeping missions,
Nigeria has a vital stake in successful peacebuilding
efforts. Today, we reiterate that abiding commitment.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
extend my sincere thanks to you, Sir, for convening
this annual debate on the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its sixth session (A/67/715) and the
report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding
Fund (A/67/711). I thank Ambassador Momen,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, for presenting
the report of the Peacebuilding Commission on its sixth
session. I would also take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Ranko Vilović, Permanent Representative
of the Republic Croatia and Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for the statement he delivered. At this
juncture, my delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Tunisia on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation commends the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund for the reports
submitted for the deliberation of the General Assembly.
The two reports have been invaluable in underscoring
the important work of the Commission and the Fund.
Malaysia takes note of the reports and their findings and
conclusions, which will be the basis of our deliberations
today.
The Peacebuilding Commission was established to
prevent countries emerging from conflict from relapsing
into conflict. As an intergovernmental advisory body
entrusted to coordinate and integrate approaches on
post-conflict peacebuilding measures, the Commission
has continued to play an important role in assisting
such countries in navigating that perilous journey.
Malaysia shares the views reflected in the report,
especially on the importance of developing national
capacity and resource mobilization as key principles to
a successful peacebuilding initiative. Without national
capacity there can be no governance, and without
resources there can be no development. We support
the continued efforts of the Commission in mobilizing
international support and interests from various players,
including the World Bank and the African Development
Bank in that endeavour.

22

The report outlines various progress and
developments in the six country-specific configurations
under its agenda. My delegation is especially encouraged
by developments in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Burundi.
We believe that the progress in those countries is
a testimony to the legitimacy of the strategy of the
Commission in its work and the strong cooperation
between the PBC and the Governments of those
countries. Nevertheless, we believe that efforts should
continue towards achieving sustainable peace, stability
and development. At the same time, my delegation is of
the view that the Commission should intensify efforts
in supporting the remaining countries under its agenda
from relapsing into conflict.
Malaysia is not new in supporting the development
and progress of developing countries and countries
emerging from conflict. We have continued to
demonstrate our commitment in the development of
human capital and governance through the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme. Officials from
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and
the Central African Republic have benefitted from
the Programme. Through the Malaysian Technical
Cooperation Programme, Malaysia has trained a total
of 163 officials from Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea
and Guinea-Bissau in various programmes, including
capacity-building programmes, public administration,
agricultural management, diplomacy and customs and
law enforcement.
There is no doubt that the work of the Commission
must continue and be enhanced. The Commission’s
advisory role on peacebuilding matters with United
Nations organs, particularly the Security Council,
must continue to be strengthened. Malaysia commends
the progress made in enhancing relations between the
Commission and the Security Council. We encourage
further consultations and discussions between the two
organs to support peacebuilding programmes in the
countries under the Commission’s agenda.
While the progress in our work, as reflected in the
report, has been a welcome development, Malaysia is
of the opinion that coherence and coordination between
the Commission and the various United Nations entities
at the field level must continue to be enhanced. My
delegation is of the view that such coordination in the
field is important, as most of the Commission’s work
and assistance take effect at the field level.

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

Malaysia takes note of the developments in the
working methods of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Reform of the working
methods of the Commission would ensure efficiency,
credibility and continuity to future generations. My
delegation is of the view that developments in the
working methods of the Commission must continue to
be updated so as to ensure coherent policy development
and transparency and cultivate institutional memory
that would further strengthen the Commission.
Malaysia also takes note of the relationship
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
concept of civilian capacity in the aftermath of
conflict. That synergy can be further explored in
gauging expertise from countries that have emerged
from conflict in order to endow the Commission with
experience and knowledge. While taking note of that
important development, my delegation is of the view
that cooperation and collaboration between the two
sides should be more specific and centred on important
thematic issues such as economic revitalization, the
development of governance and national reconciliation.
My delegation underscores the fact that resource
mobilization is a key element in supporting countries
in a transition towards peace. In this regard, Malaysia
takes note of the Secretary-General’s report on the
Peacebuilding Fund. We are encouraged by the
increased contribution of $80.5 million in 2012. That
demonstrates a widespread belief and trust in the
Fund on the part of Member States and donor entities
in supporting the peacebuilding agenda of the United
Nations.
Malaysia will continue to place our trust in the
Peacebuilding Fund to support the Commission in its
work in the six countries on its agenda. Apart from the
six countries on its agenda, Malaysia takes note that the
Fund has supported 19 other countries and 19 United
Nations agencies in various programmes that support
peace and stability.
While the Fund has contributed to the work of the
Commission and various other countries and United
Nations agencies, Malaysia would like to underline
that more Member States and international donors must
contribute to the Fund. At the same time, Malaysia
would also like to echo the call for transparency and
accountability in the disbursements of the Fund by
ensuring that best practices are inculcated in the
management of the Fund.

13-27079

Peacebuilding requires the cooperation and
coordination of all key players, both international and
from the host country. The Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund have continued to play
this important role of enabling nations in duress to
stabilise and prosper. We should continue to support the
Commission and the Fund in this noble endeavour. It is
Malaysia’s aspiration to see greater commitment from
Member States and international players to supporting
sustainable peace and stability through the work of the
Commission. Malaysia stands ready and looks forward
to working closely with all its members in support of
peacebuilding.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission for 2012,
for having presented the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission on its sixth session (A/67/715). We would
also like to thank the Permanent Representative of
Croatia, Ambassador Ranko Vilović, current Chair of
the Commission, for his statement, and we wish him
every success in his work this year.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Tunisia on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
We welcome the new format for presenting the report
of the Peacebuilding Commission, in accordance with
the recommendations resulting from the 2010 review.
The report places greater emphasis on the progress
achieved by the Commission, the opportunities and
challenges ahead, and ways to enhance the impact of
its support. It also contains a broad-ranging analysis of
the implementation of the recommendations of the 2010
review, which offers a clearer vision for the direction
to be taken.
As a country that overcame its own internal conflict
in 1996, we value the support of the international
community to peacebuilding. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund,
and in particular the country-specific configurations,
was useful in mobilizing such cooperation. In addition,
their activities over the past six years have also been an
important source of lessons learned in the specific and
varied situations.
We recognize the work carried out by the countryspecific configurations, which represent a genuine
nexus between the concept of peacebuilding and its

23

A/67/PV.69

application to situations on the ground. In this respect,
as highlighted in the report, we stress the importance for
the national stakeholders in the respective countries to
demonstrate leadership and firm commitment in order
to ensure that the support provided by the Commission
has the desired impact.

value of the relationship between the Security Council
and the Commission in better addressing conflicts and
other situations in the countries on its agenda. We will
continue to support the work of the Commission as
a mechanism to meet the specific needs of countries
emerging from conflict.

Concerning the main functions that we
have identified for the Commission — resource
mobilization, political support and the promotion
of coordination — allow us to make the following
observations.

Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Allow me to thank the
Secretary-General and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) for the instructive and forward-looking report
of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding
Fund (A/67/711) and the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (A/67/715), presented as mandated by
General Assembly resolutions 63/282 and 60/180,
respectively. Sierra Leone warmly welcomes both
reports, which, inter alia, accurately reflect the
programmes and activities of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF) and the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
in Sierra Leone during the reporting period.

We are pleased to note that the Commission has
continued to enhance its resource mobilization efforts,
identifying gaps and the relevant stakeholders and
programmes to be mobilized. We recognize that the
interruption of constitutional order has a negative
effect on the mobilization of resources, and we agree
that there is a need to continue to support the countries
on the agenda to create national systems that help to
attract sustainable financial and technical support.
We welcome the Commission’s readiness to pay
attention and provide political support to countries
on its agenda, in addition to the support provided by
other entities, supporting for example Governments in
shouldering new responsibilities that arise due to the
change in the nature of the United Nations presence in
the country, as will be the case in Liberia and Sierra
Leone.
We reiterate the need for the Commission use its
political influence to promote the necessary coordination
within the international community on the ground by
enhancing the support of the various stakeholders to
the peacebuilding strategies and priorities established
at the national level. The progress achieved under the
Commission’s initiatives to improve coordination at the
country level should help the Commission to promote
the creation of transparent mechanisms that bolster that
coordination and national involvement.
We recognize in particular the great usefulness
of the Peacebuilding Fund, and we are pleased to
confirm that total contributions to the Fund increased
significantly in 2012. We hope that the Fund will
continue to receive the sustained support it needs to
fulfil its functions.
Guatemala shares the Commission’s commitment
to the search for lasting development and peace in
countries emerging from conflict, and recognizes the

24

Let me also thank the outgoing Chair of the PBC,
the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, for
presenting the report of the PBC, for steering the work
of the Commission in an exemplary manner during his
tenure, and for his support for the work of the Chair
and members of the Sierra Leone configuration. In
a similar vein, I would like to join other delegations
in welcoming the new Chair of the PBC, Mr. Ranko
Vilović, Permanent Representative of Croatia, and
assure him of Sierra Leone’s support.
We acknowledge the effort made by the PBC in
taking forward the recommendations of the 2010 review
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture
(A/64/868), in particular the initiation of activities by
the Commission on a path towards strengthening its
impact and demonstrating value added, both in the field
and as a policy platform for the normative development
of the peacebuilding discourse in the United Nations
and beyond. In that regard, we note the efforts of the
Commission in strengthening its relationship with
operational entities of the United Nations, especially
the senior United Nations leadership in countries
on the agenda of the Commission, the Chairs Group
and the international financial institutions, and more
importantly, its efforts aimed at strengthening linkages
with the principal organs of the United Nations. We
encourage the Commission to continue interacting
with the World Bank, the African Development Bank,
regional organizations and operational actors of the
United Nations system to strengthen partnership and
alignment of activities. That is of crucial importance,

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

as it has the potential to strengthen the Commission’s
political advocacy, resource mobilization and efforts
to address transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking.

peacebuilding elements of our development framework
with the joint vision of the United Nations country
team, resource mobilization efforts and political
accompaniment.

We urge the Commission to continue building on its
contributions to the work of the Senior Advisory Group,
particularly in the area of improving the United Nations
contribution to the strengthening of national capacities
for peacebuilding. The fundamental principle of national
ownership and the importance of supporting national
civilian capacity development and institution-building
will no doubt broaden and deepen the pool of
civilian expertise for peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict. In that regard, the Commission
should monitor and make recommendations on the
implementation of the Secretary-General’s civilian
capacity initiative and assess its practical implications
for national capacity-building in critical peacebuilding
priority areas.

The successful conduct of elections in 2012 amply
exemplified those achievements. In that regard, we
commend the PBF, the PBC and development partners
and donors for their valuable contributions towards
the conduct of successful elections in November 2012.
The process was exceptionally peaceful, technically
well organized, and characterized by a high voter
turnout. It demonstrated the growing capacity of Sierra
Leone’s national institutions and marked the crossing
of a significant peacebuilding threshold. That could not
have been easily achieved without the accompaniment
of the PBC or support from the PBF, key development
partners and donor countries.

It is clearly important to emphasize that countries
emerging from conflict need an institution like the
PBC that will serve as a platform of support, providing
them with advice, raising their profile internationally,
building trust and dialogue among the various national
stakeholders, and mobilizing financial resources for
immediate and long-term peacebuilding priorities. In
that regard, the PBC should incorporate the findings
of the Working Group on Lessons Learned, as well as
inputs from expressed views of Member States on the
need to develop a field-centric approach and ensuring
timely and predictable financing of peacebuilding
activities over the medium- to long-term.
We acknowledge and appreciate the role of the
Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO), which remains
critical to the Commission’s efficient functioning
through the provision of assistance in the development
of the instruments of engagement, the assessment
of progress towards commitments made therein, or
the unblocking of obstacles and identification of
opportunities for resource mobilization.
Sierra Leone’s engagement with both the PBC and
the PBF has been quite fruitful. As underscored in both
reports, the Commission has, through the relentless
efforts of the Sierra Leone configuration, the PBF and
donors and development partners, seen tremendous
progress in our peacebuilding efforts. Those
achievements range from support to our democratic
and good governance institutions to aligning the

13-27079

Going forward, Sierra Leone is in the midst of
articulating its priorities for the next five years. In
that regard, Sierra Leone’s emerging priorities for
the Agenda for Prosperity reflect the much-desired
shift in emphasis towards fostering economic growth,
improving social services and building human capital.
To that end, and by way of building on the Agenda for
Change, we are developing a strategy to address our
next priority development challenges. We therefore urge
members of the Sierra Leone PBC configuration, the
PBC membership in general, the PBSO and development
partners as well as donors, to support our development
aspirations, including the seamless transition to a
strong and well-resourced resident coordinator system.
The Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration,
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada, visited
Sierra Leone in February this year, and his report
and briefing of the configuration underscore progress
made in addressing key peacebuilding priorities and
the need for enduring support, particularly in the area
of youth unemployment and empowerment, security
sector reform, support for the proposed constitutional
review process, management of natural resources,
the stemming of drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime through a coordinated subregional
approach, and the need for strong private sector growth
that could translate into a more tangible peace dividend
and sustainable peace consolidation.
We are convinced that the composition of
the delegation demonstrates the PBC’s continued
determination to sustain international support for

25

A/67/PV.69

Sierra Leone. Let me at this juncture express Sierra
Leone’s unreserved gratitude to the Chair and members
of the Sierra Leone configuration for their unflinching
commitment to achieving Sierra Leone’s peacebuilding
and development transformation goals.
We believe that the Chair’s visit, as has always
been the case, was quite rewarding. Sierra Leone
looks forward to more regular visits as they provide
an important platform for all actors and stakeholders
to speak out on achievements as well as challenges.
The arrival of the mission soon after the recent United
Nations technical assessment mission also presented
the opportunity for an informed consideration of the
transition process from the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone to a resident
coordinator system.
In conclusion, as one of the first countries on the
PBC’s agenda, Sierra Leone has charted a path for others
to potentially learn from. This has involved adjusting
early approaches in order to make more effective use of
PBF resources, lower the bureaucratic burden placed on
Governments, and better align with national priorities.
It has also entailed a shift in perspective away from
heavy field-level engagements with an operational
focus to a more political role that concentrates on how
the PBC can serve as an international platform for
advocacy and action on all aspects of peacebuilding.
However, despite those achievements, several
outstanding issues will require effort over the longer
term. Evidently, now is the time for the international
community to pay greater attention to Sierra Leone by
providing the required continued assistance to build on
the gains achieved to date. Similarly, there is a need
for a measured transition that takes into account the
filling of critical gaps that might occur during and after
the transition process. Above all, the pace of transition
should match needs on the ground, especially given the
potential for small investments at this stage to make
a substantial contribution to consolidating hard-won
peace. In that context, we welcome the remarks by
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra
Leone configuration, on the need for the configuration
to turn its attention to supporting the transition process,
including by advocating for any necessary resources to
fill gaps created by the drawdown.
Finally, we emphasize the need for the PBC to align
its engagement with the Government of Sierra Leone’s

26

new priorities articulated in the eight pillars of the
Agenda for Prosperity.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on the work of its sixth session
(A/67/715). We particularly welcome the analytical
approach of the report, which is structured according
to the main recommendations of the 2010 review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Using
concrete examples drawn from the six country-specific
configurations of the Commission, the report identifies
the key challenges and opportunities for the PBC.
To avoid a repetition of the main points of the
report, with which we entirely concur, I shall limit my
statement to three points, in particular on the basis of
our experience as Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the PBC. Generally speaking, we believe that
peacebuilding actors could play a more central and
strategic role in the overall architecture of the United
Nations. This is particularly true not only for the PBC
as an intergovernmental advisory body, but also for the
Peacebuilding Support Office.
First, the efforts of the PBC should focus on the
actual impact on the ground and thus the work of the
six country-specific configurations. The establishment
and strengthening of partnerships with stakeholders
within the United Nations system and other actors,
such as international financial institutions, are crucial
in this regard and deserve continued consideration.
Links with the private sector should also be explored
further. However, merely establishing partnerships is
not enough. Ensuring the coordination and consistency
of reciprocal efforts is key to their success. The
positive results of the Burundi development partners’
conference, held in October 2012 in Geneva, showed us
how well-managed partnerships can make a difference.
Secondly, the question of the transition away from
United Nations missions and the role of the Commission
in this process needs to be better understood. Three of
the six configurations of the PBC — those for Burundi,
Sierra Leone and Liberia — have achieved decisive
milestones in this regard. We welcome the preliminary
discussions in the Commission’s Working Group, and
hope to continue and expand this important debate in
order to better define the value added of the PBC in
transition processes. Those discussions should ideally
be carried out in close collaboration with the Security

13-27079

A/67/PV.69

Council, which has the final say on the completion of
United Nations missions.
Thirdly, and more generally, we are of the opinion
that the PBC must better promote its role as the main
forum for exchanges on peacebuilding at the United
Nations, given its unique composition, which brings
together all the relevant major United Nations groups.
We are, for example, very much in favour of including
issues related to peacebuilding in the development
programme for the post-2015 period. Thus, a debate
that is focused on those aspects could be held in the
PBC.
However, the Commission should not simply
address United Nations processes. The potential of the
Busan process of the Group of Seven Plus and the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States should also be
explored and discussed within the PBC. After all, the
six countries on the agenda of the Commission have
signed on to the New Deal.
Before I conclude, allow me to say a few words
about the Peacebuilding Fund, as the report on the Fund
(A/67/711) is also under consideration this morning. We
welcome the valuable contribution of the Fund to the
promotion of peacebuilding, and we especially welcome
the announcement by the Assistant Secretary-General,
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, that a third financial tranche
will be assigned to Burundi. We also encourage efforts
to better coordinate the Fund with similar instruments
of the World Bank, the African Development Bank and
the United Nations Development Programme.
To conclude, we would like to express our sincere
thanks to Ambassador Momen of Bangladesh, former
Chair of the PBC, under whom this report was written;
the staff of the Peacebuilding Support Office; and
Assistant Secretary-General Ms. Cheng-Hopkins and
her team for their valuable efforts.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): At the outset, let
me express gratitude to the former Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Momen of
Bangladesh, for his informative presentation of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) report on its sixth
session (A/67/715), and to the current PBC Chair,
Ambassador Vilović of Croatia, for his comprehensive
statement. My delegation fully supports the priorities
outlined by PBC Chair Ranko Vilović.

13-27079

While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement by
the representative of the European Union, I would like
to make a few points in my national capacity.
In our view, the PBC report before us today, which
contains a valuable analytical component, duly captures
important manifestations of the Commission’s added
value and its comparative advantages. In particular, my
delegation welcomes PBC support for the successful
conduct of elections in Sierra Leone, the launching of a
national reconciliation strategy in Liberia and resource
mobilization in support of a new poverty reduction
strategy in Burundi. At the same time, we agree with
one of the conclusions that the unique membership
structure of the Commission and its nature as a political
platform made up of the most influential global actors
has yet to be realized.
Going forward, our priority should remain the
implementation of the outcome of the 2010 review in
order to further boost PBC relevance, performance and
impact on the ground. This, in our view, should include
sharpening the Commission’s analytical profile and
enhancing its interaction and closer cooperation with
the Security Council. The PBC must also give due and
comprehensive consideration to situations where two
countries on its agenda have experienced a disruption
of their constitutional order, thus undermining the
progress in peacebuilding. A leading role in that
exercise can be played by the relevant country-specific
configurations and the Working Group on Lessons
Learned.
We fully share the conviction that only a more
relevant, more flexible, better performing, better
supported, more ambitious and better understood PBC
will make a difference on the ground. In this respect, my
delegation looks forward to the early implementation of
the innovative agenda going forward that concludes the
Commission’s report.
Peacebuilding is one of the pillars of Ukraine’s
multidimensional contribution to United Nations
activity in the area of international peace and security.
In this regard, we understood our membership in the
PBC Organizational Committee in 2011 and 2012
as a privilege and a responsibility in equal measure.
Among the highlights of Ukraine’s first experience
in the Commission was our vice-chairmanship of
the Organizational Committee in 2011 and active
involvement in the Chair’s group; participation in the
first-ever field visits of the inclusive PBC delegations

27

A/67/PV.69

to Guinea and Liberia; and contribution to the activities
of the steering group of the Liberia configuration.
We are also glad to have been able to contribute
substantially to a number of areas that are important for
increasing the added value of the PBC. Particular attention
was paid to the strengthening of the Commission’s
thematic edge in terms of such crosscutting issues
as women’s participation in peacebuilding, gender
mainstreaming, children and youth in peacebuilding
and the peacekeeping and peacebuilding nexus, as well
as to its institutional consolidation and more robust
interaction with the relevant United Nations organs.
Here, the first-ever joint PBC/UN-Women high-level
event comes to mind.
I would do injustice to Ukrainian peacekeepers
if I did not mention that my country’s contribution to
the United Nations peacebuilding endeavour has also

28

been channelled through its active military, police
and civilian engagement in over 20 missions under the
auspices of the United Nations. As a practical follow-up
to our first membership in the PBC in general and its
Liberia configuration in particular, Ukraine intends to
send a new generation of the formed police unit to the
United Nations Mission in Liberia.
We will do our best to further advance the United
Nations peacebuilding agenda and strengthen the
impact of the PBC in post-conflict and fragile societies.
It is against that backdrop that we hope to be entrusted
with the responsibility of serving in the PBC in 2014
and 2015, representing the General Assembly category.
In closing, I would like to express our full support
of the Peacebuilding Support Office and Peacebuilding
Fund.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

13-27079
