United Nations

S/PV.6517

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6517th meeting
Wednesday, 20 April 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan (S/2011/239)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-30506 (E)

*1130506*

S/PV.6517

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Chinese Language Day
The President (spoke in Chinese): As today is
Chinese Language Day, I would like to convey my
congratulations to the Chinese delegation.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
(S/2011/239)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I would like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2011/239, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Atul Khare.
Mr. Khare (spoke in Chinese): Today is Chinese
Language Day. I would like to begin by congratulating
the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Chinese
Mission to the United Nations, Mr. Wang Min, and to
convey my best wishes to all Chinese-speaking people.
(spoke in English)
Thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in Sudan.
The Council has before it the Secretary-General’s most
recent report (S/2011/239) on the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), outlining the
Mission’s activities up until 1 April and
recommendations for the extension of the UNMIS
mandate, which will expire on 30 April.
I would like to start my remarks today by
outlining the latest developments in the Sudan,
followed by updates on the post-referendum

2

negotiations and the status of the outstanding
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) provisions,
before highlighting some of the key issues related to
the planning for a follow-up United Nations mission in
South Sudan.
During the reporting period, the successful
completion of the Southern Sudan self-determination
referendum was a momentous achievement. It is a
testament to the commitment of the CPA parties to
peace and to the courage of His Excellency President
Al-Bashir and His Excellency First Vice-President Kiir.
The CPA parties went to great lengths to ensure that the
referendum progressed smoothly, peacefully and on
time, and that its results clearly reflected the will of the
Southern Sudanese people and were accepted by all.
The referendum also demonstrated how the peace
and security work of the United Nations can be
effective when supported by a unified and coordinated
international community. The logistical and technical
assistance of UNMIS and the financial support of the
international partners were indispensable. Just as
important was the political facilitation provided by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Menkerios and the tireless work of the staff throughout
the United Nations in the Sudan.
Despite these achievements, several challenges
lie ahead. Key CPA issues remain unresolved or
incomplete, and if not addressed effectively could
quickly undermine progress and threaten to pull the
parties back into conflict.
Following the referendum, tensions in the South
have risen. In particular, conflicts between the Sudan
People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) and a number of
insurgents and militia resumed and posed a significant
threat to civilians in the Jonglei, Upper Nile and Unity
states.
The situation in Abyei remained volatile
throughout the reporting period. The continued failure
of the parties to make progress towards resolving
Abyei’s future status fuelled frustration and
empowered hard-line elements within the Misseriya
and Ngok Dinka communities and contributed to
continued violence. There has, fortunately, been no
significant upsurge in violence since early March, and
the Kadugli agreements have contributed to containing
the situation even though their full implementation
remains a major challenge.

11-30506

S/PV.6517

In all cases, the Mission responded through
political facilitation and increased military presence.
However, denial of access severely curtailed the ability
of UNMIS to patrol conflict areas such as Abyei,
Jonglei and Upper Nile and further deter threats against
civilians.
The majority of UNMIS patrols took place across
the Mission area unhindered by any deliberate
restrictions to UNMIS freedom of movement. As I
mentioned earlier, however, this was not the case in
Abyei, Jonglei and Upper Nile, where this positive
trend has been reversed. Out of a total of 221 patrols
conducted in the Abyei area during the reporting
period, at least 33 — or around 15 per cent — were
denied, with a sizeable increase in March, when
21 cases — or 26 percent — of the 82 UNMIS patrols
were denied access. More importantly, since January
and despite persistent attempts, UNMIS patrols have
never been able to gain access to the sites where the
fighting took place, such as Makir Abior, Noong,
Todach and Tajalei. In addition, UNMIS patrols have
frequently been harassed, most recently in Diffra on
18 April, which has led to the non-attainment of
original patrol goals. There were also overt displays of
aggression towards UNMIS, for example in Goli,
Diffra, Shegei and Um Khaer.
In March, due to SPLA operations against the
armed militias in Upper Nile and Jonglei States, the
SPLA requested that UNMIS remain out of the
counties where the operation was occurring. This
restriction was revoked by the SPLA in late March, but
it severely hampered the ability of UNMIS to verify
the military and humanitarian situation in these areas
and of humanitarian actors to gain access to affected
civilians. Since the lifting of the restrictions, UNMIS
and the United Nations country team have been able to
conduct verification and assessment missions to
address the plight of the civilian population and
security concerns.
To counter these restrictions, UNMIS engaged
with both Governments and their military command.
The issue was brought to the attention of the area joint
military committees and the Ceasefire Joint Monitoring
Commission, and also discussed within the Ceasefire
Political Commission. In Abyei, the standing
committee also discussed the problem, and it was
decided that UNMIS should have unhindered access to
the whole area. This has increased the Mission’s

11-30506

mobility to some extent but restrictions remain a
challenge.
We have been pleased with the cooperation
between the National Congress Party (NCP) and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM), but
remain concerned about the slow progress on
outstanding CPA issues, such as border demarcation,
Abyei, popular consultations, and the integration of
SPLA North into the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF),
and on the post-referendum negotiations.
The recent round of negotiations in Addis Ababa
from 9 to 11 April concluded with an agreement on a
joint approach to debt management ahead of the World
Bank meeting last weekend, but a number of economic
questions, such as the ownership of pipelines and
transitional financial arrangements for oil-revenue
sharing, remain to be resolved. Equally, some progress
was made on the joint management of the border, such
as the establishment of a joint command mechanism to
ensure the implementation of the post-referendum
security arrangements and the development of a joint
paper on border security, but the parties still differ on
the necessity of third party involvement.
In this context, we are very concerned about the
lack of progress in finding a solution to the crisis in
Abyei. While the SPLM insists on an agreement on the
basis of the CPA Abyei Protocol and the ruling of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration, the NCP has stressed
the importance of equal participation by the Misseriya
in a referendum. Abyei remains a flashpoint that has
the potential to further escalate and damage the
relationship between the North and the South. In this
regard, UNMIS has recorded a sizeable military buildup in the area on both sides. We are also concerned
that, due to the continued obstruction of migration in
the central corridor, migration-related conflict cannot
be ruled out.
Due to these disagreements, there is a possibility
that the residual CPA issues will not be solved or that
the post-referendum negotiations will not be concluded
by 9 July. The popular consultations in Blue Nile state
are lagging behind and have not started in Southern
Kordofan, pending the state elections. Furthermore, the
physical demarcation of the border has not yet
commenced, and the integration of the SPLA troops in
the two areas has not been resolved, creating a
potential security threat. It is our view that third party
engagement will remain necessary to bring the CPA to

3

S/PV.6517

a satisfactory conclusion and to further support the AU
High-Level Implementation Panel in its efforts to
negotiate a post-referendum package.
The popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states are vital to the development
of peaceful North-South relations and the North’s own
adjustment in the post-CPA period. It is of the utmost
importance to ensure credible popular consultations in
Blue Nile and South Kordofan states and that the
parties commit themselves to mechanisms to
implement their results beyond the CPA’s interim
period.
We are concerned about the security risks relating
to the integration of the SPLA from Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan states into the SAF, especially
pending progress on the popular consultations process.
These troops, located on the border with Unity and
Upper Nile states, insist that their political grievances
be adequately addressed in the popular consultations,
and await their outcome and implementation before
agreeing to any formal agreement on their integration.
Furthermore, the upcoming elections in Southern
Kordofan, which are to commence on 2 May, are of
importance to both parties, and the increase in violence
is of great concern to us. The NCP-SPLM partnership
has been a stabilizing factor over the past two years,
but since this election will influence Southern
Kordofan’s political balance of power, the rhetoric of
the election campaign has been increasingly
aggressive. As a result, on 13 April, four predominantly
Nuba villages within the locality of Al-Rashad,
200 kilometres north-east of Kadugli, were targeted by
violence, resulting in the death of 19 persons, including
three children, four women and 12 men, and the injury
of 29, including three women.
Conflicts between the SPLA and insurgents pose
a significant threat to civilians in Jonglei, Upper Nile
and Unity states. Several issues are at stake here: first,
disgruntled high-level officers of the SPLA who do not
see eye to eye with the SPLM leadership; secondly,
Southern militia leaders — such as Murle and
Shilluk — whose local grievances have not been
addressed; and finally, Southerners who fought within
the Sudanese Armed Forces but want to be integrated
into the SPLA. The Government of Southern Sudan
will need to take concrete measures to address ethnic
tensions, mismanagement, political and social

4

marginalization,
economic
development
governance, especially in rule of law institutions.

and

The integrated technical and operational planning
team of the United Nations has completed its report,
which is being considered at Headquarters now. As part
of the planning process, there has been continual
engagement through the Integrated Mission Task Force
to ensure that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has full awareness of the needs and
objectives of other departments, funds, agencies and
programmes in the post-9 July period.
The outcome of this work has been the
development of a broad mission concept, a concept for
the military and police component, and an initial draft
of a mission support concept. These concepts have
informed a paper for the consideration by the Policy
Committee chaired by the Secretary-General when it
meets some time around 26 April. The SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations will then be outlined in a
special report that will be issued for the Council’s
consideration in mid-May.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Khare for his briefing.
I now give the floor
Representative of the Sudan.

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate you most sincerely, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also thank you for your
ongoing coordination efforts during Colombia’s
membership of the Council.
We are all aware of the significance of today’s
deliberations, especially for the Sudan. In particular,
the report of the Secretary-General before the Security
Council (S/2011/239) is the penultimate report on the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS). The interim
period will end in just over two months. This is the
most decisive, crucial and sensitive period for the two
parties to the CPA. During that time, they will have to
redouble their efforts in order to reach political
settlements on outstanding issues, so as to achieve the
primary goal of the CPA, namely, the establishment of
lasting peace and security in both the North and the
South.

11-30506

S/PV.6517

The report of the Secretary-General sheds light
on numerous political developments during the
reporting period. Chief among those is the completion
of the referendum in a safe, fair and transparent
manner, as has been communicated to the Council by
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, head of the United Nations panel
tasked with monitoring the referendum. However, the
referendum is not an end in itself. We have reached the
point where we must conclude the implementation of
the CPA, not just by resolving outstanding issues but
also by initiating arrangements to enhance integration
between the North and South following separation.
Our desire in the North to promote fraternal
relations, in particular with the nascent State in the
South, was illustrated by the historic statement
delivered by our President during his visit to Juba prior
to the referendum, as well as by his statement to the
Cabinet at the time of the referendum’s endorsement.
Once again, I wish to stress here that the principles and
guidelines declared by Sudan’s President constitute
both our platform and our approach to addressing postreferendum arrangements, including on the issues of
citizenship,
debt,
assets,
water,
international
instruments, security, economic arrangements, the
demarcation of the border and the situation in Abyei —
in spite of the thorny nature of those issues and the
time they require. We have reiterated many times here
in the Council that we would like — and are in fact
eager — to provide assistance to the nascent State in
the South, for we understand that security there also
means security for the North.
In its section on Abyei, the report of the
Secretary-General sheds light on many developments
experienced in the region during the reporting period.
Paragraph 17 refers to the 13 January Kadugli
agreement between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
tribes, as well as to the 17 January agreement between
the Ministers of the Interior of the two parties to the
CPA. Those agreements provide for arrangements to
find solutions to disputes. If the two parties adhere to
them, those arrangements will bring about an end
conflict. The agreements also provide for the
deployment of two additional Joint Integrated Unit
battalions, while withdrawing all Southern-affiliated
police units. However, clashes flared up once again
when Misseriya tribe members were prevented from
taking their herds to water sources.
No one can argue that addressing security issues
and concerns will ever substitute for a comprehensive

11-30506

political settlement on Abyei. As the Council is aware,
the Government of the Sudan has continued to
positively address the proposals on the situation and
status of Abyei provided by the facilitators and
mediators, as they represent members of the Council.
Those include the framework proposals submitted by
Mr. Thabo Mbeki, head of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel. However, those proposals
fell on deaf ears on the other side, which failed to
respond positively and rejected them. In the light of the
flexibility we in the North have shown, we call upon
the Council today to resolve the question of Abyei. We
propose that the other party should also take steps to
demonstrate flexibility, in order to help the facilitators
and mediators to address the problem. We would like to
emphasize that we are prepared to show the necessary
flexibility, taking into consideration the circumstances
in the region, so as to reach a final solution to the
Abyei issue.
We have followed up on the preparations for the
legislative elections to be held in South Kordofan state.
Those elections were among the requirements of the
popular consultations provided for in the CPA.
Preparations began with voter registration and the
publication of candidate lists to carry out elections for
the legislative council. I would like to emphasize that
we in the North are committed to making progress and
to continuing the preparations. I wish to reassure the
Council that the elections will take place from 2 to
4 May, as scheduled. That will constitute a great stride
towards completing the popular consultations. We will
provide the Council with updates on developments in
due course. I also wish to reassure the Council that
both parties are participating in the popular
consultations.
In his briefing, our friend Atul Khare referred to
clashes in certain areas of Southern Kordofan. I wish to
stress that those were the same kind of actions as take
place in the context of competition between any two
parties in preparations for elections anywhere in the
world; they are not policies aimed at reigniting
hostilities. They flared up, but were contained
immediately.
Following elections for the Legislative Council in
Southern Kordofan, we will initiate public
consultations aimed at assessing public opinion in
connection with the services provided by the State.
This is an aspect that has already been achieved in
Blue Nile State, which is a step ahead of Southern

5

S/PV.6517

Kordofan.
Generally
speaking,
the
popular
consultations in both States are taking place in an
objective manner; there are no major problems in this
regard.
As noted in paragraph 42 of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/239), the SPLA presence in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States is an issue that
should be discussed, investigated and addressed on the
basis of the CPA — that is, those forces should be
withdrawn. I wanted to provide the Council with
details so that it would be aware of where the problem
lies — that the SPLA has not yet withdrawn its
elements from Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
States, which could have a negative impact on the
popular consultations. We therefore call on the Council
to send a strong message. We are not asking for
condemnation, but for the Council to encourage the
SPLA to implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, specifically on this aspect.
I would recall that the Sudanese military made a
commitment to all of the aspects of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement by withdrawing all of its units and
the Joint Integrated Units from Southern Sudan. SPLA
redeployment from the North remains at 37 per cent.
According to the report of the Secretary-General, that
aspect should be addressed by the Council, as these
issues are intertwined.
Regarding security developments in Southern
Sudan, the report before the Council and the briefing
provided by Mr. Atul Khare paint a grim picture of the
situation in Southern Sudan. It can be summed up as
follows: there are too many insurgent units. I could
describe them as an amoeba — a kind of creature that
keeps growing and growing. Every day we hear of a
new instance of an insurgent battalion defecting and
taking up arms against the State. I personally drew
attention to this issue one month ago, when Mr. Pagan
Amun participated in the meeting of the Council.
However, Mr. Amun did not like my statements. I
believe that this is not the right approach to tackling
these issues.
We welcome the role of the United Nations and
of UNMIS. We pay tribute to them for the credible
information they have presented in depicting the issues
and shedding light on the problems beleaguering
Southern Sudan. The goal is for that nascent State to be
stable, secure and deserving of international support,
especially in the area of development. It should prepare

6

and transform itself from an elitist military
organization into a State that is inclusive of all the
political parties in Southern Sudan. The units in
question should be integrated and reached out to, not
excluded, for their exclusion would mean that the
nascent State had failed before even seeing the light.
I am sharing this with the Council not as an
opponent of the South but as a Sudanese citizen who is
truly looking forward to the stability and security of
both the North and the South. I therefore wish to paint
a true picture of the situation and thereby help the
Council to take the right decision.
Another aspect that shows that recently there
have been tremendous problems related to the SPLA is
the fact that they have prevented many elements from
reaching the region. They have prevented UNMIS from
carrying out its humanitarian work, let alone fulfilling
its military mandate.
In closing, I wish to recall what I said earlier: that
this is a mushrooming phenomenon. George Athor, the
insurgent SPLA General, and many others have
defected and separated from the SPLA.
Regarding the recommendations on the future of
UNMIS, the Mission’s mandate will expire before
9 July, the date that marks the end of the interim
period. Therefore, we endorse the technical and
temporary extension of the UNMIS mandate until
9 July, as proposed in paragraph 111 of the report.
We are determined to intensify our consultations
with our brethren in the SPLA so as to resolve all
outstanding issues, including the status of Abyei. What
is needed at this stage is for the international
community, in particular the Security Council, to build
confidence between the two parties and to support their
efforts to resolve those issues. We are filled with hope
that our brethren in the SPLA will understand the
requirements of the forthcoming period and the
daunting challenges that we will face. In that way,
together we will be able to present a civilized example
of two neighbouring countries sharing many common
denominators in terms of history and brotherhood.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

11-30506
