VIII.

247

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

35/216.

V

Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund

EMERGENCY FUND

A

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to the
Emergency Fund, for a further period of one year, by an
amount not exceeding $100,000:

VI
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $4,723,200
(net) for I 98 I, being the amount of $4,698,200 recommended by the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, increased by an amount of
$25,000 required for the two temporary-assistance posts
requested by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board, and supplementary expenses of $ I 8 I ,700 (net)
for 1980 for the administration of the Fund;

VII
SUPPLEMENTARY MEASURES

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/222 of 20 December 1979,
Mindful of the interests of the participants and
beneficiaries of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund and of the morale and efficiency of the international civil service,
Noting that a policy of prudent, world-wide
diversification of the investments of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund serves the interests of the participants and beneficiaries.
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the investments of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund;' 0
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
diversify the investments of the Fund in appropriate
investments in developing countries whenever this serves
the interests of the participants and beneficiaries and is
in accordance with the criteria of safety, profitability. liquidity and convertibility;
3. Reaffirms its confidence in the Secretary-General
as trustee of the assets of the Fund.

Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension

Board to consider, in conjunction with its proposed
study of aid to pensioners who because of their advanced age are in need of supplementary payments,
measures to alleviate the situation of pensioners whose
retirement in the early years of the existence of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund resulted in
pensions which have remained inadequate despite subsequent adjustments, and to submit proposals thereon,
which are within the available resources of the Fund, to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

B

Concerned over the increasing cost of pension adjust-

ments,
Requests the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to take the following action and report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session:
(a) To study the procedures involved in the verification of a pensioner's residence:
To study the possibility of a methodology to

verify a pensioner's residence;
(c)

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 197 of 22 December 1976,
32/73 A of9 December 1977, 33/121 A of 19 December
I 978 and 34 /222 A of 20 December 1979, in which it requested the Secretary-General to ensure that the
resources which the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund holds invested in transnational corporations are
invested on safe terms and, to the greatest extent practicable, in sound investments in developing countries.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 10

The General Assembly,

(b)

99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

To study the possibility of pro-rata divisions of

pension adjustments for pensioners who spend a significant part of a retirement year in a country other than
their stipulated country of residence;
(d) To study the practice whereby individuals
holding United Nations special service agreements or
contracts receive a fee and a pension simultaneously
from the United Nations or the specialized agencies.

99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund, 11
Reaffirming the fiduciary responsibility of the
Secretary-General for the interests of the participants
and beneficiaries of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund under the Regulations and Rules of the Fund.
Reaffirming its belief that the diversification of investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in
developing countries and development agencies can
facilitate the attainment of the objectives and purposes
of the organizations of the United Nations system
without affecting the profitability of the investments of
the Fund,
Noting with concern that investments in shares of
transnational corporations have been maintained at an
appreciable level,
"' A/C.5/35/41 and Corr. I.
" Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 9 (A/35/9) and A/35/9/ Add. I.

General Assembl}-Thirty-fifth Session

248

1. Commends the efforts of the Secretary-General, as
trustee of the assets of the Fund, to fulfil the mandate
given to him to diversify the investments of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund and to ensure, in consultation with the Investments Committee, that the
resources which the Fund holds invested in shares of
transnational corporations are reinvested in developing
countries to the greatest extent practicable, subject to
careful observance of the requirements of safety,
profitability, liquidity and convertibility, and in conformity with Regulations of the Fund:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and
accelerate the efforts mentioned in paragraph I above
and to report on those efforts to the General Assembly
at its thirty-sixth session:
3. Decides that, as from the thirty-seventh session of
the General Assembly, a detailed biennial inventory of
the investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall be made with a view to finding ways and
means of strengthening its operations in conformity
with the Regulations of the Fund and the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly.

99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

('

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/121 B of 19 December
1978 and 34/222 B of 20 December 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, 50
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consult
with the Governments of all States members of the
Organization of African Unity, as well as financial
institutions in Africa, with a view to making substantial
investments in Africa on safe and profitable terms in
keeping with the development requirements of African
countries.
99th plenary meeting
17 December 1980

35/217.

Questions relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 1980-1981

The General Assembly

II
SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE UNITED NATIONS TO
ACTIVITIES FINANCED FROM EXTRABUDGETARY
RESOURCES

I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on services provided by the United Nations to activities
financed from extrabudgetary resources 53 and the
related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;"
2. Endorses the recommendations made by the Advisory Committee in paragraph 24 of its report;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, as a
separate annex to future proposed programme budgets,
all the necessary information on services provided by the
United Nations to activities financed from extrabudgetary resources:
III
PROCEDURES GOVERNING THE DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY

I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on procedures governing the disposal of property 55 and
the related oral report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions:"
2. Requests the Secretary-General to implement the
procedures recommended in paragraph 15 of his report,
and to apply those procedures when drawing up the
proposed programme budget for the biennium I 9821983:

IV
PROGRAMME FOR TRAINING ENGLISH AND FRENCH
TRANSLATORS 1 PRECIS-WRITERS AT THE ECONOMIC
COMMISSION !--OR AFRICA

I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the programme for training English and French
translators/precis-writers at the Economic Commission
for Africa" and the related oral report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions:''
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to incur the
necessary expenses for the third training programme:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session an evaluation of the training programmes of the two previous
bienniums to be considered by the Assembly before it
approves fonds for the fourth training programme:
V
ACiENCY SUPPORT COSTS

DEPOSITARY FUNCTIONS OF THE SECRET ARY-GENERAL
AND REGISTRATION AND PUBLICATION OF TREATIES

Endorses the recommendations made by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions in paragraphs 11 and 12 of its report on the
depositary functions of the Secretary-General and
registration and publication of treaties: I!
2
' Ibid.,
Supplement
A/35/7/Add.l.

No.

7A

(A/3~/7/Add 1-.'2).

document

I. Takes note of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
agency support costs:'"
'A/C.5/34/21.
'' Official Records of the General A«embly. Thirty-jifth Session.
Supplement No. 7A (A/35/7/Add.1-32), document A/35/7/Add.2.
"A/C.5/35/30.
'' Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-Jijih Session.
Fifih Committee, 26th meeting, paras. 16- 18.
- A/C.5/35/29 .
. , Official Records oj the General Assembly. Thirty-Ji(ih Session.
Fifth Commirtee. 26th meeting. paras. 21 and 22.
"' A/35/544 and Corr I
