s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25344
26 February 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3178th meeting, on 26 February 1993, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "An agenda for peace: preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking and peace-keeping":
"The Security Council has continued its examination of the
Secretary-General's report entitled 'An Agenda for Peace' (S/24111).
"The Security Council welcomes the observations contained in
'An Agenda for Peace' concerning the question of humanitarian assistance
and its relationship to peacemaking, peace-keeping and peace-building, in
particular those contained in paragraphs 29, 40 and 56 to 59.
It notes
that in some particular circumstances there may be a close relationship
between acute needs for humanitarian assistance and threats to
international peace and security.
"In this respect, the Security Council notes the Secretary-General's
assessment that the impartial provision of humanitarian assistance could
be of critical importance in preventive diplomacy.
"Recalling its statement on fact-finding in connection with
'An Agenda for Peace' (S/24872), the Council recognizes the importance of
humanitarian concerns in conflict situations, and thus recommends that
the humanitarian dimension should be incorporated in tlie planning and
dispatching of fact-finding missions.
It also recognizes the need to
include this aspect in connection with information-gathering and
analysis, and encourages Member States concerned to provide the
Secretary-General and the Governments concerned with relevant
humanitarian information.

93-11257

3833h (E)

260293

260293

I.•.

S/25344

English
Page 2

"The Security Council notes with concern the incidence of
humanitarian crises, including mass displacements of population, becoming
or aggravating threats to international peace and security.
In this
connection, it is important to include humanitarian considerations and
indicators within the context of early-warning information capacities as
referred to in paragraphs 26 and 27 of 'An Agenda for Peace'. The
Council emphasizes the role of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs in
coordinating the activities of the various agencies and functional
offices of the United Nations.
It believes that this capacity should be
utilized systematically at a pre-emergency phase to facilitate planning
for action to assist Governments in averting crises that could affect
international peace and security.
"The Security Council notes the ongoing and constructive
collaboration between the United Nations and various regional
arrangements and organizations, within their respective areas of
competence, in identifying and addressing humanitarian emergencies, in
order to solve crises in a manner appropriate to each specific
situation. The Council also notes the important role which is being
played by non-governmental organizations, in close cooperation with the
United Nations, in the provision of humanitarian assistance in emergency
situations around the world. The Council commends this cooperation and
invites the Secretary-General further to explore ways in which this
cooperation can be advanced in order to enhance the capacity of the
United Nations to prevent and respond to emergency situations.
"The Council expresses concern about the increased incidence of
deliberate obstruction of delivery of humanitarian relief and violence
against humanitarian personnel, as well as misappropriation of
humanitarian assistance, in many parts of the world, in particular in the
former Yugoslavia, Iraq and Somalia where the Council has called for
secure access to affected populations for the purpose of providing
humanitarian assistance. The Council stresses the need for adequate
protection of personnel involved in humanitarian operations, in
accordance with relevant norms and principles of international law. The
Council believes that this matter requires urgent attention.
"The Security Council believes that humanitarian assistance should
help establish the basis for enhanced stability through rehabilitation
and development.
The Council thus notes the importance of adequate
planning in the provision of humanitarian assistance in order to improve
prospects for rapid improvement of the humanitarian situation.
It also
notes, however, that humanitarian considerations may become or continue
to be relevant during periods in which the results of peacemaking and
peace-keeping efforts are beginning to be consolidated. The Council thus
recognizes the importance of ensuring a smooth transition from relief to
development, and notes that the provision of coordinated humanitarian
assistance is among the basic peace-building tools available to the
Secretary-General.
In particular, it fully endorses the
Secretary-General's observations in paragraph 58 of 'An Agenda for Peace'

I •••

S/25344
English
Page 3

regarding the problem of land mines, and invites him to address this as a
matter of special concern.
"The Security Council intends to continue its consideration of the
Secretary-General's report, as indicated in the President's statement of
29 October 1992 (S/24728)."
