UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/16
27 May 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4010th meeting of the Security Council, held on 27 May 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council expresses its alarm at the serious deterioration
in the political, military and humanitarian situation in Somalia and
concern at the reports of increasing external interference in Somalia.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to a comprehensive and
lasting settlement of the situation in Somalia, bearing in mind respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence and unity
of Somalia, in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It reiterates that full responsibility for achieving national
reconciliation and for restoring peace rests with the Somali people.
"The Security Council expresses its support for the activities of the
Standing Committee on Somalia and calls upon all Somali factions to cease
immediately all hostilities and to cooperate with the regional and other
efforts to achieve peace and reconciliation.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at recent reports of the
illicit delivery of weapons and military equipment to Somalia in violation
of the arms embargo imposed by resolution 733 (1992) of 23 January 1992
which could exacerbate the crisis in Somalia and endanger the peace and
security of the region as a whole.
"The Security Council reiterates its call upon States to observe the
arms embargo and to refrain from any actions which might exacerbate the
situation in Somalia. It further requests Member States having information
about violations of the provisions of resolution 733 (1992) to provide this
information to the Committee created pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) of
24 April 1992.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the humanitarian
impact of the long-lasting crisis, and in particular condemns attacks or
acts of violence against civilians, especially women, children and other
99-15729 (E)

270599

/...

S/PRST/1999/16
English
Page 2

vulnerable groups, including internally displaced persons. It also
condemns attacks on humanitarian workers, in violation of the rules of
international law.
"The Security Council calls upon the Somali factions to cooperate on
the basis of the principles of neutrality and non-discrimination with the
United Nations agencies and other organizations carrying out humanitarian
activities. The Council urges all parties to guarantee the security and
the freedom of movement of humanitarian personnel and to ensure unhindered
access to those in need of assistance. In this regard, it also commends
the existing coordination of all efforts of the international community to
meet the humanitarian needs of the Somali people undertaken by the Somali
Aid Coordination Body, comprising donors, United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations.
"The Security Council urges all States to contribute generously to the
appeal of the United Nations to ensure continued relief and rehabilitation
efforts in all regions of Somalia, including those aimed at the
strengthening of civil society.
"The Security Council welcomes the continuing efforts of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) in Nairobi.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to submit
periodic reports on the situation in Somalia.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
