S/PV.7387

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7387th meeting

Wednesday, 18 February 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

15-04441 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1504441*

S/PV.7387

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed El Hadi Dayri, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Libya.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Egypt, Italy and Tunisia to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Arab Republic of Egypt, and His Excellency
Mr. Abdelkader Messahel, Minister Delegate for
Maghreb and African Affairs of Algeria.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Bernardino
León, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting. On behalf of the
Council, I welcome Mr. León, who is joining today’s
meeting via video-teleconference from Tunis.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. León.
Mr. León: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council today on the situation in Libya at
this critical juncture. Let me begin by expressing my
condolences and sympathy to all the families of the
victims of terrorism and extremism in Libya. I condemn
in the strongest possible terms the horrific and brutal
acts we have witnessed in Libya in recent days and
weeks. No words can express my outrage and revulsion
at the beheading of 21 men, including 20 Egyptian
nationals who were targeted for no other reason than
their religious belief and nationality.
The scale of this atrocity should not eclipse the
barbarity of other acts committed by extremist groups,

2/11

18/02/2015

including the Islamic State and Ansar al-Sharia.
In November, three young activists were beheaded
in Derna. Towards the end of December, a young
Egyptian doctor and his wife, also Copts, were brutally
murdered at their home in Sirte; their daughter, who
was abducted, was found dead on the city’s outskirts the
next day. These are but a few of the countless incidents
that every day affect thousands of civilians, who bear
the brunt of war and displacement and are victims of
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, especially in areas like Benghazi.
The savage terrorist acts highlight once again the
imminent danger confronting Libya, its people and the
wider region unless there is a swift agreement among
the main parties in the country on resolving the political
crisis and bringing an end to the military and political
conflict.
Since my last briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.7264), we have witnessed blatant disregard by
Islamic State elements for Libya’s sovereignty and
state institutions. The capture of public installations in
Sirte and the attack last month on the Corinthia Hotel
in Tripoli reflect a growing ability and determination
on the part of the Islamic State to exploit the political
crisis and consequent security vacuum to consolidate
its presence and influence across Libya.
Recent incidents, including the attacks on
the oilfields in Mabruk and south of Sidra clearly
demonstrate the increasing ability of the Islamic State
and other terrorist groups to operate in different parts
of the country, whether in Derna, Benghazi, Sirte or
Sabratha. Extremist groups with radical ideologies
associated with Al-Qaida have been on the rise since
the end of the armed conflict in 2011, with Ansar
al-Sharia’s strongholds in Benghazi and Derna already
constituting a serious terrorist challenge in the context
of the Libyan crisis. These have served as platforms for
mobilizing support for the Islamic State.
The Islamic State has already shown its potential
for destruction in Iraq and Syria. Operating across
borders, it has mobilized recruits and significant
financial resources, including through the use of
social media. In Libya, the Islamic State has found
fertile ground in the growing post-revolution political
instability, capitalizing also on the weakness of State
institutions and the State security sector. The steady
influx of foreign nationals has bolstered its ranks and
now threatens to introduce yet another dimension to the
conflict in Libya. We should be gravely concerned by

15-04441

18/02/2015

The situation in Libya

this turn of events and firmly oppose the ideology and
terrorist practices of the Islamic State. These radical
forces must be confronted at every turn. No strategy
will be successful without strong regional cooperation
and an empowered Libyan State and authorities.
We must not lose sight of the complexities of Libya’s
crisis, its weak and fragmented State institutions,
their current political polarization, the predominance
of armed groups seemingly oblivious to the national
interest, media incitement and inflammatory rhetoric,
and corruption. These are all factors that have
contributed to the current breakdown of basic State
functions and the disruption of the country’s economy
and of its social fabric.
Since my last briefing to the Council, we have
made considerable headway in bringing the main
parties to the negotiating table. We have progressively
structured a political dialogue along five mutually
reinforcing tracks, bringing together representatives
from a broad spectrum of the Libyan political, military
and social landscape. The objective of the dialogue is to
bring Libya out of the chaos that is providing terrorism
with fertile ground to breed further violence and
destruction. In January, the United Nations hosted two
rounds of political talks in Geneva in which discussions
were focused on reaching agreement on a national unity
Government and security arrangements, to include a
comprehensive ceasefire.
Within Libya, reactions to the talks have been
overwhelmingly positive and appear to have injected a
new ray of hope regarding the possibility of a peaceful
resolution of the political crisis and military conflict.
Notwithstanding the hard-line positions initially
adopted by some of the parties, the fact that all the
major stakeholders now recognize the gravity of the
situation and the need for a political resolution is and
must be seen as a positive sign.
On this note, I am pleased to report that a week
ago I was in Ghadames where, for the first time, all
the parties joined the United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue. No doubt, this marks an important
breakthrough towards an inclusive political agreement,
which remains the only avenue for a sustainable way out
of the crisis. I am hopeful that a political agreement can
be reached soon. The differences among the parties are
not insurmountable, and I am confident that their sense
of responsibility for the fate of the Libyan people and
the national unity, democracy and territorial integrity

S/PV.7387

of the Libyan State will prevail over their differences.
Yesterday marked the anniversary of a revolution
intended to realize these values, which look so far away
today.
We are also making progress, slow but steady, in
trying to de-escalate the situation on the military front.
These efforts have intensified following a string of
attacks in the oil crescent region towards the end of
December, and except for the attack by Islamic State
elements in the Mabruk oilfield on 3 February, there
has been a relative truce in hostilities Nonetheless, the
overall situation remains fragile and there is much work
to be done. The overall situation in Benghazi remains
dire, and only yesterday we received reports of aerial
attacks on Zintan in the west.
The images of the brutal acts of terror that we
have witnessed in Libya in recent months have shaken
our collective conscience. We must capitalize on this
sense of urgency and, today more than ever, we must
stand firmly behind the political process. Given the
sense of urgency, I have called for the next meeting of
the political dialogue in order to finalize discussions
initiated in Geneva on the formation of a Government
of national unity and security arrangements to pave
the way for a formal and comprehensive cessation of
hostilities.
Defeating terrorism in Libya can be achieved only
through the political and institutional determination
of a united Libyan Government, which will need the
strong and unequivocal support of the international
community in confronting the myriad challenges
facing Libya. First and foremost, this will require the
development of a coherent and comprehensive strategy
to combat terrorism, as well as the identification of
the needs and support required from the international
community.
It is our shared responsibility to build consensus
among the Libyan counterparts. It is crucial for the
international community as a whole to maintain a unity
of purpose through coherent messaging and actions.
Our efforts to counter terrorism in a sustainable manner
cannot be a series of isolated acts and we should not
allow terrorism to disrupt the political dialogue. Allow
me to take this opportunity to remind all parties that
nothing in their actions or decisions at this critical time
should be allowed to provide space or the opportunity
for terrorist groups to further consolidate their presence
or influence. I urge them to intensify their engagement

15-044413/11

S/PV.7387

The situation in Libya

towards a political resolution of the crisis. The window
of opportunity is rapidly closing, and no effort must be
spared.
It is only through a strong Government of national
unity based on a solid consensus that Libyans, with the
support of the international community, can aspire to
put in place an effective strategy to combat the growing
threat posed by terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State. I would like to thank all the Governments of
the region and international actors for their support
to United Nations efforts. I would also like to call on
all Member States to spare no effort in support of a
political resolution of the Libyan crisis.
Finally, I take this opportunity to reiterate the
commitment of the United Nations to Libya’s democratic
transition, and to say that our engagement in Libya will
continue to be guided by our utmost respect for Libya’s
sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. León
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Libya.
Mr. Dayri (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): It is a pleasure
for me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on China’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We have every confidence in your ability to
lead the Council and to achieve fruitful results.
The people and Government of Libya once again
reiterate their deep condolences to our brothers in
the Arab Republic of Egypt; to the President, the
Government and the people of Egypt; and to the
families and victims of the heinous crime perpetrated
by the terrorist group the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) against 21 Egyptian citizens in Libya.
Such a heinous act runs counter to all principles and
values of humanity and monotheistic religions.
My country reiterates its condemnation and
absolute rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of the source, motive
or justification, wherever and by whomever it is
perpetrated. My country reaffirms that terrorism is a
serious phenomenon that threatens the stability and
security of States. We are seeing this phenomenon turn
into a front line that stretches from the Middle East
through North Africa and covers the Mediteranean as
well as the Sahel, demonstrating that no one in those
regions is immune to the phenomenon.

4/11

18/02/2015

I was eager to personally attend this meeting,
following the 19 December 2014 Security Council
debate on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7351), in order to
reaffirm the commitment of the Government of Libya
to combating contemporary terrorism as one of our top
priorities. The terrorist group ISIS and its allies have
been working tirelessly to kill and assassinate innocent
people, destroy the infrastructure and economies of
countries, and to offer a safe haven for terrorists of
various nationalities. This is a threat to Libya and other
States, particularly our neighbouring States.
Nevertheless, among the positive indicators that
have arisen, we look forward to a national dialogue
in Libya. The three rounds of discussion will take
place thanks to the remarkable and laudable efforts
of Mr. Bernardino León, Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, and his good offices aimed
at ensuring unity and successful dialogue.
As we await further success, the complex situation
prevailing in my country is deteriotating, in particular
since ISIS appeared on the blood-soaked landscape, as
I said earlier. While we await further success, the needs
of the Libyan army have become more urgent than
ever before, with a view to strengthening the national
dialogue based, inter alia, on the need to combat
terrorism. It has become increasingly apparent of late
that the army must be supported in its mission through
strengthened efforts, which must include, first, dealing
with all Libyan terrorist groups and organizations,
such as Ansar al-Sharia and ISIS. That will require the
international community — which helped Libya rid
itself of the former dictatorial regime before leaving it
prey to the security vacuum — to shoulder its legal and
moral responsibilities in providing urgent support, first
and foremost, by rebuilding and rearming our armed
forces so that they can take action.
Before both the General Assembly and the Security
Council, the legitimate Libyan authorities have
repeatedly alerted the international community to the
dangers of terrorism and its spread to Libya. Today, I
am here to reiterate in this Chamber that Libya can no
longer remain silent in the face of terrorism. It is clear
that the challenges facing Libya’s legitimate authorities
are enormous now that armed terrorist groups have
taken possession of entire cities in Libya and are
proclaiming the Al-Qaida doctrine and announced to
the entire world that they have joined with ISIS. They
have attempted to take over the ports from which
we export oil and have attacked several oil fields in

15-04441

18/02/2015

The situation in Libya

order to finance their terrorist activities throughout
the world and to transform Libya into a hub for their
terrorist activities in North Africa, the Sahel and the
Mediterranean basin.
In the light of all this, we welcomed the adoption
last week of resolution 2199 (2015). However, the
Council’s interest in the disastrous situation of terrorism
prevailing in my country is nowhere near the intensity
that benefited our brothers in Iraq and Syria when they
faced similar problems. We therefore call upon the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
in maintaining peace and security in Libya, particularly
since the situation in my country threatens not only the
countries of Africa, but also those of Europe.
Libya requires a decisive stance on the part of the
international community to help it to build the capacity
of its national army by lifting the arms embargo so that
our army can receive military materiel and weapons to
counter the rampant terrorism in my country. Libya also
requires assistance to strengthen its legal institutions
to ensure their capacities to address extremism and
terrorism. A failure to provide weapons and training
to the Libyan army to assist it in confronting terrorism
will only play into the extremists’ hands, ensure
instability in Libya and have negative repercussions on
the security sector throughout the region, and thus on
international peace and security.
The most recent success of the Libyan army in its
tireless struggle against terrorism gave vivid proof
of the need for professional training for its military
and security institutions. While I do not call for
international intervention to deal with ISIS and Ansar
al-Sharia, in view of the lack of international support
the Libyan Government has called on brotherly Egypt
to support the Libyan army in confronting terrorism,
although that call was not included in the declaration
issued yesterday, 17 February.
There is a close link between terrorism and
transnational crime in all its forms, including
trafficking in weapons, drugs and petroleum products,
money-laundering and human trafficking, among
others. Cooperation must be strengthened at the
international, regional and subregional levels and
among the States of the region to control their borders.
Appropriate coordination and information-sharing
mechanisms must be established to enable the arrest
and prosecution of those accused of crimes. We need
effective cooperation to deal with foreign terrorist

S/PV.7387

fighters, in the framework of resolution 2178 (2014),
and action to halt that phenomenon. Furthermore, we
must address the issue of abduction and hostage-taking,
which are used by terrorist groups inside and outside
of Libya as a source of financing and to exert political
pressure.
In conclusion, the House of Representatives and
the Government, in their capacity as the legitimate
representatives of the country, extend their full support
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino León, in achieving a political solution
to the Libyan crisis, through dialogue. The grave
challenges facing Libya represent a threat to the entire
region. Given the lack of effective international support,
we run the risk of proving incapable of eradicating that
cancer, whose spread could infest the entire region. We
therefore call on the Security Council to take all these
aspects fully into account. We desire backing for the
legitimate Libyan authorities in their efforts to duly
control the entire Libyan territory and its borders. We
reaffirm our support for the Council in that process.
With respect to the resolutions on monitoring and
controlling the trafficking of weapons and their transfer
to armed groups in Libya, as well as the financing of
those groups, we appreciate in particular the effort of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in presenting a draft
resolution to the Council, and we cherish the hope that
it will enjoy the Council’s full support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.
Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I am fully confident that you will guide the
deliberations of the Council with the utmost efficiency.
A few days ago, we were horrified to witness the
slaughter of 21 Egyptian citizens on a beach in the Libyan
city of Sirte. I should like to express our appreciation
to all those who have condemned that barbaric act and
expressed their condolences and their solidarity with
the Egyptian people at this pivotal moment. Expressions
of condolences and solidarity, while important, are not
sufficient to confront the dangers and existential threats
that civilized human beings face today. I have come
to the Council to affirm that what is in fact required
is to adopt strong and genuine positions and concrete
measures to face the dangers posed by Daesh and its
ilk, who are familiar only with the language of criminal

15-044415/11

S/PV.7387

The situation in Libya

violence and killings. I have come here to say that the
blood of Egyptians is precious, just like that of any
other victims of heinous barbaric acts. I believe that
they deserve our seriousness in fighting this scourge in
every corner of the Earth.
I should like to review with the Council a little of
the history in order to shed light on how and why we
have reached the current situation in Libya. When the
international coalition decided to support and defend the
Libyan revolution in 2011, Egypt was a firm supporter
of the aspirations and hopes of our brothers in Libya.
However, at that time, we were concerned that the
ultimate benefactors would be violent extremists, given
that many of those fighting on behalf of the revolution
were in fact backed quite generously by regional Powers
that sought to install themselves in power in Libya after
the fall of the regime. Despite our repeated warnings,
through diplomatic channels, about the dangers of
relying on extremist elements that did not represent the
Libyan people, our fears were materialized. Extremists
assumed a prominent position in the post-Al-Qadhafi
regime.
The Libyan people elected a new Parliament — the
General National Congress — which was dominated by
liberal national views. Libya was the only Arab State
where violent political Islam had failed to achieve a
majority. But, owing to the limitless financial and
military resources that violent political Islam possessed,
it was soon able to superimpose its will on the Libyan
people’s true aspirations. Threats, kidnapping and
assassinations of members of Parliament and attacks
on Government institutions, with the aim of passing
laws and setting policies, soon became the norm. That
seriously undermined Government institutions and
enabled extremists to place those institutions firmly
under their control.
No doubt, everyone remembers the circumstances
under which the political isolation law was passed, a
law that effectively barred many Libyans who did
not subscribe to political Islam from running for
Government office. Among them was the Speaker of
the General National Congress. In addition, there were
other indications of the deterioration of the situation
in Libya, including the kidnapping of Prime Minister
Ali Zeidan and attacks on Embassies. Attacks on
Embassies, the assassination of the United States
Ambassador in Benghazi, the kidnapping of Egyptian
Embassy staff and other grave incidents are listed in

6/11

18/02/2015

the letter I addressed to the Secretary-General and the
President of the Security Council on 17 February.
However, the international community’s actions
were insufficient to preserve the security of the Libyan
people and those of Libya’s neighbouring States on the
Mediterranean. Nor did the international community
move effectively to counter the threats posed to
international peace and security. When parliamentary
elections were held in June 2014, in which political
Islam gained only 10 per cent of seats, it confirmed
once more the moderation of the Libyan people and
their clear inclination to support democratic forces. At
the time, Egypt warned that extremists would again
impose their domination through the use of force
in an attempt to accomplish what they failed to do
through the ballot box. Nevertheless, the international
community took little notice when extremists resorted
to arms and occupied Tripoli, along with its airports
and Government institutions, thereby forcing the
legitimate Parliament to vacate the capital and to resort
to holding its sessions elsewhere in Libya. That, in turn,
prompted ludicrous objections from the extremists that
the Parliament was convening its sessions outside the
Libyan capital.
I have no doubt that the Council has followed those
and other developments closely. Therefore, I will not
delve into this any more. I do, however, wish to reiterate
them today, because of the complacency of some in
confronting those who seek to impose their will through
the use of arms. Unfortunately, this comes at a time that
is crucial in the history of the Arab people — when
democracy and the free expression of their will should
have enabled them to advance and modernize their
societies, and not regress to the Dark Ages. Today, in
the light of the enormity of the danger the recent events
in Libya pose, not only to that country’s people or its
neighbouring States, but to humankind as a whole,
we simply no longer have the luxury to repeat past
mistakes. Our peoples will judge us.
As the international community, we have to assume
the historic responsibility placed on our shoulders and
on the shoulders of the Council in dealing with the
clear threat to international peace and security posed
by the current situation in Libya. If we are to rectify
past complacency in dealing seriously with the Libyan
crisis, we then must actively cooperate to support
the Council of Deputies and the Libyan Government
in order to enable them to extend their legitimate
authority and sovereignty to all Libyan territory and

15-04441

18/02/2015

The situation in Libya

to combat terrorism wherever it exists in all parts of
Libya — north, south, east and west. That will require
the following measures.
First, legal restrictions placed on the ability of the
legitimate Government and the Libyan National Army
to procure their defence needs should be lifted so that
they may be able to confront terrorism and achieve
stability and security.
Secondly, concrete measures should be taken to
prevent the acquisition of arms by all non-State militias
and entities through the imposition of a naval blockade
on arms being sent to areas of Libya outside the control
of the legitimate authorities.
Thirdly, States wishing to assist the legitimate
Libyan Government in confronting terrorism and
imposing security should be allowed to do so in the light
of the severe difficulties the legitimate Government
faces in that regard, with the condition that such
assistance be provided in coordination with the Libyan
Government and with its approval.
Egypt has decided to respond to the requests and
needs of the Government of Libya and has provided
military assistance. We will not hesitate to confront the
terrorist threat that challenges our region with its ugliest
face. This despicable organization is seeking to spread
terror throughout the Arab and Islamic world — from
Iraq to Syria to Libya and through them to the heart of
Europe, which is the closest continent to our region and
the most susceptible to the threat that this and similar
organizations pose.
We call for full support for Arab League resolution
7852 (2015), adopted on 15 January, which calls for
extending all forms of support to the Libyan Government
and asks the Security Council to lift the restrictions
imposed on arming the Libyan National Army. We
fervently hope that the Security Council will respond
positively to those calls. I trust that the Permanent
Mission of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will
circulate today a draft resolution for discussion in the
coming days that will address the actions required to
achieve a successful conclusion to the Libyan crisis.
For this threat is a most dangerous one.
Before concluding my statement, I wish to
reaffirm that Egypt will continue to support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bernardino León, who is making great and
appreciated efforts in Libya to achieve a political

S/PV.7387

settlement to the crisis through the establishment of an
inclusive Government that represents all political forces
that have renounced violence and terrorism and that
seek a negotiated settlement to the conflict. At the same
time, I wish to reiterate that, while a political solution is
an absolute necessity, it is not an alternative to militarily
confronting terrorism. I have no doubt that, through the
current political dialogue, the Government of national
unity will continue to seek to combat terrorism as a
matter of priority, just as it has been a matter of priority
under the current Government, led by Prime Minister
Abdallah Al-Thinni.
We call upon the States represented here to
do their utmost to support the legitimate House of
Representatives. Waging the international community’s
war against terrorism requires the active participation
of a national partner. We would like to deal with the
honourable partners in Libya, and not those who are
acting against the interests of their country. If the
objective is to promote a political solution in order
to let some impose their will on the Libyan people, I
would ask the international community to make every
possible effort to support the legitimate House of
Representatives. The war against terrorism requires
a national partner. There is no better partner than the
Parliament of the Libyan people, which was elected
through the ballot box. The current Government or
its successor will gain the confidence of the House of
Representatives if Mr. León is successful in his efforts,
as we hope he will be.
In conclusion, I thank Council members for their
time. I again express our sincere hope that the Council
will deal with the crisis in Libya as a matter of extreme
urgency, the utmost priority and as an issue that requires
concerted efforts to confront a common danger that
seeks to reverse the forward course of humankind. I
trust that we as a community with a clear vision of its
goals and aspirations will succeed in our mission.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Minister Delegate for Maghreb and African
Affairs of Algeria.
Mr. Messahel (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting on the situation in
Libya. My thanks also go to all the members of the
Security Council for allowing us to share with them
the assessment and view of Algeria on the crucial
and paramount issue for the security and stability of a

15-044417/11

S/PV.7387

The situation in Libya

brotherly and neighbourly country, but also for peace
within the region and beyond.
I would also like to thank and express our full
appreciation to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Bernardino León, for
his selflessness and commitment and for the briefing
that he gave us at the beginning of this meeting on
the situation in that country, which is our immediate
neighbour. I also want to commend the presence of my
brothers, the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and Libya,
Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim and Mr. Mohamed
El Hadi Dayri.
I cannot begin my statement without recalling our
horror at the cowardly assassination of 21 Egyptian
citizens by a terrorist group and reiterating that my
country condemned with the greatest vigour this
abject criminal act. I take this opportunity to reiterate
Algeria’s condolences to the Egyptian authorities and
once again to express our full sympathy and compassion
to the families of the victims.
Algeria, which has suffered and confronted the ills
of terrorism, including coming from Libyan territory,
as was the case with the attack against the oil facility in
Tigantourine, which the Algerian security forces were
able to neutralize by freeing more than 800 hostages and
preserving the facilities within the complex. We know
how much international solidarity and cooperation are
essential in such circumstances.
This latest development clearly illustrates how the
situation has deteriorated, and that is a source of major
concern, both for the speedy restoration of the country’s
stability but also for regional and international peace
and security. More than ever, these developments are
appealing to our conscience and pushing us to to ramp
up our efforts to help and encourage Libyans to engage
in dialogue while rebuilding unity and national cohesion
and generating national consensus on their shared
goals, with the help of the international community.
We remain utterly convinced that only through
dialogue and national reconciliation can the various
parties overcome the serious crisis they find themselves
in, with all the consequences that could have for the
entire region. I can only say once again that a solution
that is so hoped for — and I do not think there can be
the slightest disagreement about it — can come only
from Libyans themselves, for Libya. The international
community’s duty is to bring all possible political and
diplomatic means to bear in supporting, encouraging

8/11

18/02/2015

and promoting that unique right. That is why my country
will continue to work, particularly through the efforts
and action undertaken on behalf of the United Nations
by Mr. Bernardino León, to help to create consensus on a
political solution that preserves the unity and territorial
integrity of Libya and the cohesion of its people, a
solution that will pave the way for the establishment
of the national institutions that Libyans want. Algeria,
duty bound by its solidarity with the Libyan people, but
also because Libya’s stability concerns it directly, as it
does all the neighbouring countries, has initiated and
fully and wholeheartedly endorsed the efforts of those
neighbours, the African Union and the international
community to support our Libyan brothers on the path
of dialogue and reconciliation.
I would also like to recall that it is also at Libya’s
request that my country has continued to deploy efforts,
with the discretion that this kind of situation requires,
to bring different viewpoints closer together and pave
the way for an inclusive dialogue that will, of course, be
open only to those who reject violence and terrorism.
That approach reflects a willingness to support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the
search for a political solution to the crisis affecting our
neighbour and brother country.
We commend the work that has been done by the
group of Libya’s neighbouring countries. Algeria,
which is taking on the responsibility for coordinating
the group’s security affairs committee, will fulfil its
task faithfully and with determination. We will of
course continue to support Mr. León, with whom we are
maintaining a dialogue at every level in order to ensure
that he can pursue his efforts and approach with a view
to reuniting all the parties. The negotiations conducted
at Ghadames I and II and in Geneva are emblematic of
the existence, ultimately, of a willingness on the part of
those parties, which we believe to be sincere, to seek
a political solution among themselves. We are pleased
that during the last round of inter-Libyan dialogue at
Ghadames II, the various parties in the Libyan crisis
committed to establishing an agenda for forming a
Government of national unity.
In our view that is a crucial and necessary step. We
believe that the formation of a Government of national
unity will affirm in the eyes of Libyans themselves
their full national sovereignty and allow it to receive
every kind of legitimate help and support from the
international community and the Security Council.
Establishing such a Government of national unity

15-04441

18/02/2015

The situation in Libya

would, in our view, constitute the best guarantee in
the fight against terrorism, which, as everyone — or at
least those who have experienced it — knows, feeds on
chaos and weak State institutions.
For its part, Algeria will make a full contribution
to that effort. We solemnly reaffirm our commitment
to continuing our efforts with our neighbours and
international stakeholders to arrive at a political
solution that will ensure the restoration of security
and stability in our brother country and promote the
building of a State with strong institutions capable of
meeting every challenge, including the priorities of
eradicating terrorism and every form of extremism. My
country also reiterates its commitment to providing all
the help necessary for establishing and strengthening
Libya’s united public institutions, and we will do it with
all possible international good will, as agreed on with
the Libyan authorities. Algeria hopes fervently that the
Libyan nation can unite as soon as possible. The Libyan
people are demanding it, its neighbours are waiting for
it, and I think I can say that the entire international
community, as evidenced at today’s meeting, is hoping
for it.

S/PV.7387

crisis. Thanks also to this Security Council meeting,
we are witnessing a growing awareness of the crisis and
of the need for a timely solution. What we expect from
this meeting is a realization once and for all that here at
the United Nations we need measures that can stabilize
the country indefinitely.
In its difficult transition to democracy, Libya
has remained vulnerable to divisions between the
factions that compromise attempts to invigorate that
transition. While the election produced a Parliament
and Government recognized by the international
community, it did not mark a turning point in the political
process. Libya’s fragile political and institutional
framework risk being filled by the threat of terrorist
groups, against which we must stay strong, and by the
joining of forces of local factions and extremists. We
cannot allow that to happen. On the contrary, we must
redouble our efforts to support the process of dialogue
facilitated by the United Nations, which is showing
increasing signs of vitality, with a view to the rapid
formation of a national unity Government that is able to
stabilize the country, assert its authority over the whole
territory, and jumpstart reconstruction.

We do not have the right to fail in this mission, and
we have a duty to be sincere, to be clear and to learn the
lessons of the past. Every Libyan citizen, every refugee
and every displaced person, the memory of every victim
of terrorism and blind violence demands it of us. And
every people of the region demands it, demands that
we do not fail and that we work together for a united
Libya, living in peace with all its citizens and all its
neighbours. Algeria will do all it can to contribute, with
all possible tenacity and determination.

Italy has supported the United Nations mediation
efforts from the start, convinced that a political
solution is the only way out of the crisis in Libya. Some
preliminary results have been achieved at the Geneva
and Ghadames meetings, thanks also to the dedication
of Special Representative Bernardino Léon, whom we
thank for his efforts. Italy is pleased to have contributed
to this progress by making available to the United
Nations its network of contacts and providing logistics
support for several sessions.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.

Our shared goal is to empower the moderate front
on the Libyan political scene. We need a clear-cut,
renewed commitment from all those who believe in
dialogue as the only way forward. The success of that
dialogue will require and must aim for the conclusion
of a credible ceasefire respected by all the parties to
the conflict throughout the country. But the latest
developments also send the message, loud and clear,
that we do not have forever. In Libya, we are dealing
not with monolithic blocs but rather with many
different fronts that have their own internal conflicts
and interests. The splintering of the parties is both a
challenge to and an opportunity for the United Nations
mediation efforts.

Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy condemns in the firmest
possible terms the barbaric killing of 21 Egyptian
Coptic Christian citizens in Sirte, and we express our
deepest condolences and solidarity to the families of
the victims and the Egyptian authorities.
The Libyan crisis is one of the most pressing,
sensitive challenges facing the international community
today. There has been a grave deterioration in the
security situation, particularly in Tripoli, as evidenced
by the attack on the Corinthia Hotel on 27 January,
followed by other serious episodes. This requires
that all of us support by every means possible the
diplomatic action that is being pursued to resolve the

The next few weeks, we believe, will be crucial to
the future of Libya. Italy intends to step up its support

15-044419/11

S/PV.7387

The situation in Libya

for the efforts of the United Nations and is ready to do its
part in the framework of the decisions that the Security
Council may take. At the same time, the deterioration
of the situation on the ground demands a change in
pace on the part of the international community before
it is too late. This is why Italy looks with expectation
to the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya. The Mission should
be equipped with the mandate, the means and the
resources needed to accelerate the political dialogue and
to stabilize and assist a new reconciliation framework
and a new national unity Government in Libya.
The international community must send the
message that, once the Libyans themselves have
reached the compromise needed to form a national
unity Government, it is ready to resume its cooperation
and support. We must not find ourselves unprepared
when that moment arrives, which we hope will be soon.
If we do, we risk not only an immediate negative impact
on the political sustainability of the national unity
Government, but also the advance of radicalism and a
worsening of the humanitarian situation.
Allow me to recall here the tragedy of the thousands
of persons who flee the country on unsafe vessels
headed for the Italian and European coasts. Since the
beginning of the year, the European Union’s Operation
Triton has already rescued 5,302 people from the sea, an
almost 60-per cent increase over 2014. These statistics
clearly indicate to us the dimensions of the challenge
we face. What is happening in Libya has a profound
impact both in Africa and in Europe, on both shores
of the Mediterranean, with grave repercussions on the
stability of Libya’s neighbours — including Italy — and
on the success and sustainability of the transition
processes in the area.
It will be our job from the start to assist the Libyan
authorities in the stabilization of the country. Even in
the most optimistic scenario, this process may be long
and fragile, requiring coordinated action on the part of
various international stakeholders. Italy is willing to take
a leading role in this task, in the framework of a United
Nations initiative and together with our partners in the
region. We are ready to contribute to the monitoring
of the ceasefire and the keeping of the peace. We are
ready to work to train security and military units, in the
framework of the integration of the militants into the
regular army, and for the rehabilitation of the country’s
infrastructures. We are ready to treat and to heal the
wounds of war and to resume our broad programme

10/11

18/02/2015

of cooperation with Libya. The civilian population
must clearly see the advantages of the reconciliation
championed by the international community.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the full, resolute
support of Italy for the stabilization of Libya through
the dialogue sponsored by the United Nations. We do
so fully aware, as we must all be, that the deterioration
of the situation on the ground demands a change of
pace on the part of the international community. And
it demands the maximum possible commitment of us
all to the pacification of the country so as to prevent
Libya from becoming a victim of a blind and desperate
terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on China’s
accession to the presidency of the Security Council this
month, and to welcome His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
El Hadi Dayri, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Libya; His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt; and His Excellency Mr. Abdelkader
Messahel, Minister Delegate for Maghreb and African
Affairs of Algeria. Algeria, Egypt and Libya are three
brotherly countries.
I am also grateful to Mr. Léon for his briefing via
video-teleconference from Tunis.
I welcome your decision to convene this meeting,
Sir, demonstrating the United Nations determination
to address the threat posed to Libya by terrorism, in
particular in the light of recent developments and the
dangerous upsurge of the phenomenon, which threaten
the security and stability of Libya and have negative
repercussions for its neighbours, including Tunisia.
Against that backdrop, I reiterate Tunisia’s firm
condemnation of the heinous massacre perpetrated by
terrorist groups against innocent Egyptian citizens, as
well as its solidarity with the people and the Government
of Egypt following that detestable crime.
It goes without saying that this painful incident
only reaffirms the growing threat posed by terrorist
organizations operating across borders, which leaves
no country unscathed, including my own. Tunisia
has suffered from this phenomenon. A dastardly
terrorist operation took place close to our western
border yesterday, resulting in the death of four heroic

15-04441

18/02/2015

The situation in Libya

national guardsmen. I take this opportunity to offer our
condolences and commemorations to their families.
May they rest in peace.
We reiterate Tunisia’s firm and ongoing commitment
to condemning all forms and manifestations of terrorism.
We are determined to participate in international and
regional efforts to earnestly and decisively address
this phenomenon and halt its further spread, which
threatens international peace and security and requires
coordinated efforts.
Tunisia maintains close relations with the brotherly
country of Libya through our shared history and
geographical proximity, as well as through our social
links and common civilizational affinities. We also
have close ties with other neighbouring States and those
of the western Mediterranean basin, and are concerned
about their situation in the face of extremism, terrorism
and radicalism, which impact the security and stability
of Libya and the entire region.
Tunisia understands that, in response to the growing
activity of terrorist and extremist groups in Libya, the
Security Council is working to address the threats posed
to peace and stability. Given the deteriorating situation
in Libya, we must be united in our efforts to ensure
the precedence of a political solution. Any option that
circumvents a political solution will only exacerbate
and complicate the situation further. We believe that,
today more than ever before, this is a responsibility
that must be shared by all. We must strengthen our
support and ensure that there is reconciliation and

S/PV.7387

understanding between those Libyan political parties
that eschew violence and understand that dialogue is the
key to national unity. An end must be put to the crisis
and Libyan institutions built to meet the aspirations of
our Libyan brothers, with a view to enabling greater
stability, security and development.
I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express Tunisia’s support for the mediation efforts made
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bernardino León and by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to bring together all Libyan partners
in a constructive dialogue to promote reconcilation and
pave the way for democracy.
We reiterate our call to the entire international
community to support efforts made by Libyan parties
to avoid divisive politics and promote dialogue.
Alongside neighbouring States, we have contributed
to strengthening political dialogue to resolve the Libyan
crisis. We will make every effort to help our brothers
in Libya achieve a peaceful solution that would ensure
the return to stability, through the promotion of the
State and the rule of law, and to once again revive their
hopes so that they may build a Libyan future based on
sovereignty, stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

15-0444111/11
