UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1994/1009
29 August 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

REPORT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL MISSION ESTABLISHED PURSUANT TO
THE STATEMENT MADE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL AT
THE 3406TH MEETING, HELD ON 19 JULY 1994 (S/PRST/1994/35)
Letter of transmittal
Letter dated 29 August 1994 from the Security Council Mission
established pursuant to the statement made by the President
of the Security Council at the 3406th meeting, held on
19 July 1994 (S/PRST/1994/35), addressed to the President of
the Security Council

We, the members of the Security Council Mission established pursuant to the
statement made by the President of the Security Council at the 3406th meeting,
held on 19 July 1994 (S/PRST/1994/35), have the honour to submit to you herewith
the report called for in item (g) of the terms of reference of the Mission set
out in the Note by the President of the Security Council dated 4 August 1994
(S/1994/931).

(Signed)

Ronaldo Mota SARDENBERG

(Brazil)

(Signed)

YANG Xiuping

(China)

(Signed)

Karel KOVANDA

(Czech Republic)

(Signed)

Roble OLHAYE

(Djibouti)

(Signed)

Patrick John RATA

(New Zealand)

(Signed)

Ibrahim A. GAMBARI
(Chairman)

(Nigeria)

(Signed)

Salim Bin Mohammed AL-KHUSSAIBY

(Oman)

(Signed)

Vasiliy S. SIDOROV

(Russian Federation)

(Signed)

Karl F. INDERFURTH

(United States of America)

94-34360 (E)

290894

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 2

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
At the 3406th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 July 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Mozambique", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement (S/PRST/1994/35) on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council notes with appreciation the report of the
Secretary-General of 7 July 1994 (S/1994/803) on the United Nations
Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ). It commends the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the personnel of ONUMOZ for their efforts in
support of the implementation of the general peace agreement for
Mozambique. They continue to have the full backing of the Council.
"The Security Council welcomes the significant progress made in the
implementation of the general peace agreement, in particular in the
electoral sphere, but remains concerned at continuing delays in the
implementation of some major aspects of the agreement. The Council is
especially concerned at the delays which continue to occur in the
demobilization of forces and in the formation of the new Mozambican Defence
Force (FADM). In this context, the Council reiterates its call in
resolution 916 (1994) of 5 May 1994 to the parties to comply fully with all
the provisions of the agreement.
"It is essential that the demobilization of all forces is completed by
15 August 1994, as agreed by the parties, and that the difficulties of
forming, before the elections, FADM at the strength agreed in the general
peace agreement are addressed quickly and with flexibility.
"The Council is encouraged by the recent announcement of the
Mozambican Government’s decision to turn over the assets, including
equipment and facilities, of the Mozambique Armed Forces (FAM) to FADM by
15 August 1994 and reiterates the importance of the Government providing
all necessary support to the establishment of FADM.
"The Council underlines the importance to the peace process of the
rehabilitation of areas with a large returning population, including
through an effective mine-clearance programme. In this regard, it urges
that high priority be given to mine-clearance activities and related
training.
"The Council, in its resolution 916 (1994), decided to renew the
mandate of ONUMOZ for a final period until 15 November 1994 and welcomed
the announcement by the President of the Republic of Mozambique that
elections would take place on 27 and 28 October 1994. It reaffirms the
importance it attaches to the elections taking place on these dates and
stresses the need for additional decisive steps to that end. In this
context, the Council stresses that there is no margin for further delay in
demobilization and in the formation of FADM. The Council expects the
parties to continue to cooperate with ONUMOZ and with each other to ensure
full and timely implementation of the agreement.
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 3

"The Council reiterates the importance of the extension of civil
administration throughout Mozambique, which is essential for the holding of
free and fair elections. In this context, it reaffirms its call to all
parties, especially the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (RENAMO), to allow
unimpeded access to the areas under their control to all political forces
in the country, in order to ensure free political activity throughout
Mozambique.
"The Council expresses its intention to endorse the results of the
elections provided the United Nations reports them as free and fair and
reminds all the Mozambican parties of their obligation under the general
peace agreement fully to respect the results.
"The Council will consider sending a mission, at an appropriate time,
to Mozambique to discuss with the parties how best to ensure full and
timely implementation of the general peace agreement and that the elections
take place on the dates agreed and under the conditions set out in the
agreement.
"The Council will continue to monitor developments in Mozambique
closely and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that it is kept
informed on a regular basis."
2.
On 4 August 1994, the President of the Security Council issued the
following note (S/1994/931):
"1. The President of the Security Council has the honour to refer to the
statement made by the President of the Council at its 3406th meeting, held
on 19 July 1994, in connection with the item entitled "The situation in
Mozambique" (S/PRST/1994/35).
"2. The statement indicated, in particular, that the Security Council
would consider sending a mission, at an appropriate time, to Mozambique to
discuss with the parties how best to ensure full and timely implementation
of the general peace agreement.
"3. In accordance with that decision, the President has held consultations
with the members of the Council. Following those consultations, the
members have agreed that the mission will depart for Mozambique on
6 August 1994, for a duration of approximately five days, and that it will
be composed of the following nine members of the Council: Brazil, China,
Czech Republic, Djibouti, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman, Russian Federation
and United States of America.
"The mission will, inter alia:
"(a) Convey to the leaderships of the Government of Mozambique and
Resistência Nacional Moçambicana (RENAMO) the Security Council’s concern at
the delays in the implementation of major aspects of the general peace
agreement for Mozambique;

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 4

"(b) Underline the necessity of completing the demobilization of all
forces by 15 August 1994, as agreed by the parties;
"(c) Underline the need for the parties to ensure that the elections
take place on the dates agreed and under the conditions set out in the
agreement;
"(d) Stress the intention of the Council to endorse the results of
the elections provided the United Nations reports them as free and fair;
"(e) Remind all the parties of their obligation under the general
peace agreement fully to respect the results of the elections;
"(f) Stress the full support of the Security Council for the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative;
"(g) Submit to the Council a report of the mission’s findings during
the visit."

II.

ACTIVITIES OF THE MISSION

3.
The Mission of the Security Council established pursuant to the statement
made by the President on 19 July 1994 (S/PRST/1994/35) visited Mozambique from
7 to 12 August 1994, beginning its work in Mozambique on the morning of
8 August.
4.
The Mission carried out its work in accordance with the terms of reference
decided upon by the Security Council, as contained in the note by the President
of the Council (S/1994/931).
5.
The Mission’s programme of work (see annex I) included meetings with
Mr. Joaquim Alberto Chissano, President of the Republic of Mozambique and
President of the Frente de Libertação Moçambique (FRELIMO),
Mr. Afonso Macacho Marceta Dhlakama, President of the Resistência Nacional
Moçambicana (RENAMO), Mr. Pascoal Manuel Mocumbi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mozambique, representatives of 16 other registered parties (see annex II),
Mr. Aldo Ajello, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, senior staff
of the United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), heads of government
delegations to the peace commissions, the heads of RENAMO delegations to the
peace commissions, the Chairman of the National Elections Commission,
international members of the peace commissions and ambassadors of Security
Council member countries (see annex III), ambassadors of African countries, the
representative of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and representatives
of the National Police Affairs Commission, the National Information Commission,
the National Commission for Territorial Administration and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
6.
The Mission observed voter registration at a typical registration centre at
Matalene. It visited the Training Centre of the New Mozambican Defence Force
(FADM) at Manhica and the Mine-clearance Training Centre at Tete. It observed
demobilization in RENAMO assembly areas in Nhamacala, at the government assembly
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 5

area at Chimoio and at General Staff Headquarters at Maputo, where it witnessed
the demobilization of President Chissano and other high-ranking government
officers. One member of the Mission visited assembly areas and ONUMOZ sections
at Mocuba.
7.
The Mission touched on all issues affecting the implementation of the
general peace agreement, including demobilization, formation of the new army
(FADM), issues relating to the elections, security problems in the country
before, during and after the elections, humanitarian and refugee issues, mine
clearance, the relationship between ONUMOZ and the Government and the role of
ONUMOZ after the elections and beyond 15 November. The Mission also heard
various requests for assistance.

III.

THE SITUATION ON THE GROUND
A.

Demobilization

8.
In accordance with its terms of reference, the Mission stressed to all
interlocutors the necessity of completing the demobilization of all forces by
15 August 1994, as agreed by the parties.
9.
The deadline for the demobilization of the Mozambican Armed Forces (FAM)
was 15 August 1994. The process of the assembly of troops has concluded and
demobilization is expected to be completed shortly.
10. After a number of serious riots and mutinies by soldiers kept for very long
periods of time at assembly areas and unassembled locations, on the part of both
the Government and RENAMO, owing to delays in the demobilization process,
towards the end of July the Government and RENAMO allowed the soldiers
themselves to choose between joining the new army and demobilization. The great
majority of the soldiers chose demobilization and the reintegration support
scheme financed by the Government and the international donor community, which
is intended to facilitate their reintegration into normal civilian life. Under
that plan, the soldiers receive six months of salary from the Government and
18 months subsidy at salary level from the fund established by the international
donor community. The very high degree of demobilization has thus had a negative
impact on the number of soldiers available for integration into the new army.
11. Very interestingly, however, a key opposition figure expressed the view
that, after the elections, the current lack of sufficient recruits for the new
army could be expected to correct itself. In his opinion, having exercised
their option for demobilization, severance pay, and the 18-month subsidy at
salary level, these ex-soldiers would still be free to return after elections
and resume their military careers. This should, it is hoped, enable FADM to
achieve at least the target of 15,000 troops relatively quickly.
12. As at 28 August 1994, a total of 70,086 soldiers (52,242 Government and
17,844 RENAMO) had been demobilized and 9,917 were in the process of being
demobilized (7,662 on the Government side and 2,250 from RENAMO); 1,624 troops
were still in the assembly area, pending resolution of questions relating to
their documentation.
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 6

B.

New army

13. Both President Chissano and Mr. Dhlakama stressed the need to have an
effective army in place, preferably by the time of the elections. The general
peace agreement envisaged the formation of a 30,000-strong unified army before
the elections, with 50 per cent of the personnel to be provided by the
Government and 50 per cent by RENAMO. However, following delays in cantonment,
assembly and demobilization, ONUMOZ proposed that the number of troops to be
integrated into FADM before the elections be reduced to 15,000 (to the level
covered by the existing training programmes), and to recruit the remainder
later. While there was no formal agreement on this proposal, as a result of the
riots and mutinies and the low number of FAM soldiers and RENAMO combatants
choosing to join the new army, both parties are now prepared to move forward to
the elections with whatever the number might be and to deal with the recruitment
of the remainder thereafter. As at 28 August 1994, 7,398 had joined the new
army. Of this figure, approximately 6,482 soldiers have already been or are
being trained.
14. As announced by President Chissano at the 12 August 1994 ceremony for his
demobilization as Commander-in-Chief, and that of other senior officers of FAM,
a public ceremony was held on 16 August 1994 for the termination of FAM. In
accordance with the general peace agreement, all authority, equipment and
structures of FAM were to be transferred to FADM.
15. The Joint Commission for the Formation of the Mozambican Defence Force is
responsible for the formation of FADM until the new Government takes office,
after which FADM is to be placed under the authority of the Ministry of Defence.
The responsibilities of the existing Ministry of Defence until the new
Government takes office will have to be clarified.
16. The new army, FADM, lacks necessary funds and equipment, and will not be
operational unless these are provided. The Mission was informed that the
equipment of the old army was in the process of being transferred to the new
army but that a large proportion of it is in poor condition. The weapons of the
demobilizing soldiers and combatants were being collected. Some arms caches
have been discovered. FADM needs additional equipment and infrastructure.
17. An area of concern is the training capability for the new army following
the reduction in the strength of ONUMOZ. The assistance of the international
community in building the new army has been requested by both the Government and
RENAMO.
18. It was also pointed out that the army could be called upon to play a role
in the regional security arrangements currently being discussed and that it
would be desirable for it to be trained also for peace-keeping purposes.
19. The Mission has been informed that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General witnessed the demobilization of Mr. Dhlakama at a RENAMO
demobilization ceremony held at Meringue on 19 August 1994.

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 7

C.

Registration

20. The Mission was informed that there are an estimated 7.8 million eligible
voters in Mozambique, of whom 6.1 million had been registered as at
20 August 1994. But many refugees have not yet returned.
21. The Mission was also informed that, until recently, there had been a
limited number of registration brigades and a lack of free movement in the
RENAMO-controlled areas because of their slow integration into the civil
administration and the existence of land-mines. RENAMO stressed the need to
ensure that as many eligible voters as possible are registered.
22. The deadline for registration for all persons was initially extended by
five days to 20 August 1994, originally the deadline for special cases only.
Under the Electoral Law, extension of the registration period by the competent
authorities could not go beyond 12 September 1994, when the election campaign
was to have begun. However, by the calculations of the National Elections
Commission, the registration period could be extended by no more than five days
in order to allow for the conduct of procedures concerning the publication of
the results of the census and any challenges thereto. Subsequently, the Mission
was informed that, on 23 August 1994, the National Assembly decided to extend
the registration period until 2 September 1994.
23. The National Elections Commission decided to intensify the registration
process, utilizing existing means. It is, however, experiencing logistical
problems, including communications and transportation difficulties. Quick means
of transportation, including helicopters, are needed to reach all parts of the
country. In a country with a scattered population, there are only two daily
newspapers with less than 15,000 copies circulating in two cities, and only two
radio stations. The Mission was informed that approximately 5 million persons
were expected to vote.
24. The Mission was informed that there was no province or district where
registration had not begun but that registration had commenced late in RENAMOcontrolled zones.
25. The Mission heard concerns expressed in several quarters about alleged
registration irregularities and the fear of election irregularities. Not only
must the elections be declared by the United Nations to have been free and fair,
they must also be perceived as having been free and fair.

D.

Elections

26. In accordance with its terms of reference, the Mission stressed to all
interlocutors the need for the parties to ensure that the elections take place
on the dates agreed and under the conditions set out in the agreement. The
Mission reminded the parties of their obligation under the general peace
agreement to respect fully the results of the elections, and stressed the
intention of the Security Council to endorse the results of the elections
provided the United Nations declared them free and fair.

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 8

27. President Chissano and Mr. Dhlakama indicated their commitment to holding
the elections on 27 and 28 October 1994, as scheduled.
28. The Mission obtained the assurances of the parties of their commitment to
the peace process, to the election dates, and to accepting the results of the
elections if they are declared free and fair. Mr. Dhlakama stated that the most
important thing for RENAMO was the fulfilment of the democratic process and for
all parties to make an effort to see that the result was a happy one.
29. Inasmuch as there is the political will to transcend problems, it is the
view of the Mission that the elections will be held and the results respected.
30. The difficulties encountered in connection with the elections must be
solved. Free access by all the parties to all areas in accordance with the
general peace agreement will be necessary so that the elections may be held
under acceptable conditions. Concern was raised in several quarters regarding
lack of access to areas under RENAMO control for election purposes.
31. Some members of the international community strongly recommend that some
form of political accommodation be agreed upon before the elections. Others
believe that what is required is a political understanding between the leading
parties to the effect that the democratic rules will continue to be observed
after the elections are held. It was pointed out that the Government does not
support the idea of a Government of national unity. However, it did not rule
out the inclusion in the Government of personalities in their individual
capacities.
32. In order to ensure a satisfactory level of observation of the elections by
the United Nations, it is important that the international community agree to
provide a high number of international observers, Mozambique being a vast
country, with elections scheduled to take place at about 8,000 polling stations
connected in groups to 1,600 polling sites. This effort will be complemented by
observers from the Mozambican political parties. In order to strengthen the
capacity of these parties to participate in the observation efforts, a programme
is being worked out to provide training and financial and logistical support.

E.

Civic and voter education

33. The Chairman of the National Elections Commission stressed that in order
for the elections to be successful, a strong civic and voter education campaign
will have to be undertaken, as well as adequate monitoring of the elections,
with representatives of all parties participating fully in the monitoring.
34. The National Elections Commission is in need of assistance to facilitate
efficient communication, which will be critical during the elections. Radio and
television spots were being utilized but radio reaches less than 30 per cent of
the population. The Mission was informed that there were radio transmission
problems. ONUMOZ has requested Japan, which had reached agreement with the
Government of Mozambique to improve radio broadcasting facilities, to try to
boost the transmission capability temporarily. Germany is providing a radio
station to RENAMO.
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 9

35. As the view was expressed that the elections would not necessarily bring
peace, the Mission believes that there is a need to include a component equating
elections to peace in the civil education radio programmes.
36. The Mission stressed to all interlocutors that the goal of the peace
process is to bring democracy, permanent peace, political stability, real
freedom of the press and responsible Government to Mozambique.

F.

Financing of the parties

37. RENAMO informed the Mission that it needed additional financial means to
assist it in connection with the elections. The Mission was informed that not
all pledges to the Trust Fund for Implementation of the General Peace Agreement
in Mozambique (RENAMO Trust Fund) had been honoured. Of the US$ 14.6 million
already pledged only $13.6 million had been received, all of which had been
expended. RENAMO also indicated that the European Union had approved funds but
that these had not yet been released because of procedural difficulties.
38. The 16 smaller political parties also stressed the need to receive adequate
financial support in order to enable them to engage fully in the election
process. The Mission has been informed that each of them have now received
$50,000 as a first payment from the Trust Fund for the political parties.

G.

Security problems in the country before, during and
after the elections

39. The deterioration of the security situation throughout the country before,
during and immediately after the elections raises serious concern. The Chairman
of the National Elections Commission stressed that it was important that the
electoral campaign be assured of security and freedom of movement throughout the
country.
40. The country will be going into the elections without a fully constituted
and properly equipped army. The police are weak, poorly trained and lack the
right equipment. On the other hand, thousands of soldiers, whose only skill is
the use of weapons, have been demobilized and are without alternative
employment. Armed banditry is spreading, especially in the countryside, and the
situation may become critical.
41.
Under the Chissano-Dhlakama agreement of 3 September 1993, and in
accordance with the main principles governing the general peace agreement, the
parties agreed to request the United Nations to send a contingent of police,
inter alia, to monitor all police activities in the country, to monitor respect
for the rights and liberties of Mozambican citizens throughout the country, and
to provide technical support to the National Commission for Police Affairs. By
resolution 898 (1994), the Security Council authorized the establishment of a
United Nations police component as an integral part of ONUMOZ.

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 10

42. The Mozambican police is not adequately equipped to deal with public
security. There is further need for international assistance in the field of
training and equipping of the Mozambican police.
43. Under the general peace agreement, private and irregular armed groups,
which had been formed to fight alongside the government forces against RENAMO,
should have been disarmed before the completion of the demobilization process.
The Mission was informed that the process of the collection of their weapons is
under way. RENAMO raised the question of the need to disband the armed militias
before the elections.

H.

Humanitarian and refugee issues

44. By Security Council resolution 797 (1992), the United Nations Office for
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination was transformed into the humanitarian
component of ONUMOZ. Humanitarian needs of Mozambique for the period 1992 to
1994 have been estimated at $616 million. The Mission was informed that
87 per cent, or $536 million, of that amount had been made available through the
generosity of the international community.
45. The Mission was informed that the humanitarian activities coordinated by
the United Nations Office for Humanitarian Assistance Coordination in sectors
such as health and agriculture are designed and implemented in a manner intended
to cater to the needs of all beneficiary groups, including returnees, internally
displaced persons and the demobilized. However, for the demobilized there have
been additional and specific programmes designed to facilitate their
reintegration into civilian society. These include the Reintegration Support
Scheme, a programme for developing occupational skills, a provincial fund to
provide small and medium-sized grants for the employment of demobilized soldiers
and facilitate their participation in community-based economic activities, and
career counselling and problem-solving services.
46. The Mission was also informed that in accordance with the Joint Declaration
on the Guiding Principles for Humanitarian Assistance annexed to the general
peace agreement, the United Nations Office for Humanitarian Assistance
Coordination has also sought to ensure that humanitarian assistance is provided
to all who are in need, including those residing in RENAMO-controlled areas.
One function of the Office has been to open up the country and currently
40 non-governmental organizations are working in ex-RENAMO areas where formerly
only the International Committee of the Red Cross and the World Food Programme
operated.
47. The Mission was informed that some 342,000 refugees are still outside
Mozambique and that the internally displaced persons who have yet to
re-establish themselves in their home areas number 900,000. These facts,
together with the continuation of drought conditions in significant areas of
Mozambique, suggest that emergency humanitarian assistance will be needed beyond
1994.
48. The social and economic situation in Mozambique is very critical. Changes
following in the wake of the peace process, including demobilization and the
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 11

return of refugees and displaced persons, are increasing social instability.
The humanitarian assistance programmes are too limited to address the scope of
the problem. In particular, the demobilized could become a source of social
unrest for a long time to come. This issue must be carefully reviewed and ways
of assisting the present and the new Government in addressing the problem beyond
the boundaries of the humanitarian assistance component and the ONUMOZ mandate
will have to be sought.
49. The Mission was informed that as a result of an accelerated repatriation of
Mozambican refugees nearly 1.1 million refugees had returned by the end of
July 1994. It is expected that a further 200,000 will return during September
and October 1994, though this will be too late for them to be enfranchised. In
June 1994, UNHCR requested, on a humanitarian basis, that the deadline for voter
registration of returning refugees be exceptionally extended to as close as
possible to the election dates.

I.

Mine clearance

50. The Mission was informed that there are an estimated 1 million to 2 million
mines in Mozambique, spread over some 9,000 areas. The Security Council has
stressed in past resolutions the importance it attaches to progress in mine
clearance and related training in Mozambique.
51. The Mission was briefed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Director of the United Nations Office for Humanitarian
Assistance Coordination, and other ONUMOZ personnel on the United Nations mineclearance programme in Mozambique. The programme, which was initiated in 1993,
comprises the following components: a National Mine Survey, clearance of mines
from 2,000 kilometres of priority roads and the establishment of a Mine
Clearance Training Centre. Activities carried out within these components are
intended to contribute to the creation of a national mine-clearance capability.
The $18.5 million cost of the mine-clearance programme is met from a specific
allocation within the ONUMOZ budget ($11 million), and by contributions from the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs Trust Fund for De-mining Activities
($7.5 million).
52. Substantial delays in the implementation of aspects of the mine-clearance
programme, and the state of the programme generally, were a source of dismay to
the Mission. While the National Mine Survey has been largely completed, there
has been only limited progress in the clearing of priority roads, and the Mineclearance Training Centre is still not fully operational. The Mission was
especially concerned to learn during a visit to the Training Centre at Tete that
the Centre was experiencing difficulty attracting Mozambican trainees. The lack
of resources at the Centre, including such basics as a reliable water supply and
medical support unit, was also a cause of concern.
53. An accelerated United Nations programme aimed at creating a domestic mineclearance capability is now operational in Mozambique. It has the following
specific objectives:
(a)

Clearance of mines from the 2,000 kilometres of priority roads;
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 12

(b) Strengthening of the Mine-clearance Training Centre in order to train
450 Mozambican mine clearers to be deployed in 15 platoons by November 1994;
(c) Building of a supervisory and management structure to cover both field
operations and middle management;
(d) Development of a mine survey capability and the training of Mozambican
supervisors, instructors and staff for the Mine-clearance Training Centre.
54. The financing of the programme beyond November 1994 deserves serious
consideration as the Government of Mozambique is unlikely to be in a position to
finance the programme on a long-term basis.
55. A dispensation was being sought by the United Nations Office for
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination from United Nations Headquarters to leave
the mine-clearing equipment behind.

J.

Requests for assistance

56. The Mission heard a variety of requests for assistance, which included the
following:
(a) The Government would like additional support from the international
community in providing the subsidies for the demobilized soldiers;
(b) The Government requested assistance from the international community
to equip and train the new army, including with respect to logistics and
rehabilitation centres;
(c) The Government requested assistance in the training and equipping of
the police force;
(d) The National Elections Commission requested funding for the
recruitment of voter registration brigades for deployment in ex-RENAMO areas;
additional logistical support, for example, vehicles, aircraft and efficient
means of communication throughout the country; assistance to provide civil and
voter education; and tents for electoral observers.

K.

The relationship between ONUMOZ and the Government

57. It was clear to the Mission that there was a certain amount of friction
between the Government and ONUMOZ, essentially because of the complexity of the
situation in Mozambique. It is in the interest of the parties to ensure that
the credibility of ONUMOZ is preserved. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General is of the view that the situation of ONUMOZ benefited from the
visit of the Mission.
58. ONUMOZ is pressing to realize the goals of completing its mandate in a
timely manner and contributing to the achievement of a successful democratic
process. Its energy has lent it a high profile and led to some resentment, to
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 13

which it should remain sensitive. With events moving rapidly, the Government
has occasionally felt overlooked, unconsulted, and even blamed for delays.
Overall, ONUMOZ maintains a good level of cooperation with all the parties,
including the Government, but must remain sensitive to those perceptions. The
situation appears to be under control.

L.

ONUMOZ after the elections and beyond 15 November 1994

59. Some members of the Mission requested the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to look into the question of which ONUMOZ elements scheduled
to be reduced in strength could be kept on until after the elections.
60. Given the manner in which political, security, election and humanitarian
events are converging rapidly to a resolution, the Mission felt that ONUMOZ
could play a larger, more visible security role in this final period,
particularly on the election days. With the lingering tensions and the novelty
of elections, every effort must be made to prevent problems. ONUMOZ must deploy
its high visibility straight through the election days and, in part, beyond.
The United Nations should also have a post-election presence, to be phased out
according to the dictates of the near-term situation.
61. In the view of the Government, the United Nations needs to assist
Mozambique through a transitional period with a view to its institutional
framework becoming fully operational when ONUMOZ ends, so as to ensure that the
local framework is capable of effective governance.

IV.

OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

62. The Mission formed a positive impression of the pace of the peace process.
It maintains a cautious optimism about its prospects.
63. The Mission was satisfied with the pace of demobilization. It noted,
however, difficulties relating to the formation of FADM. It emphasizes the
importance of a complete transfer of all FAM matériel to FADM. The Mission
notes the importance of international support for the reintegration programmes
for demobilized soldiers. There are problems of resources, in connection with
which the parties have appealed to the international community.
64. The Mission is encouraged by the commitment of the parties to hold the
elections as scheduled.
65. The Mission believes every effort must be made to ensure the registration
process reaches all Mozambicans throughout the country. All zones of the
country must be completely open to all citizens in every phase of the electoral
process. Training and logistical support will need to be increased to ensure an
adequate number of electoral observers. Party observers will require technical
assistance. Allegations of electoral irregularities must be submitted through
formal channels and acted on expeditiously. There is a need for donor support
to meet shortfalls in the electoral budget.

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 14

66. The Mission recommends that the Security Council reiterate its call on the
parties to respect the results of the elections once declared free and fair by
the international community. The Security Council could further encourage the
parties to reach an understanding that will promote post-electoral stability and
harmony and respect for the rules of democracy.
67. If there was one area of disappointment in an otherwise successful mission,
it was that of mine clearance, which was late in starting and has made little
progress. This must be rectified, with proper machinery put in place. There
should be no attempt whatsoever to disrupt the programme, or to transfer
existing resources to another operation. The Mission recommends that the mineclearing equipment remain in the country.
68. The Mission recommends that the international community assist Mozambique
with additional trainers for FADM.
69. The Mission recognizes that the political, social and economic future of
the country is entirely dependent on the willingness of the Mozambicans
themselves to complete the peace process successfully. At the same time,
Mozambique is in dire need of the support of the international community as it
continues implementation of the peace process.
70. The Mission was impressed by the dedication, energy and hard work of all
the ONUMOZ personnel it encountered. The Mission expresses its thanks to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the excellent support given
to it in its work.

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 15

ANNEX I
Visit of the Security Council to Mozambique
7-12 August 1994

PROGRAMME
Sunday, 7 August
1625 hrs

Arrival at Johannesburg

1700 hrs

Departure from Johannesburg for Maputo

1830 hrs

Arrival at Maputo airport:
Mission met by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

Monday, 8 August
0800 - 0845 hrs

Mission working breakfast

0900 - 1030 hrs

Briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral

1030 - 1145 hrs

International members of the Supervision and Monitoring
Commission

1200 - 1300 hrs

Mr. Pascoal M. Mocumbi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
(Ministry of Foreign Affairs)

1315 - 1445 hrs

Lunch

1500 - 1600 hrs

Heads of government delegations to the peace commissions

1630 - 1730 hrs

Heads of RENAMO delegations to the peace commissions

1900 - 2130 hrs

Reception at Polana Hotel hosted by the Ambassador of
Nigeria to Mozambique and Mrs. I. J. Udoyen

Tuesday, 9 August
0900 - 1015 hrs

President Chissano
(President’s office)

1030 - 1145 hrs

Mr. A. Dhlakama
(residence of Mr. Dhlakama)

1200 - 1245 hrs

Mr. B. Mazula, Chairman of the National Elections
Commission

1300 - 1345 hrs

Lunch
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 16

1500 hrs

Departure from Maputo airport for Matalene

1515 - 1545 hrs

Briefing and observation of voter registration at
Matalene

1545 hrs

Departure from Matalene for Manhica

1600 - 1700 hrs

Briefing at Manhica FADM training centre

1700 hrs

Departure from Manhica for Maputo

1730 hrs

Arrival at Maputo

1800 hrs

Press briefing

1900 hrs

Reception hosted by Mr. Din Jianduo, Chargé d’affaires
of the Embassy of China to Mozambique

Wednesday, 10 August
0800 - 0845 hrs

Breakfast with chief editors of the press

0900 - 1000 hrs

UNHCR and United Nations Office for Humanitarian
Assistance Coordination

1000 - 1130 hrs

International members of the peace commissions and
ambassadors of Security Council member countries

1130 - 1300 hrs

National Police Affairs Commission, National Information
Commission and National Commission for Territorial
Administration

1315 - 1445 hrs

Lunch

1500 - 1600 hrs

Political party leaders

1615 - 1715 hrs

Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
senior ONUMOZ staff

1730 - 1800 hrs

Meeting on mine clearance with the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Director
of the United Nations Office for Humanitarian Assistance
Coordination

1900 - 2100 hrs

Reception hosted by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 17

Thursday, 11 August
A
0615 hrs

Departure from Maputo for Tete

0915 hrs

Arrival at Tete

0930 - 1030 hrs

Visit to the Mine-clearance Training Centre; briefing by
the instructors

1040 hrs

Departure from Tete for Nhamacala

1140 hrs

Arrival at Nhamacala

1140 - 1220 hrs

Visit to the RENAMO assembly area of Nhamacala; observe
demobilization

1220 hrs

Departure from Nhamacala for Chimoio

1310 hrs

Arrival at Chimoio

1320 - 1510 hrs

Briefing and lunch with Botswana battalion

1525 - 1615 hrs

Visit to Government assembly area of Chimoio; observe
demobilization

1630 hrs

Departure from Chimoio for Maputo

1830 hrs

Arrival at Maputo

2130 hrs

Meeting between the Chairman, Mr. Al-Khussaibi,
Mr. Olhaye and the ambassadors of Algeria, Angola,
Egypt, Malawi, Nigeria, Switzerland, Zaire, Zambia and
Zimbabwe, and the representative of OAU

B
0800 hrs

Departure from Maputo for Quelimane

1000 hrs

Arrival at Quelimane

1015 hrs

Departure from Quelimane

1050 hrs

Arrival at Mocuba

1100 - 1200 hrs

Briefing by the Brazilian contingent commander

1200 - 1300 hrs

Lunch with Brazilian contingent

1330 - 1420 hrs

Visit to Mocuba assembly areas and local ONUMOZ sections
/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 18

1430 hrs

Departure from Mocuba for Quelimane

1505 hrs

Arrival at Quelimane

1515 hrs

Departure from Quelimane for Maputo

1715 hrs

Arrival at Maputo

Participants:

Mr. Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg
Mr. Luciano Osorio Rosa
Mr. Antonio Ferreira Rocha
Brig. A. T. Scheffers, Deputy Force Commander
Lt. Col. Alexandra de Mattos Borges Lins
Cap. Marinho Pereira Resende Filho
Mr. Pelucio Silva

Friday, 12 August
0845 - 1015 hrs

Ceremony for demobilization of President Chissano and
other high-ranking Government officers
(Estado Maior General)

1320 - 1420 hrs

Debriefing with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General

1430 - 1500 hrs

Press conference

1515 hrs

Departure from Maputo for Johannesburg

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 19

Annex II
Participants in the meeting of the mission with the
international members of the peace commissions and
ambassadors of Security Council member countries
(Maputo, Wednesday, 10 August 1994)

SECURITY COUNCIL MEMBER COUNTRIES
(AMBASSADORS TO MOZAMBIQUE)
BRAZIL
CHINA
NIGERIA
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA

Luciano Rosa
Din Jianduo
Isaiah Udoyen
Valeri Gamaioun
Dennis Jett

INTERNATIONAL MEMBERS OF THE PEACE COMMISSIONS

UNDP
OAU
European Community
BOTSWANA
DENMARK
EGYPT
FRANCE
GERMANY
ITALY
KENYA
NETHERLANDS
NIGERIA
NORWAY
PORTUGAL
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA
ZIMBABWE

Joana Merlin-Scholtes
Ahcene Fzeri
Alvaro Neves da Silva
M. P. Lesetedi
Stig Barlyng
Esmat Abdel Azeem
Francis Heude
Helmut Rau
Manfredo Incisa Di Camerana
Lt. Col. S. M. Chege
Robert A. Vornis
Isaiah J. Udoyen
Bjoerg Leite
Carlos Neves Ferreira
John Sunde
Pablo Gomez Olea Bustinza
Birgitta Johansson
Conrad Marty

(CORE)
(CSC)
(CORE)
(CCF)
(CORE)
(CCF)
(CSC, CCF, CORE, CCFADM)
(CSC, CCF, CORE)
(CSC, CCF, CORE)
(CCF)
(CORE)
(CCF)
(CORE)
(CSC, CCF, CORE, CCFADM)
(CORE)
(CORE)
(CORE)
(CORE)

Richard Edis

(CSC, CCF, CORE, CCFADM)

Dennis Jett
John Mayowe

(CSC, CCF, CORE)
(CCF, CCFADM)

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 20

Annex III
LIST OF THE 18 REGISTERED POLITICAL PARTIES IN MOZAMBIQUE

FAP-FRENTE DE AÇĀO PATRIÓTICA
Raul da Conceiçāo (Secretary-General)
FRELIMO-FRENTE DE LIBERTAÇAO DE MOÇAMBIQUE
Feliciano Gundana (Secretary-General)
FUMO/PCD-FRENTE UNIDA DE MOÇAMBIQUE/PARTIDO DA
CONVERGÊNCIA DEMOCRÁTICA
Domingos Arouca (President)
José Manuel Samo Gudo (Secretary-General)
MONAMO/PMSD-MOVIMENTO NACIONALISTA
MOÇAMBICANO/PARTIDO MOÇAMBICANO DA SOCIAL DEMOCRACIA
Maximo Dias (Secretary-General)
PACODE-PARTIDO DO CONGRESSO DEMOCRÁTICO
Vasco Mamboya (President)
PADEMO-PARTIDO DEMOCRATICO DE MOÇAMBIQUE
Wehia Ripua (President)
PALMO-PARTIDO LIBERAL E DEMOCRÁTICO DE MOÇAMBIQUE
Martins Luis Bilal (President)
PANADE-PARTIDO NACIONAL DEMOCRÁTICO
Jose Massinga (President)
PANAMO/CDR-PARTIDO NACIONAL DE MOÇAMBIQUE/CENTRO DE
REFLEXĀO DEMOCRÁTICA
Marcos Juma (President)
PCN-PARTIDO DE CONVENÇĀO NACIONAL
Lutero Simango (Acting General Coordinator)
PIMO-PARTIDO INDEPENDENTE DE MOÇAMBIQUE
Ayacob Sibinde (President)
PPLM-PARTIDO DO PROGRESSO LIBERAL DE MOÇAMBIQUE
Neves P. Serrano (President)
PPPM-PARTIDO DO PROGRESSO DO POVO DE MOÇAMBIQUE
Padimbe Kamati (President)
PRD-PARTIDO RENOVADOR DEMOCRÁTICO
Maneca Daniel (President)

/...

S/1994/1009
English
Page 21

PT-PARTIDO TRABALHISTA
Miguel Mabote (President)
RENAMO-RESISTENCIA NACIONAL MOÇAMBICANA
Vicente Ululu (Secretary-General)
SOL-PARTIDO SOCIAL LIBERAL E DEMOCRÁTICO
Casimiro Nhamitambo (President)
UNAMO-UNIÃO NACIONAL MOÇAMBICANA
Carlos Reis (President)

-----
