S/PV.9134

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9134th meeting

Friday, 16 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Jaraud-Darnaultx. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Kambangoye Ankassa
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mr. Ndung’u
Ms. Curzio Vila
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Shaheen
Ms. Quinn
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2022/689)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-59285 (E)
*2259285*

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

contains a set of revised benchmarks and timelines and
extends the transitional period by 24 months. It now
envisages elections in December 2024. I note that those
steps were taken in accordance with article 8.4 of the
peace agreement.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2022/689)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan; and Ms. Lilian Riziq,
President of the South Sudan Women’s Empowerment
Network.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/689, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.
I give the floor to Mr. Haysom.
Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in South Sudan.
Since 2018, the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan has provided the framework to consolidate
South Sudan’s transition from conflict to peace. The
fundamentals of the agreement remain valid. The
ceasefire among the parties has largely held, despite
continued outbreaks of intercommunal violence.
With the end of the transitional period approaching,
however, it became increasingly clear that the parties
would not be able to conclude the implementation
of the key provisions of the agreement by February
2023 — the original deadline for transition. With that
window closing, on 4 August the signatory parties
agreed on a road map for completing the remaining
tasks of the country’s transition. The road map
2/17

16/09/2022

The road map is a welcome development, as it
represents consensus among the key signatories on the
way forward through a South Sudan-owned process.
It also recommits the parties to the objectives and
goals set out in the peace agreement. With that said,
the extension of the transitional period has been met
with mixed reactions by many South Sudanese who had
hoped that, by now, they would be preparing to cast their
votes in a democratic electoral process. Peace partners,
non-signatory parties, some civil society actors and
other stakeholders raised concerns about the inclusivity
of the process and have called for greater clarity around
the Government’s commitment to implementing the
agreement on time. However, there is no alternative
to the implementation of the peace agreement. That
was reflected in the affirmative vote of 37 of the 43
members, a two-thirds majority, of the reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission in
approving the extension. The next step is its ratification
by the Transitional National Legislative Assembly.
Let me underscore that the road map is a way point,
not an end point, in South Sudan’s journey on the path
to democratic transition. I emphasized that when I met
with President Kiir and First Vice-President Machar,
and I encouraged the parties to display tangible results
by keeping to the strict deadlines of the road map’s
calendar and to drive implementation in a manner that
brings on board the other stakeholders and gains the
confidence of the population. It is therefore critical that
the international community and the Council remain
closely seized of the process.
One of the most important pending issues is the
constitution-making process, as well as preparations
for elections. I underscore the importance of an
inclusive political process and the opening up of
civic space as essential conditions for a robust and
competitive electoral process to mark the completion
of the transition.
Against that backdrop, I can report some steps
taken by the parties since my previous briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.9067). The President and the First
Vice-President agreed to resolve the parliamentary
impasse, which enables the Transitional National
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Legislative Assembly to underwrite critical aspects of
the peace agreement. I can report that key bills are now
being considered by Parliament. Those bills will enable
the creation or reform of electoral, constitution-making
and judicial institutions.
I commend the recent graduation of the first batch
of the necessary unified forces from Greater Equatoria.
Those graduates are a symbol of unity for the people
in South Sudan and, in that regard, they are expected
to play a critical role in contributing to the democratic
transition of the country.
More immediately, graduation should open up the
possibility of their deployment to help curtail subnational
and intercommunal violence. The capacity of the
Government to exercise its pre-eminent responsibility
for the protection of civilians will further expand
with the reform of the security sector. In that regard,
I have warned that the graduation is just a first step in
the broader process of security sector transformation.
The adequate provision of the budgetary resources
necessary for the graduated forces, their integration
and deployment remain vital to creating a unified army.
However, the failure to address those critical issues has
the potential to reverse the gains that have been made.
A survey of the conflict landscape in South Sudan
is a reminder that this is not the time to give up on the
sense of urgency to implement the peace agreement.
Subnational violence, marked by cycles of cattle
raiding, abductions and revenge killings, continues to
devastate communities and drive humanitarian needs.
The fighting between Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-Army in Opposition forces and the Kitgwang
and Agwelek factions in Upper Nile is concerning.
Clashes have displaced thousands of people in Upper
Nile, Jonglei and Unity states and to the Sudan. We
have received reports of people fleeing to the Malakal
protection of civilians site, thereby exacerbating the
already crowded and congested conditions there. We
are currently working with the Government to meet the
urgent needs of the displaced population.
We have also strongly condemned recent violence
in Mayom, Unity state, and the clashes in Rualbet,
Warrap, both of which have caused devastating
casualties, including reports of extrajudicial killings.
I note the steps taken by the Government to condemn
those extra-judicial killings, establish investigative
committees and examine root causes of those conflicts.
I continue to urge respect for due process of the law.

S/PV.9134

Incidents of conflict-related sexual violence are
increasing. However, it could be effectively addressed
if all the parties concerned and the relevant authorities
put a stop to the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of choice. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMMISS) continues to support national ownership
of the conflict-related sexual violence prevention and
response agenda, national legal and policy frameworks
and sustainable implementation capacities.
More broadly, the Mission is strengthening its
support to the justice chain in each state by supporting
accountability, through the implementation of
mobile circuit courts and courts martial and targeted
training and mentoring and by focusing on criminal
investigations and enhanced capacity to address crimes
that risk destabilizing the peace, including those
involving gender-based violence.
As guided by the three-year strategic vision of
the Security Council in our mandate, the Mission has
largely managed to accomplish a double pivot in our
focus and operations.
The first pivot has been to orient our efforts towards
greater facilitation of the political process, while
engaging the political parties and other stakeholders,
including non-signatories and civil society. The road
map provides a fresh opportunity to align those efforts
and sharpen our engagement with key actors, as well as
institutions and partners.
The second pivot is a transition from a Mission
anchored in a static protection role to one that
emphasizes proactive deployment to violent hotspots.
We are focusing on mobility to meet protection needs
where they are greatest throughout the country. We are
leveraging our integrated civilian and military teams
to ensure that security gains are always consolidated
with local-level political and reconciliation initiatives,
which can be followed up by programming from the
United Nations country team.
The Mission is confident that our expanded
protection presence has made a difference. There has
been a modest decrease in the number of civilians
affected by violence and a significant decrease in the
overall number of incidents, as compared to the previous
year. Still, the biggest adversaries to our goal of an
integrated, all-season Mission are often terrain and
weather. We require greater mobility and innovation in
our equipment, and we are developing exit strategies so
that we can avoid becoming stuck — quite literally — in

22-592853/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the mud. The ongoing UNMISS temporary operating
base in Tambura, in Western Equatoria, is a case study
in balancing such challenges and requirements.
Allow me to share a word on the humanitarian
situation. Food security continues to deteriorate in
South Sudan, with an estimated 8.3 million people
in need. Those trends are being driven by climate
shocks, including floods and droughts, the conflict
itself, the economic downturn, protracted displacement
and disrupted livelihoods. Based on the ongoing
humanitarian assessment, flooding and heavy rains
have impacted hundreds of thousands of people to
date. Access to the people in affected locations remains
challenging due to impassable roads, flooded airstrips
and insecurity.
Overall, humanitarian needs continue to outstrip
available resources and funding, requiring the
reprogramming of such resources as they are available
to respond to the most urgent crises. I therefore urge
donors to continue responding to the 2022 humanitarian
response plan as generously as they have been doing,
but currently it is only 44.6 per cent funded.
South Sudan has tremendous potential, although it
may be currently difficult to imagine it fully blossoming.
But from our conversations with the Government,
donors and United Nations partners, we know that, if
properly developed, livestock, agriculture and wildlife
could become engines of livelihood creation for
generations to come. Those natural endowments can be
a source of conflict or a source of cooperation, and it is
always political will that makes a difference.
Please allow me to share some additional thoughts
in conclusion. The next few months will be a litmus test
for the parties in demonstrating their commitment to the
implementation of the road map. Delays and setbacks
so far have come at a cost, notably, the withdrawal of
major donor funding to the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission. I urge partners to reconsider
their support to those mechanisms, which are critical
for the renewed phase of the peace process. Similarly,
I urge the Government to ensure the sufficient and
transparent allocation of national resources towards the
tasks outlined in the road map.
I acknowledge the contribution of the Government
of the Sudan, particularly in support for the transitional
security arrangements. I also welcome the Mission’s
4/17

16/09/2022

ongoing partnership with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union,
as well as the troika and European Union. With that,
let me reaffirm that the support of the international
community continues to matter in this process. Our
collective task now is to support the parties in fulfilling
their obligations to the people of South Sudan as per
the timing set out in the road map. I therefore express
my gratitude to the Council for its continued attention
and interest.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Riziq.
Ms. Riziq: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in South Sudan.
On 12 September, South Sudan marked the fouryear anniversary of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan. Four years
after the signing of the peace agreement in 2018, the
power-sharing agreement has neither ended the violence
nor delivered the needed reforms. The situation in
South Sudan is unsustainable. The whole country is
breaking down. There is rampant insecurity and forced
displacement of civilians. The civic space is severely
restricted. Women and girls are routinely subjected to
sexual violence.
Despite the recent graduation of security forces by
the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity, the dire humanitarian and security situations
continue. The joint human rights report published on
6 September by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights documents horrific
violations and abuses of human rights in South Sudan’s
Unity state. The report documents 131 cases of rape and
gang rape, including girls as young as 8 years old and a
9-year-old girl who was gang-raped to death.
The current Government has failed to carry out its
mandate, including implementing the peace agreement
and protecting civilians. Instead, corruption and the
misuse of resources, especially oil revenues, remain
prevalent in South Sudan. Therefore, extending the
current Government’s term, given its leaders’ failure
to engender peace, democracy or development, will
prolong the suffering of ordinary citizens. In fact, the
extension of the term of the Government without the
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9134

inclusive participation of civil society or other political
and social groups will entrench the parties in their
positions vis-à-vis the agreement and encourage the
Government to hold fraudulent elections to remain in
power. The post-election period in such a scenario will
lead to violence and the outbreak of a full-fledged war.
Such a war will lead to the total collapse of South Sudan.

My remarks today will address three key themes:
first, UNMISS’ contributions towards peace and
security in South Sudan; secondly, the disappointing
step backwards on a political solution to the country’s
transition period; and thirdly and lastly, but not least,
the continued human rights abuses, including pervasive
sexual violence, to which Ms. Riziq just referred.

Therefore, we call on the region and the international
community to support the call for a broad-based process
to ensure the inclusivity of South Sudan’s transition
to peace, democracy and development. In that regard,
we support Fordham University’s initiative to convene
a broad-based meeting on South Sudan as a followup to the round-table discussion to be held in New
York on 3 June 2023. The initiative seeks to convene
an inclusive political dialogue for South Sudanese
stakeholders in the region. The goal is to help the South
Sudanese reach a broad consensus on a road map for
a new transitional programme, agree on a transitional
constitutional framework outlining the terms of the
transitional period and identify the top priorities of the
transitional Government.

First, we commend UNMISS’ efforts and dedication
to de-escalate tensions in Unity, Upper Nile and Jonglei
states over the past month, where thousands of civilians
have fled their homes due to fighting between armed
factions. The most recent outbreak of violence occurred
in Adidiyang, Upper Nile state, on 7 September,
resulting in numerous deaths and the destruction of
buildings used for humanitarian purposes. Displaced
people, as we heard, are now fleeing to the Malakal
protection of civilians site, where UNMISS is providing
shelter and critical humanitarian assistance.

That non-partisan initiative has the potential to
influence and push South Sudanese political and social
groups to engage in an inclusive political dialogue and
to agree on a road map for a transitional programme
with a specific mandate and timeline for free, fair,
credible and inclusive elections. We believe that such
a process will help the South Sudanese get out of the
vicious cycle of political violence and build a society
that will foster good governance and sustainable
development and ensure justice and accountability.

We note with grave concern the heavy rains and
flash flooding that continue to affect tens of thousands
of people across South Sudan. Those events underscore
the continuing impact of climate change on vulnerable
communities. The United States is supporting the
provision of safe drinking water, hygiene kits,
emergency shelter items and more to the most affected
communities, and long-standing United States Agency
for International Development disaster preparedness
programmes in South Sudan are also responding by
distributing pre-positioned relief supplies.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Riziq and Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Haysom and for their comprehensive briefings
on the situation in South Sudan.

The United States is appalled by the trauma,
violence and inhumane conditions that the people
of South Sudan are forced to experience on a daily
basis. We urge the Government of South Sudan to take
immediate actions to end hostilities and engage in
dialogue to resolve the remaining causes of the conflict.
We urgently call on South Sudanese officials, the
members of the Security Council and the international
community to assist UNMISS in its humanitarian
efforts to address the dire needs of civilians, while also
providing for the safety and the security of UNMISS
personnel, humanitarian workers in South Sudan and
internally displaced persons.

The United States commends the work of the
leadership of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), the men and women of UNMISS
and the troop- and police-contributing countries that
play such a critical role in protecting civilians and
mitigating conflicts in many volatile areas.

Secondly, the United States is highly disappointed
that South Sudan’s leaders extended the transitional
period, thereby once again extending their own time
and power, despite failing over the past four years to
deliver fully on the commitments they made in the
2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Riziq
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

22-592855/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. We regret
that the Government leaders did not postpone the
ratification of the extension to allow themselves time
to demonstrate, through sustained action and results
on the ground, that the new commitment — as set
out in their road map — will be different from the
past few years. We also regret that the Government
did not take the opportunity to meaningfully engage
with civil society and other agreement stakeholders,
which we believe would increase the chances of its
successful implementation.
Thirdly, as we heard from Ms. Riziq, UNMISS and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights released a joint report in September
on human rights abuses committed in southern Unity
state. The report documents human rights violations
and abuses, including the killing of 173 civilians, the
abduction of civilians and sexual violence. The report
specifically finds that Government and allied forces
engaged in scorched-earth tactics against victims,
including children, such as shooting, beheading,
burning alive and drowning in swamps. The report
also documents 131 incidents of conflict-related sexual
violence, including the rape and gang rape of women
and, as we tragically heard, girls as young as 8 years
old. The report states that such acts were systematically
committed by Government and allied forces as a method
or strategy of warfare.
While we welcome UNMISS’ support of the mobile
courts, we continue to be alarmed by the prevalence of
gender-based violence cases, including conflict-related
sexual violence, occurring throughout the country. It is
completely unacceptable that women, girls and boys are
subjected to that, with the most severe impact on women
and girls in all their diversity. We urge the Government
of South Sudan to swiftly investigate all human rights
violations and abuses, including conflict-related sexual
violence, and to hold perpetrators to account.

16/09/2022

Empowerment Network. We welcome the participation
of our brother the Permanent Representative of South
Sudan in this meeting.
The A3’s statement will focus on three issues,
namely, the political, security and humanitarian
situations in South Sudan.
First, regarding the political situation in South
Sudan, the A3 welcomes the gradual implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan that has
been witnessed over the past four years, despite the
challenges. The A3 also welcomes and commends the
signatory parties to the Revitalized Agreement for
unveiling the road map extending the transitional period
by 24 months to enable the implementation of its key
outstanding tasks. To enhance implementation, we urge
an all-inclusive process to create national ownership of
the road map through dialogue and consultations with
all segments of society, including women’s groups,
youth and civil society.
The A3 also welcomes the progress on the formation
of the necessary unified forces, in particular the
recent graduation of more than 20,000 members of the
unified national army, police and other security forces.
That is a key milestone in strengthening the capacity
of South Sudan’s security institutions to protect
civilians and address insecurity, including intermittent
intercommunal violence and human rights concerns,
as well as to guarantee the territorial integrity of the
country. We urge the parties to expedite the graduation
of all remaining forces.

Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to read out
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Gabon, Kenya and my
own country, Ghana (A3).

It is important for the international community to
support the implementation of the transitional security
arrangements, in particular by providing adequate
support to fund, equip, deploy and sustain the forces
over time. The graduation of the necessary unified
forces should usher in a new phase of the peace process
and should be built upon through the implementation
of all outstanding tasks in the Revitalized Agreement.
We continue to urge all political leaders to place the
overall interests of the nation first in their discussions
and decisions.

At the outset, we take note of the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report (S/2022/689) and
thank Special Representative Haysom for his useful
insights on the situation in South Sudan. The A3 also
appreciates and takes note of the additional briefing
by Ms. Riziq, President of the South Sudan Women’s

The A3 reiterates the call on the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the United Nations, as well as all other bilateral and
multilateral partners, not to relent in their efforts but
to continue to extend the necessary assistance and
financial support to the activities of the Revitalized

6/17

22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Agreement’s implementation oversight mechanisms and
institutions, including the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism and the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee.
On the security situation, the A3 remains deeply
concerned by the reoccurring intercommunal conflicts
in some parts of the country. We condemn the reported
fresh attacks and violence by armed elements, including
those targeted at internally displaced persons at the
Adidiyang island site in Upper Nile state. We are also
deeply concerned about the renewed hostilities in some
parts of Unity, Upper Nile and Jonglei states, which
resulted in the killing of civilians, the abduction of
women and children and new displacements.
We urge all armed groups to immediately cease
hostilities and observe the permanent ceasefire. We
further call on the Government of South Sudan to
urgently intervene to de-escalate the situation, protect
civilian lives and investigate those incidents. The A3
also condemns the reported incidents of extrajudicial
killings and urges thorough investigations into those
murders. Those who perpetrate heinous crimes should
be held accountable.
The dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan
is worrisome, with a reported increase in internally
displaced persons and higher levels of food insecurity.
The effects of climate change have continued to worsen
the situation, with South Sudan facing severe flooding,
localized drought and conflicts driven by the struggle
for livelihoods.
The A3 wishes to reiterate its call for increased
international donor support in order to respond to the
humanitarian situation, including to help increase
the capacity of the World Food Programme to deliver
food aid to South Sudan. We urge the Government
of South Sudan to put in place additional measures
for the protection of humanitarian workers and to
facilitate unhindered humanitarian access to all parts
of the country.
The A3 takes this opportunity to condemn the
attack on a humanitarian vehicle in Eastern Equatoria
state on 9 August, which resulted in the death of a fifth
humanitarian worker since the beginning of the year.
We express our deepest condolences to the family of the
deceased, and we call on the perpetrators of such attacks
to immediately cease hostilities towards aid workers,

S/PV.9134

who are sacrificing their lives under challenging
circumstances in order to serve humankind.
Furthermore, we are aware of the need for
improvements to the country’s economic situation, which
remains a key element in alleviating the humanitarian
situation. The A3 welcomes the economic recovery
measures implemented by the Government of South
Sudan. The much-needed reforms to help diversify the
country’s economy and to promote agriculture, food
security and infrastructure development will require
significant international resource support. The A3
reiterates its call for additional international donor
development assistance for South Sudan.
Finally, the A3 wishes to underscore that, moving
forward, peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction,
including capacity-building of South Sudan’s public
institutions, remain critical areas of focus in support
of South Sudan. We appeal to the Government of South
Sudan to take advantage of the opportunities available
at the Peacebuilding Commission in that regard. The
A3 also welcomes and commends the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United
Nations country team for continuing to provide
technical assistance and capacity-building assistance
to the various South Sudanese institutions.
The A3 also joins the Secretary-General in
conveying our deep appreciation to the troop- and
police-contributing countries, Special Representative
Haysom and the uniformed and civilian personnel of
UNMISS for continuing to work tirelessly towards
peace in South Sudan.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Haysom for his briefing. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan at today’s meeting. I also listened
attentively to the briefing by Ms. Riziq.
The political transition in South Sudan has entered
a new and important stage. Last month, the signatories
to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan agreed on a
road map to extend the transitional period. That was a
political decision made independently by all parties in
South Sudan. It is also the correct choice in the light
of the current situation and is conducive to the peace
process. Like the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and other international
partners, China welcomes that development.

22-592857/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

16/09/2022

China hopes that all the parties concerned will
continue to cooperate and work together to gradually
achieve the remaining goals of the transitional period
in accordance with the road map so as to lay a solid
foundation for elections.

should not only increase humanitarian assistance to
South Sudan, but also help accelerate its independent
development and build its capacity and resilience
to counter risks and challenges and promote peace
through development.

Countries should understand the practical
difficulties faced by South Sudan, take an objective
view of the decision on extending the transitional
period and not blindly regard elections as a panacea
to solve all problems and should not ignore political
efforts made on dialogue and reconciliation among the
parties in South Sudan.

As an international witness to the Revitalized
Agreement, China has always respected South Sudan’s
sovereignty and independence and supported its
efforts to embark upon a development path that fits
its own national conditions. China recently provided
material assistance to the necessary unified forces
and cooperated with the United Nations Development
Programme on its disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

The successful graduation and deployment of the
first cohort of South Sudan’s necessary unified forces
at the end of August shows significant progress in the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. It marks
a solid step forward in South Sudan’s peace process.
China welcomes and commends that step and believes
that the necessary unified forces can play an important
role in safeguarding national security and eliminating
violent conflicts.

The Chinese peacekeepers in UNMISS are fearless
and dedicated in actively carrying out their peace
mission. Going forward, we will continue to work with
the international community to provide support and
assistance for the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement and help the people of South Sudan in their
effort to lead a peaceful life as soon as possible.

It cannot be ignored that follow-up actions of the
necessary unified forces and the implementation of
other security arrangements set out in the Revitalized
Agreement require concrete help from the international
community. Cutting off funds while complaining
about delays in implementing the agreement is not an
effective solution to the problem.

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Special
Representative Haysom and Ms. Riziq for their briefings.

Security Council sanctions against South Sudan
are not conducive to the necessary unified forces
securing the security equipment needed to carry out its
mandates. A growing number of Council members have
already recognized that. China once again calls on the
Council to pay attention to South Sudan’s concerns and
appeals on the issue of sanctions, lift the arms embargo
and other sanctions against South Sudan at an early
date and help it improve its security capacity.

First, we welcome the critical graduation of the first
batch of necessary unified forces. Truly unified security
forces are key to reducing violence and conflict and to
providing peace and security. The next step will now
be to graduate and deploy forces across the country and
ensure that they have access to food and medicine and
are consistently paid their salaries.

As the youngest country in the world, South Sudan
has a late start in development and a weak foundation.
As such, it requires continued support from the
international community. Affected by floods, food
shortages, violent conflicts and other factors, South
Sudan is facing dire humanitarian challenges and is in
urgent need of help.
Under such circumstances, reducing development
assistance and imposing indiscriminate sanctions are
making things worse. The international community
8/17

In the past couple of weeks, we have seen that
tangible progress in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan is indeed possible, particularly
in two specific areas.

Secondly,
we
support
the
Government’s
commitment to a road map. We strongly believe,
however, that the road map would have benefited from
a broad-based and inclusive process. The Government
could have used the road map process to build a greater
consensus and domestic-support base. With only five
months left of the original transitional period, South
Sudan’s leaders must now deliver the results they
promised, in accordance with the timelines in the road
map and by dedicating sufficient resources.
The people of South Sudan also need to see
progress on other promises, such as public financial
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

management reform, fighting corruption, as well as the
development of a new constitution and the institutions
needed for elections.
The processes ahead will be successful only if
there is true civic and political space and freedom.
Opening up civic space is a precondition for the
successful implementation of the peace agreement.
Attempts to silence civil society activists and the media
run counter to the spirit of the peace agreement and
democratic governance.
Also, to deliver on the timelines in the new road
map, stronger enforcement mechanisms and sustained
efforts are needed from the region, including from the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union.
The level of violence, including sexual violence,
and the recruitment and use of children by armed
forces and groups remains unacceptably high. We
are deeply concerned about the findings of the joint
investigations by the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights into
human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law in southern Unity state.
We are also deeply worried about the prevailing high
level of violence in Upper Nile state. State and national
authorities should intervene urgently to de-escalate
the situation and protect civilian lives. We urge the
Government to investigate those situations and hold
perpetrators accountable.
We commend UNMISS and UN-Women for
launching three women’s networks in the police,
military and prison services in July. Promoting human
rights and gender mainstreaming in security-sector
reform is vital to fostering a climate of accountability
and advancing effective peacebuilding.
Subnational violence destroys livelihoods and
forces people to flee their homes. Violence also
deepens human suffering and food insecurity and is
limiting humanitarian access across South Sudan. We
reiterate that it is the Government’s responsibility to
protect civilians, including children. That is a critical
component of securing sustainable political peace.
All of this is taking place against a backdrop of record
floods, which South Sudan is now experiencing for a
fourth year, further demonstrating that climate-related
security risks must be integrated into efforts to manage

S/PV.9134

communal natural resources and conflicts over land
ownership and rights. We commend the efforts of
UNMISS to promote dialogue, peaceful coexistence
and reconciliation at local levels, and we believe it has
a role to play in supporting the Government’s capacity
to adapt to climate change.
In conclusion, we acknowledge the recent progress
in the implementation of the peace agreement. We
now strongly encourage a sense of urgency regarding
implementing other outstanding tasks and showing a
recommitment to the timelines of the agreement, as
adjusted by the road map.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his thorough and detailed information on the
developments on the ground. We also listened with
interest to the briefing by Ms. Lilian Riziq and welcome
the participation of the representative of South Sudan
in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates has followed the recent
developments in South Sudan, particularly the signing
on 4 August of a peace road map that extends the
transitional period by two years and is endorsed by
the Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission. We hope that it will contribute to
ensuring the implementation of the essential items of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which we all
agree remains key to supporting security and stability
in the country. We continue to encourage all the parties
concerned to promote dialogue and cooperation in
order to achieve the objectives of the Agreement.
With regard to the security situation, the protection
of civilians should remain a top priority, especially in
the context of the alarming rise in sexual and genderbased violence against women and children. We
underscore the importance of holding the perpetrators
of those heinous crimes accountable. Pertaining to the
ongoing security-sector reforms, we value the recent
Government efforts to see the first batch of the unified
forces graduate last month within the framework of
the security arrangements set out in the Revitalized
Agreement, and we hope it will continue to build on
those efforts. All the parties should continue working
to de-escalate tensions, build trust among local
communities and ensure South Sudan’s unity and
stability. It is essential to focus on addressing the root

22-592859/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

causes of the various current challenges, which in turn
will help to put an end to intercommunal violence,
especially given the outbreaks in a number of regions,
notably the Upper Nile and Unity state.
Despite the ongoing efforts to respond to the
pressing humanitarian needs in South Sudan, the
humanitarian situation remains complex, as we heard
in briefings yesterday and today. According to the
World Food Programme, more than 8 million people
in South Sudan are estimated to be facing acute food
insecurity and most of the country’s population is in
need of urgent assistance, given that the numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons are rising.
The conditions have been exacerbated by recurring
floods, difficult economic challenges and inadequate
infrastructure, as well as the effects of the coronavirus
disease pandemic, all of which demand that the
international community first step up its joint actions
addressing the humanitarian situation, and secondly
establish humanitarian operations with the resilience of
local communities in mind, including mechanisms that
focus on addressing the long-term impact of climate
change, for example by taking advantage of renewable
energy sources.
The United Arab Emirates would like to commend
the important role played by the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan in conflict prevention, as
well as in supporting the Government of South Sudan
by providing technical expertise and building the
capacities needed to achieve peace and stability in the
country. That also requires sustained commitment from
all regional and international partners.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom and civil-society representative
Ms. Lilian Riziq for their informative briefings. I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan at today’s meeting.
There have been some positive political and
security developments in South Sudan in the past few
months, as highlighted in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/689). We believe that the 30 August
graduation ceremony of more than 21,000 unified
forces builds on the recent political developments,
including the completion of the formation of the
reconstituted
Transitional
National
Legislative
Assembly. We also welcome the agreement reached
between President Salva Kiir and First Vice-President
10/17

16/09/2022

Riek Machar whereby all the parties to the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan should participate in the governance structures
of the administrative areas. Those developments are
significant and should be duly recognized.
We welcome the extension of the transitional period
by another two years until February 2025, a measure
agreed to by all the signatories to the Revitalized
Peace Agreement. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development Partners Forum, of which India is a member
State, was one of the 37 members of the Reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission voting in
favour of the extension of the transitional period. We
have noted the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s calls to the Government of South Sudan
to redouble efforts to agree on a road map with clear
benchmarks, timelines and priorities to pave the way
for free, fair and credible elections. Concerns about
public finance management and corruption should also
be addressed as a top priority.
The humanitarian situation, however, remains
a matter of concern. The international community,
including the United Nations, must step up its efforts
in support of South Sudan. We appreciate the efforts of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
to deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need,
particularly in the flood-affected areas.
The safety and security of the thousands of civilians
caught in the recent clashes between rival groups
in Upper Nile is a matter of concern. In that regard,
we take note of the role of UNMISS in protecting
the civilians at the Malakal site and in mitigating
the intercommunal conflict. We have also noted the
improved communication between UNMISS and the
Government and the integrated and cross-Mission
approach, including the setting up of temporary
operational bases. We appreciate the Mission’s efforts
to assist rule-of-law and accountability institutions
by supporting special courts, mobile courts and the
development of a framework for victim and witness
protection programmes. The recent creation of the
Ministry of Peacebuilding in South Sudan will help to
ensure that peacebuilding needs are better understood.
India has been one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to UNMISS since the Mission’s establishment.
We currently have nearly 2,300 troops serving in South
Sudan. Apart from its core mandate of protecting
civilians and providing medical services, the Indian
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

contingent in UNMISS is also contributing to promoting
sustainable development and the people’s welfare. Over
the years, the Indian peacekeepers have gone beyond the
call of duty by undertaking a variety of social activities
in that regard. The United Nations has consistently
acknowledged our peacekeepers’ contributions. It is
also a matter of pride for my delegation that Lieutenant
General Mohan Subramanian, who recently took charge,
is the second consecutive UNMISS Force Commander
from India.
We believe that during this transformative
phase South Sudan requires the wholehearted
support of the international community, including
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the African Union and the United Nations. India is
cognizant of the challenges South Sudan is facing in its
pursuit of peace and stability. Both before and during
the pandemic, we delivered humanitarian assistance to
the country in the form of food grains and medicines.
The artificial-limb fitment camp we organized in Juba
last year benefited more than 500 amputees. We are also
providing a wide range of capacity-building courses to
the young people of South Sudan.
In conclusion, we will continue to support South
Sudan and its people in their journey towards securing
sustainable peace and a prosperous future.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haysom and Ms. Riziq for
their briefings, which were insightful and sometimes
stark. I want to thank Mr. Haysom and his team for all
their work in supporting the South Sudanese people’s
aspirations for peace. Ireland strongly supports the
role of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) in supporting peace and stability, as
highlighted by Colm Brophy, our Minister for Overseas
Development Aid, on his visit earlier this month to South
Sudan. We also commend the South Sudan Women’s
Empowerment Network for its efforts and recognize
the increasingly challenging operating environment in
which it continues to work — and we thank Ms. Riziq.
Ireland is fully committed to supporting South
Sudan’s peace process. While it is regrettable that
progress has been limited, the recently agreed transitional
road map is an important step forward. Implementation
in an inclusive manner, with respect for timelines, is
essential and urgent. We call on South Sudan’s leaders
to work together in a spirit of compromise in order to
deliver on their own peace agreement.

S/PV.9134

I very much welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s updates on the road map.
Progress on the electoral and constitutional processes
will be key to a successful transition towards a stable
and peaceful South Sudan. We urge the authorities
to ensure the full inclusion of civil society and bring
together all of South Sudan’s people, providing the
space for women’s full participation in the process.
A favourable and stable security environment is
essential to the transitional process. As Mr. Haysom
said, the recent graduation of 21,000 forces into a
national security structure is welcome. It demonstrates
the Government’s commitment to creating a unified
national defence force under civilian-led authority.
A fully implemented plan for the development of a
national security force is required and conditions at the
sites need to be urgently improved.
We are seriously alarmed by the continued reports
of high levels of violence, human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law across
South Sudan. That includes hundreds of survivors of
horrific sexual and gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, which we condemn in
the strongest possible terms. We call on the authorities
in South Sudan to urgently take the necessary steps to
address the issue of impunity, as well as the drivers
of conflict and insecurity. The recent joint report by
UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the levels of
violence in southern Unity state is deeply worrying.
The survivors — and all of South Sudan — deserve
to see accountability for perpetrators and redress for
those affected.
South Sudan is facing its worst humanitarian crisis
since its independence. The international community
cannot stand by while so many are facing extreme levels
of food insecurity and malnutrition in South Sudan
and the wider Horn of Africa. We call on the South
Sudanese authorities to ensure full and unimpeded
humanitarian access in the face of such great need.
We also call on all actors to protect humanitarian
workers and humanitarian resources from attacks,
targeted killings, threats and looting. That fact that five
humanitarian workers have been killed already this
year is entirely unacceptable.
The dire humanitarian situation has been
exacerbated by flooding and other climate-related
issues. On his visit this month Mr. Brophy visited
Bentiu, in Unity state. He witnessed first-hand the

22-5928511/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

devastating effects of flooding and climate change in
northern South Sudan and met with people grappling
with the combined impact of climate-related shocks
and protracted conflict, which are causing widespread
displacement and undermining stability. Together with
the European Union and its other partners, Ireland will
continue to provide life-saving humanitarian assistance
to those who need it most. The Security Council should
recognize the undeniable fact of climate-related security
risks in its work. Ireland is pleased to be supporting a
dedicated climate and security adviser in South Sudan
who is working with the Climate Security Mechanism.
We hope that over time, that work can support the
Council’s consideration of the impact of climate change
on peace and security.
In conclusion, we again urge South Sudan’s
leaders to fulfil their promises and deliver in order to
ensure their people’s shared vision of a peaceful and
prosperous future.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his comprehensive briefing and commend his and his
team’s tireless efforts to support the peace process in
South Sudan. I also thank Ms. Lilian Riziq for giving
us a frank perspective from the point of view of civil
society. I would like to make the following three points.
First, South Sudan is at a critical juncture in the
wake of the signatory parties’ agreement to extend
the transitional period. The next step is for the leaders
to show genuine political will and commit to fully
implementing the road map and creating the necessary
conditions to advance the constitution-making process,
pass the relevant legislation and create the institutions
needed to prepare South Sudan for free, fair and
peaceful elections.
The graduation of the first batch of the unified
forces is a welcome step in the reunification process
and the implementation of outstanding security
arrangements. Efforts must now be focused on
completing the formation of the defence force. Time is
of the essence. The extension of the transition period
must be accompanied by a drastic shift in attitude
and commitment. We urge the Government to engage
meaningfully with civil society and other stakeholders
in order to maintain sustained action in delivering on
the road map.
Secondly, we are concerned about the increased
violence in South Sudan, including the clashes and
12/17

16/09/2022

cattle raiding in Unity and Upper Nile states, as well
as other regions, which have resulted in killings and
displacement. Albania strongly condemns the attacks
and urges all the parties to end the fighting. The
Government of South Sudan must ensure the protection
of civilians and fully investigate serious violations and
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law, particularly those committed by joint Government
forces and allied militia.
Similarly, the astonishing 218 per cent increase
in conflict-related sexual violence documented by
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan between
April and June alone is deeply disturbing. We call for
full accountability and an end to the impunity that
encourages such grave violations. We also call for the
expedited implementation of the action plan of the
armed forces on addressing conflict-related sexual
violence under the joint communiqué, particularly as
the graduation of the armed forces continues.
Thirdly, South Sudan is facing a dire humanitarian
situation, with 63 per cent of the population at risk of
acute food insecurity. Violence and intercommunal
tensions are exacerbating the humanitarian crisis.
We urge all parties to honour their obligations under
international law and ensure the protection of civilians
and the delivery of humanitarian aid. Albania strongly
condemns attacks on aid workers and their assets, and
we call for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
In conclusion, Albania supports the recent road map
paving the way for a peaceful end to the transitional
period in South Sudan. However, we strongly urge that
the efforts be focused on implementing the road map in
an inclusive manner, by including civil society, women
and young people and respecting the timelines for
delivery. In that regard, we call on the leaders of South
Sudan to cooperate and work with their international
partners to create the political environment needed to
foster dialogue, strengthen civil society and increase
political efficacy. As the Secretary-General highlighted,
that road map should serve as a recommitment to
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan of 2018.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Haysom and Ms. Riziq
for their informative briefings. I also welcome the
delegation of South Sudan to this meeting, in which our
delegation would like to raise four issues.
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

First, we join the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
in welcoming the road map to amend the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and to extend the transitional
period. We encourage the parties to the Revitalized
Agreement to perceive the road map as an incentive to
implement the agreement’s clauses. The parties may
lose valuable impetus if they see the road map as simply
a delay in the agreement’s commitments.
Secondly, we commend South Sudan’s transitional
Government and the parties to the Revitalized
Agreement for the graduation of the first batch of the
unified forces. We concur with the Secretary-General
and Special Representative Haysom’s assessment that
a unified defence force is a momentous expression of
national unity. We hope that the graduation contributes
to positive momentum, stimulates all the parties
to the Revitalized Agreement to recommit to its
implementation and above all contributes to peace in
South Sudan.
Thirdly, we are concerned about intercommunal
violence in South Sudan. We commend the proactive
deployment by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) of mobile structures and alert
responses to conflict hotspots in many parts of the
country. However, the extrajudicial killings in Unity
state, the heavy fighting between armed factions in
Upper Nile state and disturbing incidents of conflictrelated sexual violence in many parts of South Sudan
are cases that demand bolder reactions from the South
Sudanese authorities.
Fourthly and finally, we are apprehensive about the
humanitarian crisis in South Sudan. It is alarming that
two thirds of the population, almost 8 million people,
are expected to face extreme food insecurity and
malnutrition. It is also disconcerting that South Sudan
remains one of the world’s most dangerous places for
humanitarian workers. We therefore commend the
partners that have provided relief to South Sudanese
families, while calling for additional humanitarian
funding and requesting that particular attention be paid
to the safety of humanitarian personnel. We also want to
highlight Brazil’s participation in UNMISS, including
through the presence of a Brazilian chief of staff, as a
token of our commitment to promoting durable peace
in South Sudan.

S/PV.9134

In conclusion, we encourage the transitional
Government and the parties to the Revitalized
Agreement to implement the road map earnestly.
Above all, we underscore our support for South Sudan
and UNMISS.
Ms. Curzio Vila (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative Haysom and Ms. Riziq
for their reports. I also welcome the representative of
South Sudan to this meeting. Today I will address three
points on the situation in South Sudan and the work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
First, with regard to the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, on 4 August
the parties signed a road map extending the transition
period until February 2025. We hope that during that
period the Government of South Sudan will be able to
make tangible progress in implementing the outstanding
benchmarks. That is essential for the conduct of free,
credible and fair elections. We also hope that progress
can be made on the consideration of pending draft
laws for the elections and that they will be an inclusive
process with the participation of all parties, including
the opposition and civil society, as well as women and
young people. That is particularly important in the light
of reports of a shrinking civic space.
Secondly, the prevailing security situation
in the country — in particular the high levels of
intercommunal violence — is disproportionately
affecting civilians and is very worrying. We deplore all
attacks such as the one that took place last week on the
centre for internally displaced persons in Adidiyang.
We call on the authorities to take measures to protect
civilians and prevent the escalation of fighting. We
hope that the recent graduation of the first batch of the
unified forces will contribute to that end. UNMISS
must continue to react with rapid deployments and
temporary mobile units.
UNMISS and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights continue to report abuses and
serious human rights violations. Mexico deplores the
extrajudicial killings in Mayom county and reiterates
the importance of strengthening the justice system.
We are deeply concerned about the increase in cases
of sexual and gender-based violence and about the
grave violations against children. We call for those
responsible for such acts to be brought to justice, as

22-5928513/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

well as for the provision of the necessary services and
reparations to survivors and victims.
Thirdly, concerning humanitarian assistance
and as Mr. Haysom mentioned, the conditions for the
humanitarian community are increasingly precarious.
We urge the South Sudanese authorities to take
immediate action to end the violence and restrictions
faced by the humanitarian community. In that regard,
we regret the imposition of tariffs and taxes on cargo
for use by the Mission and hope that the Government
can cooperate to facilitate UNMISS’s work.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate the importance of
addressing the root causes fuelling cycles of violence.
Stabilization and peacebuilding depend on it.
Ms. Quinn (United Kingdom): We thank our
briefers, Special Representative Haysom and Ms. Riziq.
I would like to make three key points in response to
what we have heard today.
First, the United Kingdom remains committed to
the 2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan as the best
means to deliver peace and stability in South Sudan.
We acknowledge the recent vote by the Reconstituted
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to extend
the transitional period. We now call on the Government
of South Sudan to deliver on the commitments set
out in its road map. That will require meaningful
engagement with civil society. Like the United States
and Norway, we regret that the Government did not
postpone the ratification of the extension to enable
greater consultation, which would have increased the
confidence of South Sudan’s citizens in the process
after years of inaction.
Secondly, we urge the Government of South Sudan
to dedicate sufficient resources to the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement. We welcome the recent
graduation of the first tranche of the unified forces as
an important first step towards creating an accountable
and effective national force. But overall, progress on
its implementation remains too slow. We therefore
encourage the Government of South Sudan to be clearer
on where it requires support, including from the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), to meet
critical benchmarks.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom is deeply concerned
about the continued reports of violence in South Sudan,
including widespread sexual violence and violations
14/17

16/09/2022

and abuses of human rights. That includes the attacks on
Mayom county and the subsequent extrajudicial killings
of force commanders in Unity state. We welcome the
formation of a special committee to investigate that
matter, the findings of which must be acted on to
ensure accountability. We also condemn the ongoing
violence in Upper Nile state. We commend the efforts
of UNMISS to protect civilians, while reiterating our
calls on the Government to shoulder its responsibility
to protect its citizens. We urge the Government of South
Sudan to enable humanitarian access, address violence
against humanitarian personnel and bring perpetrators
to justice.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom reiterates its
unwavering support to the South Sudanese people’s
quest for peace, prosperity and democracy. We call on
their leaders to now deliver real change for their people.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative Haysom for
his briefing on developments in the situation in South
Sudan. We welcome the participation of Mr. Akuei
Bona Malwal, the Permanent Representative of South
Sudan, in today’s meeting. We also listened carefully
to the remarks by the South Sudanese civil-society
representative, Ms. Lilian Riziq.
We support the international efforts, and especially
those of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), to stabilize the situation and strengthen
peace and security in that young State. We welcome
the unanimous decision on 4 August by the parties to
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan to extend the transition period
by 24 months, as well as the road map adopted in that
regard. We consider it the right decision in the current
circumstances. We call on the South Sudanese parties to
work together to implement the road map. All structures
operating within the framework of the peace agreement
must have the necessary funding. We welcomed the
graduation of the contingent of the unified armed forces
at the end of August. Together with the establishment in
April of a single joint command structure, it represents
an important step towards strengthening the country’s
defence capabilities. We urge Juba to continue to
prioritize the formation of a unified army, which we
consider key to the successful subsequent advancement
of the peace process and the smooth conduct of the
general elections scheduled for 2025.
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9134

In order to facilitate the training of military
personnel of the unified forces and State security
bodies, we believe it would be justified to consider the
possibility of easing the sanctions regime currently
in force against South Sudan. We believe that the
Security Council’s approval in May of a notification
regime for simplifying the delivery of non-lethal
military equipment to the country was an important
but insufficient step aimed at meeting Juba’s legitimate
wishes, which are supported by the solidarity of its
African neighbours.

year. The period should be used to bridge the gap in the
implementation of the peace agreement. We welcome the
adoption of the road map, which sets out clear priorities
and deadlines, particularly the implementation of
security arrangements, the constitutional process and
the earliest possible preparation for future elections.
The integration of 21,000 combatants into the security
forces is also an important step. Those efforts must
continue in order to complete the integration of all
combatants from the signatory armed groups and
deploy them on the ground.

Against that difficult background, the peripheral
security situation remains fraught with difficulties.
We are concerned about the outbreaks of violence in
Unity state and strongly condemn any violations of the
Revitalized Agreement and any acts of violence against
civilians, including humanitarian personnel working in
South Sudan.

Secondly, it is essential to create conditions
conducive to the implementation of the road map. We
encourage the authorities to allocate the necessary
budgetary resources. It is also essential to put in place
a legislative and constitutional framework provided
for in the Revitalized Agreement. The participation of
civil society, in particular women and young people,
will be crucial to the credibility of the peace process,
as Ms. Lilian Riziq’s briefing today made clear. We
regret the limited involvement of civil society in the
discussions on the road map. We are concerned about
restrictions on freedom of expression and assembly,
respect for which will be fundamental in the leadup to the elections. We are also extremely concerned
about the information that Ms. Riziq provided on the
issue of sexual violence. In that connection, the work
of defining the remit of the security forces must be
finalized as soon as possible. Finally, we encourage
regional actors to continue their support alongside the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. In
particular, we reiterate our support for the action of the
mechanisms for monitoring the Revitalized Agreement
and the ceasefire set up under the auspices of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

We pay tribute to the mediation efforts of the African
Union and States members of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. We note the work of the
Community of Sant’Egidio, which ensured the return
of two more groups to the path of dialogue during the
reporting period. We call on all parties that are not
signatories to the Revitalized Agreement to join the
peace process.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize our
consistent position that the main task of UNMISS
should remain the stabilization of the security situation
and the provision of assistance to the South Sudanese
authorities in its implementation of the agreement.
The task of resolving issues related to the protection
of human rights and the fight against corruption falls
within Juba’s responsibilities.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom and Ms. Lilian Riziq
for their briefings. I also welcome the participation of
the representative of South Sudan in this meeting. I
would like to emphasize three points.
First, we call for the swift implementation of the
2018 Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan. We have taken note of the
extension of the transitional period for another two
years — a decision that was unavoidable, given that
it was unrealistic to hold elections by the end of this

Thirdly, the authorities must fulfil their prerogatives
to protect civilians and humanitarian workers. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has
recently produced a report that clearly establishes the
facts and those responsible for the atrocities committed
between February and May in Unity state, including
unspeakable acts of sexual violence. The perpetrators
must be brought to justice and punished by the Council.
Obstacles to UNMISS’s freedom of movement have
increased yet again in recent months. We call on the
relevant authorities to resume cooperation with the
Mission, which has produced encouraging results in
the past.

22-5928515/17

S/PV.9134

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Finally, we condemn the attacks on humanitarian
workers and the administrative harassment of United
Nations and non-governmental organization staff. In
response to the emergency situation, the European
Union has increased its humanitarian assistance to
South Sudan to €77.2 million for 2022 in addition to
the €208 million in planned development cooperation
aid until 2024.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam, and your team on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of September. My delegation, as always, stands
ready to cooperate with you during your presidency.
I would also like to welcome Special Representative
Haysom and his team and thank them for their
service to the people of South Sudan and for his
comprehensive report.
My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
latest 90-day report on South Sudan (S/2022/689) and
thanks him for his understanding of the need for the
new road map and the two-year extension to the interim
period for the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. My delegation appreciates the fact that in his
report the Secretary-General urges the international
community to financially support the agreement’s
monitoring mechanisms during the extended period
and appeals to those friends and partners that withdrew
their much-needed funding out of frustration to
reconsider their decision.
The new road map and extension were inevitable,
for there is — as we all know — much that remains in
the agreement that was not implemented. Crucially, the
people of South Sudan, as well as most actors in the
region and the international community, were relieved
that all South Sudanese parties signatory to the peace
agreement agreed on their own to the road map and to
the two-year extension peacefully. The road map gives
the parties signatory to the peace agreement in South
Sudan another chance to seriously implement all of its
provisions and chapters in the next two years.
While acknowledging the disappointment and
frustration of some of our partners and stakeholders in
the peace agreement, we know that the road map gives
16/17

16/09/2022

our international partners and the wider international
community another chance to recommit themselves
politically and financially in order to avoid the twoyears extension being wasted, like it was the past
three years.
Staying aloof and hoping that the parties signatory
to the peace agreement in South Sudan will do the
right thing and implement the agreement really is not
an option this time. That is why President Salva Kiir
Mayardit took the opportunity to once again appeal to
those parties holding out to come back home and join in
the country’s peacemaking process. In other words, it
is a call for inclusivity. A few members of the Council
are now playing host to those holdout groups. I think
it is time that they ask them to go home and join the
peacemaking process.
Since the road map was agreed to by all signatories,
we have been hearing from our international partners
and friends of South Sudan that they would like to see
what would be different during the extended period.
But the difference that has been asked for will not be
much if the parties signatory to the peace agreement
in South Sudan are not helped by the international
community to overcome the challenges that slowed
down the agreement’s timely implementation in the
past three years. That is why we consider the road
map to be another opportunity for our partners in
the international community to get more involved by
helping to bring the peace implementation process to a
successful end in February 2025.
Allow me to digress to a more pressing natural
calamity currently affecting the majority of South
Sudanese people. I would be remiss if I did not bring
to the Council’s attention the devastation that the most
recent floods are causing to a vast swath of land in
South Sudan. The Secretary-General just returned a
few days ago from surveying the terrible floods that
have submerged most of Pakistan in the past few weeks.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
express our solidarity with the Government and the
people of Pakistan during this difficult time. On behalf
of the people and the Government of South Sudan, we
offer our prayers and condolences to the victims of the
devasting floods in Pakistan.
Likewise, as we speak now, thousands of South
Sudanese communities and their properties have been
uprooted and destroyed by new floods. The affected
communities’ areas are no longer just confined to the
22-59285

16/09/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV.9134

two states of Jonglei and Unity. This year, most of South
Sudan’s 10 states are submerged under water. The new
floods have aggravated the situation caused by last
year’s floodwaters, which did not completely dry up. As
such, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s recent appeal to those
people of goodwill — in particular non-governmental
organizations, both local and international — to come
in with urgent humanitarian assistance for the victims
of the devastating floods in our country.

to the rest of the international community, to once
again show generosity and give humanitarian support
by providing urgently needed relief for the suffering
victims of the devastating floods in South Sudan.

While the people of South Sudan are grateful and
thankful to the international community for its longstanding humanitarian aid, we would like to take this
opportunity to appeal to the Council and, through it,

I now invite the Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Council for their warm welcome and for their
kind attention.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

22-5928517/17
