S/PV.9115

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9115th meeting

Wednesday, 24 August 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Geng Shuang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-47000 (E)
*2247000*

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations requesting that His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, be invited to
participate in today’s meeting via video-teleconference,
in accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
Does any member wish to take the floor on
this matter?
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Our delegation objects to the virtual
participation of the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, in today’s meeting. We would like to explain
our objection in detail.
We are not opposing the participation of the
President of Ukraine or his representative in the
meeting. I repeat again for the record — and for those
who will try to distort our position — that we do not
object to the participation of the President of Ukraine
in this meeting. However, that participation must be in
person; in other words, he must be physically present in
the Security Council Chamber. This is not a whim on
our part; these are the rules that govern the work of the
Council. There is no politics involved here; it is purely
a procedural matter. It is also a matter of respect for the
members of the Council and for the Council as a body.
Indeed, when the world was facing the coronavirus
disease pandemic, we collectively decided that we
would continue working virtually. But, according to
our collective decision, all of our meetings via videoteleconference (VTC) were informal meetings. Then,
after returning to the Council Chamber after the peak
of the pandemic, we decided that the Council would
resume its normal working methods, which meant a
return to the provisional rules of procedure as well. In
other words, if we the members of the Security Council
are sitting here in the Chamber, other Member States
participating under rule 37 must be present too.
Mr. Zelenskyy has already spoken to the Council
twice via VTC. Each time, we expressed our negative
2/26

24/08/2022

view of that in writing. Each time we expressed our
negative view of that in writing, but at that time the
Western Council members, including the Council
Presidents who invited the President of Ukraine to
address the Council, assured us in writing that this was
an exception that would not set a precedent. A precedent
is not set after one or two times, but a third time is no
longer an exception.
We would like to remind those members of the
Council who presided or will preside in the Council
that we have already encountered such cases. We can
understand making a few exceptions when we had
just returned to the Chamber after the pandemic when
the Heads of certain States were still prevented from
travelling. However, this year, during our presidency
in February, as well as other Presidents, did not allow
high-ranking representatives of Member States to speak
under rule 37 via video-teleconference, so why should
there be double standards in the Council on this matter?
Why are other Heads of State or ministers of other
countries that are on the Council’s agenda subjected
to discrimination?
This harkens back to the situation with international
humanitarian assistance, which rushed into Ukraine
when people forgot to help others in other parts of the
world, or the double standards on refugees and migrants
in Europe when refugees from Ukraine are greenlighted in every European country while refugees from
Africa and the Middle East and other regions find
themselves facing barriers. We cannot agree to make
an exception for one country and one person for the
third time.
This meeting was announced a week in advance,
and the President had the opportunity to travel to
New York. We constantly see Mr. Zelenskyy meeting
foreign delegations, travelling around the country and
even posing for photo shoots for glossy magazines.
He is also appointed as the Head of the Ukrainian
delegation to the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly, something that is possible only through
personal participation. Based on all this, we can draw
the conclusion that there are no restrictions to the
President’s movements. We also know that the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Dmytro Kuleba,
has been actively travelling abroad. Moreover, today
in this Chamber we see Secretary-General António
Guterres, who just recently travelled to Ukraine and
visited various cities there.
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I repeat once again that what we are objecting
to in this regard is not the participation of the Head
of Ukraine, but rather his participation via videoteleconference specifically. We ask the President to put
this matter to a procedural vote.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We listened carefully to the
arguments put forward by the delegation of Russia. We
disagree with them. Let me explain why.
We have discussed this issue in the past. And
here we are again, unfortunately, since the situation
on the ground in Ukraine has not changed and has
not improved. We agree that, in the post-pandemic
situation, virtual participation under rule 37 should be
an exception. We are faced with such a situation since a
democratically elected leader of a sovereign country, a
Member of the United Nations, cannot leave his country
for reasons beyond his control. We all know what the
reasons are. The letters from the United Kingdom,
Albania and the United States of 11 April, 18 July and
19 July, respectively, explained in detail the reasons
for granting the Ukrainian President the possibility of
addressing the Security Council virtually.
Allow me to reiterate that the justification for
this exception remains unchanged from the previous
times when the Council agreed that the President could
address the Council via video-teleconference. It was
so in April, it was so in June and it is so, sadly, now.
Ukraine is at war and under foreign invasion.
When
a
full
military
attack
on
a
country — Ukraine — remains ongoing, and with
today being its Independence Day, with curfews
imposed in various cities because of that threat, the
Security Council cannot reasonably demand that the
President travel to New York if he wants to participate
in a meeting. It is therefore legitimate. And we fully
understand that in such circumstances, the situation in
Ukraine requires President Zelenskyy to be there. This
is a unique and exceptional situation at this moment
in the world, and therefore for the Security Council as
well. We therefore strongly support the participation
of President Zelenskyy via video-teleconference and
invite other members to vote in favour.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In view of the
comments made by Council members and the request
by the representative of the Russian Federation, I shall
put to the vote the proposal to invite Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, to participate via
video-teleconference in today’s meeting in accordance

S/PV.9115

with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Russian Federation
Abstaining:
China
The President (spoke in Chinese): The proposal
received 13 votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention.
The proposal to invite His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine, to participate in today’s
meeting via video-teleconference has been adopted.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We regret that members of the Security
Council have spoken out against complying with the
rules of the Council. We can understand the logic of
Kyiv’s Western backers, who are prepared to sacrifice
the entire Ukrainian people to cover up Kyiv’s crimes
and the Council’s work, but we are disappointed by
the fact that other members, who when they come
to the Council commit to upholding the rules of the
Council, have today contributed to the erosion of
its very foundations and practices. We call on all
States Members of the United Nations to take note of
today’s situation.
Despite our position, we will hear out Mr. Zelenskyy
because we also have something to say to him. We
hope that he will remain at today’s meeting until its
conclusion. We shall see whether or not Mr. Zelenskyy
will be able to come to the seventy-seventh session of
the General Assembly as the Head of the Ukrainian
delegation or not, as the representative of Albania
has claimed.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
President Zelenskyy to participate in today’s meeting
via video-teleconference.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary

22-470003/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and His Excellency Mr. Silvio
Gonzato, Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: Today marks a sad
and tragic milestone. It has been six months since
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on 24 February. During
this devastating period, thousands of civilians have
been killed and injured, including hundreds of
children. Countless others have lost family members,
friends and loved ones. The world has seen grave
violations of international human rights law and
international humanitarian law committed with little
or no accountability. Millions of Ukrainians have lost
their homes and their worldly possessions, becoming
internally displaced or refugees. As we approach the
onset of winter, the humanitarian needs in Ukraine
continue to rise rapidly, with millions of people in need
of assistance and protection. As those needs skyrocket,
it is imperative to ensure that humanitarian actors in
Ukraine have safe and unhindered access to all who
require assistance, no matter where they live.
The consequences of this senseless war are
being felt far beyond Ukraine. We are seeing new
vulnerabilities emerge in a global environment already
worn out by conflicts, inequality, pandemic-induced
economic and health crises and climate change, with a
disproportionate impact on developing countries. The
accelerated increase in food, fertilizer and fuel prices
that were already high has triggered a global crisis
that could drive millions more into extreme poverty,
magnifying hunger and malnutrition, while threatening
to raise the global humanitarian caseload to new highs
and erase hard-won development gains. Vulnerable
communities are grappling with the largest cost-ofliving crisis in a generation, and high commodity and
transportation costs are having major repercussions for
existing humanitarian operations.
Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary
DiCarlo
will brief the Security Council on the impact of the
armed conflict in Ukraine, both inside and outside
the country, over the past six months. As I mentioned
4/26

24/08/2022

here on Monday (see S/PV.9112), I want to take this
opportunity to provide a brief update on my recent trip
to Ukraine. I would have liked to have been able to do
so at yesterday’s meeting (see S/PV.9114), based on
my experience in discussions about the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, but unfortunately I was out of New
York for an engagement that was impossible to change
on such short notice.
My visit was an important opportunity to follow up
on a landmark deal that has brought a measure of hope,
especially to developing countries and the millions of
vulnerable people bearing the brunt of the global food
crisis, some of them on the edge of famine. I can report
to the Council that the Black Sea Grain Initiative, signed
in Istanbul in July, is progressing well, with dozens of
ships sailing in and out of Ukrainian ports, loaded so far
with more than 720,000 metric tons of grains and other
food products. That deal would not have been possible
without the constructive approach of both Ukraine and
Russia and the efforts of the Government of Türkiye.
On my visit to Lviv, I met with President Zelenskyy
of Ukraine and President Erdoğan of Türkiye. I thanked
them for their continued commitment to supporting
the implementation of the Initiative to ensure the safe
passage of Ukrainian food products and fertilizers to
those in need and the world at large. Visiting the port of
Odesa and the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul, I
was filled with emotion. In Odesa, I went aboard a bulk
carrier, the MV Kubrosli Y, as it was being loaded with
about 10,000 metric tons of wheat. It was deeply moving
to peer into the hold of that cargo ship and see wheat
pouring in. Even if it is in a limited way, the storied
port of Odesa, which had been paralysed for months,
is slowly coming back to life thanks to the Initiative.
In Istanbul, I saw the MV Brave Commander, a World
Food Programme-chartered ship. It was proudly flying
the United Nations flag with its cargo destined for the
Horn of Africa, where millions are at risk of famine. I
then had the opportunity to walk up the long, narrow
gangway of the SSI Invincible II, heading to the port of
Chernomorsk to pick up Ukrainian grain. That vessel
will carry one of the largest hauls of grain leaving
Ukraine to date, more than 50,000 metric tons.
Just a few weeks ago, much of that would have
been hard to imagine. We are seeing a powerful
demonstration of what can be achieved, in even the
most devastating context, when we put people first.
As I stressed in Odesa and Istanbul, what I saw was
the more visible part of the solution. The other part of
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

this package deal is ensuring that Russian food and
fertilizers have unimpeded access to global markets
and are not subject to sanctions. It is critical that all
Governments and the private sector cooperate to
effectively bring them to market. Together with the
task team led by Rebeca Grynspan, I will continue my
intense contacts for that purpose.
In 2022, there is enough food in the world — the
problem is its uneven distribution. But if we do not
stabilize the fertilizer market in 2022, there simply
will not be enough food in 2023. Many farmers
around the world are already planning to reduce areas
intended for cultivation for next season. Getting a
great deal more food and fertilizers out of Ukraine
and Russia at reasonable cost will be vital to further
calming commodity markets and lowering prices for
consumers. I once again commend the parties for their
engagement in the process and urge them to continue
to build on the progress. I also renew the call I made
in Odesa for a massive scaling-up of support to the
developing countries that are getting hammered by the
global food crisis. The shipments of grain and other
foodstuffs are crucial, but they will not mean much
if countries cannot afford them. Developed countries
and international financial institutions must do more
to ensure that developing countries can fully capitalize
on the opportunities of the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Despite progress on the humanitarian front, the
fighting in Ukraine shows no signs of ending, with new
potential areas of dangerous escalation appearing. Two
places have been ever-present in my mind and in my
discussions in Ukraine — Zaporizhzhya and Olenivka.
I remain gravely concerned about the situation in
and around Europe’s largest nuclear power plant in
Zaporizhzhya. The warning lights are flashing. Any
action that might endanger the physical integrity, safety
or security of the nuclear plant is simply unacceptable.
Any further escalation of the situation could lead to selfdestruction. The security of the plant must be ensured,
and the plant must be re-established as purely civilian
infrastructure. In close contact with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Secretariat has
assessed that we have the logistics and security capacity
in Ukraine to support any IAEA mission from Kyiv to
the Zaporizhzhya plant, provided that both Russia and
Ukraine agree. I welcome the expressions of support
for such a mission and urge that it happen as soon
as possible.

S/PV.9115

I am deeply disturbed by the allegations we are
hearing of violations of international humanitarian law
and violations and abuses of human rights related to the
armed conflict. International humanitarian law protects
prisoners of war, and the International Committee
of the Red Cross must have access to them wherever
they are held. The United Nations Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine
continue to monitor, document and report with a view to
supporting the investigation of alleged violations. Work
is also ongoing to deploy the recently established FactFinding Mission to Olenivka to look into the incident
there on 29 July. The Fact-Finding Mission must be able
to freely conduct its work, gather and analyse necessary
information and find the facts. It is imperative that it
have safe, secure and unfettered access to all relevant
places, people and evidence without any limitation,
impediment or interference.
On this thirty-first anniversary of Ukraine’s
independence, I want to congratulate the Ukrainian
people. The people of Ukraine and beyond need peace
and they need peace now. It is in line with the Charter of
the United Nations. It is in line with international law.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: On 23 February (see S/PV.8974), the
Security Council heard impassioned pleas to avert a
war in Ukraine, to no avail. Today, exactly six months
later, there is no end in sight to the conflict triggered
by the Russian Federation’s invasion. As we meet, the
heaviest fighting is concentrated in the eastern Donbas
region; the south near Kherson and Zaporizhzhya; and
the north-east near Kharkiv. But virtually all corners
of Ukraine are affected, and no one is out of reach
of missile strikes. At the same time, several attacks,
conducted mainly with drones, have also been reported
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol, Ukraine, occupied by the Russian
Federation since 2014.
Civilians are paying a heavy price in this war.
During the past 181 days the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
has recorded 13,560 civilian casualties, that is, 5,614
killed and 7,946 injured. These statistics are based on
verified incidents. The actual numbers are considerably
higher. The majority of civilian casualties were caused

22-470005/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

by explosive weapons with wide-area effects. The use
of such weapons in and around populated areas has
predictable and devastating consequences. To date,
OHCHR has documented damage, destruction or use
for military purposes of 249 medical facilities and
350 educational facilities. The actual numbers may
be higher. The indiscriminate shelling and bombing
of populated areas, killing civilians and wrecking
hospitals, schools and other civilian infrastructure are
actions that may amount to war crimes.
We continue to receive reports of human rights
violations. The arbitrary detention and enforced
disappearance of civilians, including local authorities,
journalists, civil society activists and other civilians,
continues. OHCHR has documented 327 cases of
arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance of
civilians by the Russian Federation and affiliated
armed groups in non-Government-controlled territory.
OHCHR has also recorded 39 arbitrary arrests in
Ukrainian Government-controlled territory and 28
other cases that may amount to enforced disappearance.
Fourteen victims of enforced disappearance
perpetrated by the Russian Federation and affiliated
armed groups were found dead or died while in
detention — 13 men and one woman. OHCHR has also
corroborated allegations of hundreds of wilful killings
of civilians while parts of the Kyiv, Chernihiv and
Sumy regions were under Russian control in February
and March. It has also verified 43 cases of conflictrelated sexual violence, the majority attributable to
Russian armed forces.
We are also concerned about the situation of
prisoners of war on both sides. All prisoners of war
are protected under international humanitarian law.
There is a need for unimpeded and confidential access
by the International Committee of the Red Cross to all
places of detention, including to places of internment of
Ukrainian prisoners of war and civilian detainees in the
Russian Federation.
We are concerned about reports that the Russian
Federation and affiliated armed groups in Donetsk are
planning to try Ukrainian prisoners of war in a so-called
international tribunal in Mariupol. Any tribunal must
respect the protections afforded to all prisoners of war
by international law, including fair-trial guarantees.
The failure to uphold those standards could amount to
a war crime.
6/26

24/08/2022

Humanitarian needs continue to rise rapidly. At
least 17.7 million people, or 40 per cent of the Ukrainian
population, are in need of humanitarian assistance
and protection, including 3.3 million children.
Humanitarian access is of great concern. Roads are
heavily contaminated with explosive ordnance, putting
civilians at risk and stopping humanitarian convoys
from reaching them. More than 6.6 million internally
displaced persons have been recorded. Another
6.7 million people have left Ukraine to other countries
in Europe, most of them women and children.
As winter approaches, the destruction caused
by war, combined with the lack of access to fuel or
electricity, owing to damaged infrastructure, could
become a matter of life or death if people are unable
to heat their homes. An estimated 1.7 million people
are already in need of urgent assistance with heating,
shelter repair and other winterization preparation, as
temperatures in parts of the country are expected to
drop to -20°C.
The United Nations ongoing winterization efforts
aim to complement and support the work led by the
Government of Ukraine. Our revised flash appeal
requires $4.3 billion to support 17.7 million people in
need of assistance through December. As of 19 August,
donors have generously provided $2.4 billion.
The humanitarian response has scaled up to 500
humanitarian organization partners reaching more than
11.8 million people with at least one form of assistance.
The war has severely impacted agriculture in Ukraine,
leaving thousands of farmers without income,
destroying grain-storage facilities, and exacerbating
food insecurity among vulnerable groups. According
to the World Food Programme (WFP), 20 per cent of
the people of Ukraine have insufficient food.
As the Secretary-General emphasized, the
repercussions of the war in Ukraine are being felt
worldwide. According to World Food Programme
estimates, 345 million people will be acutely food
insecure or at a high risk of food insecurity in 82
countries with a WFP operational presence. That
represents an increase of 47 million acutely hungry
people caused by the ripple effects of the war in Ukraine.
Last month, the United Nations Development
Programme estimated that up to 71 million people
may have already been pushed into poverty in the
three months after the start of the war. Key affected
areas include the Balkans, the Caspian Sea region and
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

sub-Saharan Africa, particularly the Sahel. The global
financial situation remains volatile, with concerns
about potential stagflation scenarios in the latter
part of 2022 and 2023. Energy markets remain under
stress — a serious concern as the winter season in the
northern hemisphere approaches.
While food prices have stabilized in recent weeks,
this has not yet necessarily translated into lower inflation
rates. Inflation continued to accelerate in July. It is
breaking multi-decade records in developed countries,
and yet it is developing and least developed countries
that have been more drastically affected. The fiscal
situation in many developing economies is a particular
concern, especially as their borrowing ability has been
fragile following the need to respond to the coronavirus
disease pandemic with significant expenditures.
Today developing country debts and import bills are
coming under further pressure. We remain concerned
that the deteriorating socioeconomic situation in
developing countries, particularly those in alreadyfragile situations, could lead to social unrest. While it
is difficult to establish a direct link to the war, we have
already seen an increase in the number of riots between
the first and second quarter of 2022.
Today’s grim six-month anniversary coincides with
Ukraine’s National Day. This is an occasion to celebrate
the country’s sovereignty and independence and proud
heritage, and we congratulate the people of Ukraine on
this day. But let us recall that the human and material
toll of the war is tragic, colossal and evident — first
and foremost for Ukraine and its people. The economic
consequences for the rest of the world are ominous
and growing.
The conflict is having another impact that,
although less tangible, is just as perilous. In deepening
global divisions and exacerbating mistrust in our
institutions, the war is weakening the foundations
of our international system. The consequences of a
breakdown in how the world manages questions of
peace and security are frightening to contemplate.
This war is not only senseless, but it is exceedingly
dangerous, and it touches all of us. It must end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Volodymyr
Zelenskyy, President of Ukraine.

S/PV.9115

President Zelenskyy (spoke in Ukrainian; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): I thank
everyone for their support and would like to convey our
greetings from an independent and free Ukraine, as it
continues its fight against Russian terror. Just recently,
as I was preparing this statement, I was informed that
Russia had launched missiles against railway cars in a
train station in the Dnipro region. A number of people
were killed and some 50 injured, and unfortunately the
death toll could increase. That is our life every day now.
That is how Russia prepared for today’s meeting.
Today our country is celebrating its independence.
We can all now see how much the world depends on our
independence and on whether Ukraine is at peace, our
people are safe, and the integrity of our territory and
the viability of our borders are guaranteed. Any aspect
of the terrible aggression against us will ultimately be
related to one global crisis or another. What is happening
right now? Russia has put the world on the brink of a
nuclear catastrophe. It is a fact that the Russian military
has turned the territory of the largest nuclear power
plant in Europe, the Zaporizhzhya power plant, into a
war zone. That is a fact. Russia’s armed provocation,
shelling and deployment of terrorists on the territory
of the station under the Russian flag have ensured that
Europe and neighbouring regions now face the threat of
radioactive pollution. That is a fact. The Zaporizhzhya
power plant has six reactors. In the Chornobyl incident
in 1986, only one reactor exploded. The International
Atomic Energy Agency mission should take permanent
control of the situation at the Zaporizhzhya plant as
soon as possible and Russia should unconditionally
stop its nuclear blackmail and completely withdraw
from the plant.
Russia has also weaponized hunger. It is a fact that
the Russian blockade of Ukrainian ports has increased
the deficits in an already destabilized global food
market. That has led to a dangerous situation in various
parts of the world that has compounded the effects of
the drought in Europe, which is the worst in 500 years.
Fortunately, we have managed to create a situation in
which Russia was forced to accept the terms of the
international community and allow grain exports from
Ukrainian ports to be resumed. That has relieved some
of the tension in the global food market but has not
lifted the threat completely. Only a full, unobstructed
resumption of Ukrainian agricultural exports can
guarantee that tens of millions of people around the
world will have something to eat.

22-470007/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Even now, in the twenty-first century, is it not
strange that we must still fight to save tens of millions
of people in a number of countries from artificial hunger
caused by the insane aggression of a single country?
That is also a fact. We in Ukraine do not believe that
the United Nations was established to debate issues
in the twenty-first century that should have long ago
been relegated to the past. Nevertheless, I am grateful
to the Secretary-General, the President of Türkiye and
all the other responsible members of the international
community who are striving to end the food crisis,
for which Russia alone is responsible. In the coming
weeks, we must do our utmost to expand the Black Sea
Grain Initiative in Ukraine.
Turning now to another issue, energy, it is a fact that
Russia is deliberately trying to impose energy poverty
on tens of millions of people and to deprive them of
regular access to basic goods by deliberately raising
energy prices. That is all being done by a permanent
member of the Security Council that continues to use
the privilege of its veto right. The energy crisis in
Europe, the threat of large-scale hunger, the political
chaos created for African and Asian countries and the
price hikes all over the world — surely those issues are
all too much for a single country whose representative
is sitting in the Security Council Chamber with the rest
of the members?
I will mention one more issue, which is values. We
should have a frank discussion about the fact that values
are perceived differently in different parts of the world,
with different approaches taken to them. But everywhere
in the world, life has value. Peace has value. Economic
prosperity has value. Every country that respects itself
and its people punishes murder, and not just those who
are its executioners. However, there is one country that
behaves differently and is proud of doing so. It rewards
murderers and encourages executioners. That is not just
a threat to Ukraine, although thousands of Ukrainians
have been killed by the Russian invaders and dozens
of our cities have been destroyed by Russian artillery.
Russia does not abide by the fundamental conventions
on prisoners of war, something that has already been
mentioned in today’s meeting. The Russian occupiers’
deliberate killing of Ukrainian prisoners of war in
Olenivka has become one of the most terrible pages
in the history of Europe. We need a United Nations
fact-finding mission in Olenivka immediately, with a
mandate that should cover all Ukrainian prisoners of
war currently held by Russian forces.
8/26

24/08/2022

There is no war crime that the Russian occupiers
have not yet committed on the territory of Ukraine.
If Russia is not stopped now, through a victory for
Ukraine, all these Russian murderers will inevitably
end up in other countries — in Europe, Asia, Africa
and Latin America. The Russian war criminals leave
their tracks everywhere. We must all unite as soon as
possible and act decisively to wipe out every trace of
Russian missiles and ensure that no more cities are
destroyed by Russian artillery and that there are no
more threats of a nuclear disaster.
Russia must release the territory it is occupying in
Ukraine in order to end the food crisis. Russia must
withdraw from our lands and seas so that no country in
the world can ever again disregard the United Nations
Charter and the conventions that are binding on all
humankind. Russia must be held accountable for the
crime of aggression against Ukraine. A relevant draft
resolution will be submitted to the General Assembly
for consideration at its seventy-seventh session. In order
to restore a sense of justice to international relations,
we must all join in compelling Russia to recognize that
the inviolability of borders and peace are unconditional
values for all nations. That is why the independence
and integrity of our country are crucially important to
international relations. Preserving our independence,
guaranteeing our borders and restoring economic ties
with Ukraine will bring back the true power of the
Charter and save the world from the crises we are all
being forced to face.
Secretary-General António Guterres has the
ambitious intention to organize a Summit of the Future
next year. We support that initiative and reaffirm that,
in order to build a future, it is necessary to leave in
the dustbin of history that which has always prevented
humankind from living in peace, namely, aggression
and colonial ambitions, which are what Russia brought
to Ukraine. I believe that we can surely build a future,
and it would be good and symbolic to hold that summit
in Ukraine and that the world’s future is decided on the
territory of Ukraine is decided. Whether we will have a
future at all is also being decided at the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant and in our seaports and in Donbas
and in Crimea. Our independence is the world’s security.
I thank the Council for this opportunity to brief it
on the situation in our country. I also thank members
for their kind attention and the Chinese presidency for
arranging my virtual participation in this meeting.
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Glory to Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank His
Excellency President Zelenskyy for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Secretary-General Guterres and
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for their briefings.
I would also like to congratulate Ukrainians on
their Independence Day and thank President Zelenskyy
for participating in this meeting today. The United
States stands with President Zelenskyy and the people
of Ukraine today and every day. Every Russian bomb
that falls only strengthens our resolve to support their
sovereignty and their independence.
Today marks six months of Russia’s premeditated,
unjustifiable and brutal full-scale war against Ukraine.
It has been just six months since we sat here in the
Council Chamber and watched as Russia, serving in
the presidency, attempted to defend the indefensible.
Six months of Russia’s defiance of the international
community. Six months of Russia’s flagrant lies in
disregard of international law, including violations of
the Charter of the United Nations. Six months of attacks
by Russia, killing Ukrainian civilians and destroying
civilian infrastructure. Six months of devastation and
missile strikes that have torn apart families and stolen
the lives of too many, including the life of 4-year-old
Lisa Dmitrieva, who was killed last month in a missile
strike that left 24 people dead. Six months of horrific
atrocities, including rape, murder and torture in towns
like Bucha, Irpin and others. Six months of families
being separated and millions displaced. Six months of
killings, thousands dead.
Six months later, Russia’s goal is as clear as ever: to
dismantle Ukraine as a geopolitical entity and erase it
from the world map. Russian disinformation campaigns
are increasingly being weaponized to prepare for
further attempts to annex Ukrainian territory. The
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, publicly acknowledged that as one of the
Kremlin’s objectives. Specifically, Russia is laying the
groundwork to attempt to annex the regions of Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya, as well as all of the Donetsk and
Luhansk oblasts.
Let us be clear: the international community will
never recognize Russia’s attempt to change Ukraine’s

S/PV.9115

borders by force. When the world’s leaders come to
New York next month to reaffirm their commitments
to the Charter of the United Nations, they are also
reaffirming their support for that basic principle.
No matter how many more sham referendums or
illegitimate authorities Moscow tries to install, we will
continue to defend the Charter of the United Nations
and uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence.
As we discussed yesterday (see S/PV.9114),
Russia is responsible for creating another grave risk
to another core commitment by the international
community, namely, that of nuclear safety. Ukraine
had an impeccable record of nuclear energy safety and
security at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, but
Russia recklessly attacked and seized control of that
plant by force, risking nuclear disaster.
In a similar vein, we are particularly concerned
by Russia’s so-called filtration operations, which
involve the systematic forced deportation of Ukrainian
civilians to remote areas of Russia. Those camps are
abducting and separating children from their parents.
Russian forces are forcibly confiscating and replacing
passports, dictating curriculums in schools and
replacing Ukrainian street names and other public
signs with Russian language alternatives. The evidence
of Russian forces interrogating, detaining and forcibly
deporting hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians,
including children, continue to mount.
The reasons are clear: they want to destroy Ukraine,
its culture, its people and its very existence. Even where
we have seen progress like the movement of grain and
other foodstuffs from Ukrainian ports following the
much-needed arrangement signed with Türkiye, Russia
did not let us forget about its intentions. Mere hours
after the deal was inked, Russia launched missiles at the
port of Odesa. Those missiles were a potent reminder
that millions of Ukrainians are still under siege and
tens of millions around the world are being driven to
hunger by Russia’s actions.
For all the violence and carnage, the hunger and
humanitarian crises, the human rights abuses and
threats to vulnerable groups, Russia — and Russia
alone — bears sole responsibility. Russia alone is the
sole hindrance to a swift resolution to the crisis. We
must continue to call for and ensure accountability for
all of Russia’s atrocities.

22-470009/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Today marks six months of the war, but it also
marks Ukraine’s Independence Day — a day normally
celebrated by parades and festivals with joy. Many of
us came together in a similar kind of celebration on
4 July on the lawn of the United Nations Headquarters
as America celebrated its independence. We ate and we
danced and we looked in awe at the fireworks in the sky.
In Ukraine today there are none of the typical
festivals. There are no feasts or concerts. Citizens have
been told to stay away from cities and to look for very
different kinds of explosions from the sky. We heard
President Zelenskyy describe just that to us today. One
Ukrainian citizen told a National Public Radio reporter
that she hopes that “we can celebrate independence
without weapons in the future — maybe with flowers
and dances instead.” Let us do everything we can to
bring the flowers and the dances back to Kyiv and back
to Ukrainians. Let us pray that, by this time next year,
her dream will have come true.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me also thank the
Secretary-General
and
Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for their updated information.
Thirty-one years ago today, Ukraine declared
its independence from the decaying Soviet Union. It
is a day to celebrate, and I am sure that, despite the
situation, Ukrainians in Ukraine and abroad will
probably mark their day in one way or another. We
join them in those celebrations and welcome President
Zelenskyy’s participation in this meeting under the
exceptional circumstances that he and his country
continue to endure. But celebrations are not easy and
are hardly joyful when a country is under attack from
a neighbour that from dawn to dusk pretends to be its
brother — but the kind that assaults its own brother,
killing its people, destroying its homes, bombarding
its cities, abusing its women, deporting its people,
breaking up its country and denying its existence — an
abusive brother who wants to take everything.
Today also marks exactly six months from the start
of the invasion, the day the Charter of the United Nations
was thrown into the Kremlin’s shredder, when the term
“respect for international law” lost any meaning in
Moscow. It marks 27 weeks from the adoption of General
Assembly resolution ES-11/1, when every country in
the world but four asked Russia to stop the war and
respect the sovereignty of Ukraine. It marks 25 weeks
from a legally binding order of the International Court
of Justice, the highest international court, addressed to
10/26

24/08/2022

Russia and requiring it to immediately halt its military
activities. All those calls and documents continue to
be ignored. Russia persists in its course, with the clear
intention of dismantling Ukraine and subjugating its
people, despite unquestionable evidence and hard proof
that its actions have produced and continue to produce
serious global destabilizing consequences for security,
energy and food, including the risk of a nuclear
catastrophe, and are increasingly decoupling Russia
from the rest of the European continent. We commend
Türkiye and the Secretary-General for their tireless
and successful efforts to make sure that grain and other
food products are being exported from Ukraine and can
reach the tables of the needy throughout the world.
The war is having a terribly negative impact on
everything in Ukraine and beyond, but the worst is
its devastating impact on civilians in general and
children in particular, the generation of the future.
Some 1,000 children, maybe more, will not be there to
see Ukraine liberated. They have been killed — five
every day — and 5.2 million of them are in need of
humanitarian assistance. At least 3.6 million children
have been affected by the closure of schools or the
impact of attacks on schools, which will continue
to delay the children’s return to in-person learning.
Many more are left with invisible wounds that must be
addressed without delay in order to prioritize children’s
mental health and psychological needs and help them
build resilience. If there were one single reason to
put an immediate end to this war, it is that — to save
children, our future generations, from the scourge of
war, as is written in the Charter of the United Nations.
A few weeks ago, a deadly explosion killed
53 Ukrainian prisoners of war held in Ukrainian
territory under Russian control. That tragic event has
still not been independently investigated, and as with
everything of that nature, we are told that Ukraine did
it. The prisoners of war should have been protected by
law, as well as by the guarantees given by to the United
Nations and the International Committee of the Red
Cross that the Azov detainees would be properly treated.
Unfortunately, 53 of them were killed. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s appointment of an investigation
team and urge the United Nations to do everything to
make sure that the investigation is done impartially and
on United Nations terms. Those responsible for such
despicable crimes must be held accountable.
With a regular army stretched thin after six months
of a disastrous and bloody invasion of Ukraine, there is
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

increasing evidence that the Kremlin is making dreadful
choices and recruiting Russia’s prisoners to fight.
Credible reports and meticulous investigations point
in that direction. That is very worrying for a situation
that is already alarming, since after seeing what regular
soldiers were capable of in Bucha, we shiver at the
thought of what might happen when one gives weapons
to murderers and criminals who should be behind bars
in Russia, not in Ukraine wearing military uniforms.
If that proves to be true, those new fighters will fill in
for those who have come to their senses, discovered the
truth, abandoned the war and decided to stop being a
partner in crime. One such is Pavel Filatyev, who was
sent to Kherson. He is free to speak his mind now and
tell his story. What is he saying? Let me quote.
“We understood that we were dragged into a
serious conflict where we were simply destroying
towns and not actually liberating anyone. We do
not see the reason that our Government is trying to
explain to us. All of it is a lie. We are just destroying
peaceful lives.”
His account is much longer — 141 pages — and is out
in the open for anyone to read the immense despair of
someone sent to commit crimes next door.
We have warned before, and we want to reiterate,
particularly on this day, that any annexation of
territory, any development incompatible with Ukraine’s
Constitution imposed by Russia, such as sham elections
or referendums à la russe, will not be accepted or
recognized. Pro-Russian officials in the territories
under Russian control speak openly of joining Russia
by implementing the Crimea template. That will be null
and void, a dead end. As key European leaders stated
as recently as yesterday, Ukraine’s friends are ready
to support Ukraine’s fight to defend itself, not because
anyone is against Russia and the Russians, but simply
because all who are for peace see in Ukraine a litmus
test of the European security architecture and a stress
test of the resilience of world peace and security in the
face of long-banished imperial behaviour.
On this day, we once again reaffirm our full and
unwavering solidarity with the people of Ukraine. We
pay tribute to all who are fighting to defend their land
and their lives and to all who have been sacrificed for the
independence and freedom of Ukraine. We reiterate our
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
and we call on Russia to stop the war, withdraw its troops

S/PV.9115

and change course, so that next year at this time there is
a truly happy parade in Kyiv, not one that features the
burned-out and abandoned husks of Russian military
equipment, the epitome of this senseless war.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Secretary-General and Ms. DiCarlo
for their briefings, and I would also like to welcome the
address by President Zelenskyy this morning.
For exactly six months, Ukrainians have
courageously resisted the war of aggression launched
by Russia, with its horrific toll of mass suffering and
abuse. In case anyone needs reminding, Ukrainians are
fighting for their country’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity. What better time to pay tribute to them
than today, the day of their national holiday, which
marks the declaration of Ukraine’s independence, in
1991? Through its struggle, Ukraine is also defending
the goals and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. That is why France will continue to stand by
its side. Together with our European partners, we will
continue to support it as long as it takes in the face of
Russian aggression.
On this day when Ukrainian independence is
celebrated, I would like to make it clear that France will
never recognize the annexation of the territory occupied
by the Russian Federation. We will not recognize the
legitimacy of independence referendums organized
by Russia in those areas in an attempt to legitimize its
aggression and camouflage its flagrant violations of
international law, and neither will we ever recognize
the annexation of Crimea.
With this war, Russia is contributing to the
further destabilization of a world already dealing with
serious threats. We welcome the fact that the Joint
Coordination Centre in Istanbul is now operational and
that 33 vessels have been able to leave Ukrainian ports
since the signing of the Istanbul agreements. But let
us make no mistake, the negative consequences of the
Russian-led war continue and are multiplying. Supply
chains are still disrupted, transportation costs remain
very high and the energy market is in turmoil. As long
as Russian aggression continues, those consequences
will continue to proliferate. The presence of Russian
troops at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant also
raises the risk of a nuclear accident, with potentially
devastating consequences. We reiterate our call for
the withdrawal of Russian forces. Russia would be
primarily responsible for any incident. It is crucial

22-4700011/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

that the International Atomic Energy Agency be able
to conduct an expert mission on the ground as soon
as possible.
The reports we are receiving about extrajudicial
killings and acts of torture against Ukrainian prisoners,
in particular in the village of Olenivka, but also
elsewhere, are shocking. Russia must comply with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law, which apply in all international armed
conflicts — regardless of whether it acknowledges that
it is at war.
Since the first days of Russia’s invasion, France,
together with its partners, has actively worked to
ensure that the perpetrators of the crimes committed in
Ukraine are identified and prosecuted and their crimes
documented. We actively support the work of the
International Criminal Court, which is investigating
facts that may constitute war crimes, genocide or crimes
against humanity. We also support the investigations
that are being conducted by Ukrainian jurisdictions. We
will also be paying close attention to the information
soon to be released by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, established by the
Human Rights Council, with the support of France.
Finally, we once again call on Russia to choose
diplomacy in order to rebuild peace with Ukraine,
while respecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders, and to do
so at a time and under conditions decided by Ukraine,
the party that is being attacked. France will continue
working to ensure that happens.

24/08/2022

past eight and half years. Russia’s decision to invade
Ukraine has not changed those borders; they did not
change in 2014, and they have not changed in 2022. And
Russia’s unilateral steps to integrate parts of Ukraine
will not be recognized as anything other than flagrant
violations of the principles of sovereign independence
and non-intervention and a bald attempt to entrench
a supposed sphere of influence. We also condemn
Russia’s dangerous, escalatory and unacceptable
nuclear rhetoric during this conflict.
For 183 days, Ireland has called for an end to the
unjustified and unjustifiable war being waged against
Ukraine. As each day passes, the reports of violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed by Russia grow. Civilians in Ukraine
continue to pay the highest price. For six months, they
have been living under terror, not knowing where and
when the next bomb will strike. We therefore once
again call on Russian to comply with its obligations
under international law. Parties to the conflict must
comply with international humanitarian law. They
have an obligation to distinguish between civilians
and combatants and not to attack civilian objects;
and there is a prohibition against indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks, as well as an obligation to
take all feasible precautions in attack. Compliance is
not optional.

Ms. Moran (Ireland): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks and efforts with
regard to resolving the war in Ukraine, as well as its
wider consequences, including for global food security.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing. I want to welcome President Zelenskyy’s
address to the Security Council and reiterate Ireland’s
unwavering friendship and support to the people of
Ukraine on the occasion of their Independence Day.

As I said at our meeting yesterday (see S/PV.9114),
Ireland remains extremely concerned about the
situation at the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and the serious risk of a radiological accident or
incident arising from military activity at the site, with
devastating consequences. We call on Russia to end its
illegal occupation of the site, withdraw its troops and
munitions and ensure that the Ukrainian authorities
can uphold their responsibilities for ensuring safety
and security at the site. We welcome reports that a visit
by the International Atomic Energy Agency could go
ahead soon and support the Secretary-General’s call for
the plant to remain connected to Ukraine’s power grid.

It has been eight and a half years since Russia
first violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine; and today marks six months to the day
since Russia launched its further illegal, unprovoked
invasion of Ukraine, violating and attacking the core
principles of the United Nations. Yet let us be clear.
The internationally recognized borders of Ukraine
have not changed in the past six months, or in the

We once again call on Russia to end its brutal war
and withdraw its troops from the entire internationally
recognized territory of Ukraine and to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbours.
Russia can end its aggression if it chooses. And even
while it chooses to execute its illegal war, it still has
obligations under international law, and it must comply
with them.

12/26

22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We note the remarks made this morning by the
Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General
with regard to humanitarian needs, particularly in
the face of the onset of winter. Russia’s aggression
continues to cause mounting hardship and suffering
for the people of Ukraine, who have shown remarkable
resilience and resolve. Today Ireland stands in full
solidarity with them.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Russia’s war in
Ukraine is affecting us all. It is an attack on democratic
values and freedom. It is causing a global food crisis. It
is a blatant violation of international law and the very
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
I would like to thank President Zelenskyy for his
strong testimony this morning and for the heroic fight
that he and the Ukrainian people are engaged in for
their country, as well as for the peace and freedom of
us all.
Today we mark Ukraine’s declaration of
independence in 1991. And here we are, 31 years later,
because the Soviet successor State, Russia, has invaded
Ukraine. That is truly tragic. We therefore reiterate
our unwavering support for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity within its internationally
recognized borders.
I want to thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
for her thorough and thoughtful briefing. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing, including on his
important recent visit to Ukraine. Norway applauds his
crucial role in the Black Sea Grain Initiative, as well as
his further tireless efforts to alleviate the consequences
of this horrible war and to restore peace.
Norway condemns Russia’s military aggression
in the strongest terms possible. Russia’s warfare in
urban and populated areas and use of heavy explosive
weapons is destroying homes, schools and hospitals.
The ongoing attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including nuclear power plants, are
also having a devastating and unacceptable impact.
Thousands of civilians have already been killed.
Millions have fled their homes and others are trapped
in war zones. We stand with the people throughout
Ukraine, who continue to live in daily fear of the next
attack. We reiterate our demand that civilians must
be protected and international humanitarian law and
international human rights law must be fully respected
and implemented. Humanitarian actors must be
ensured access.

S/PV.9115

Russia must stop the war and fully, immediately
and unconditionally withdraw its forces and military
equipment from Ukraine. Russia started the war in
Ukraine, and it can choose to stop it. It seems clear
that war crimes are being committed. They cannot
be forgotten. Perpetrators on all levels must be
held accountable.
The Secretary-General has talked about a beacon
of hope with the resumption of Ukrainian grain
exports. We are hopeful that one of the global bread
basket’s critical transportation lines might be restored.
That is much-needed, both for Ukrainians and the
world’s most vulnerable people and countries. It is
also critical that the World Food Programme and other
humanitarian actors are once again able to purchase
grain from Ukraine for humanitarian food assistance.
It is now vital for the Black Sea Grain Initiative to be
fully implemented.
Every day, more people are feeling the accumulated
effects of the war. In May, the Council expressed its
unified support for the efforts of the Secretary-General
to search for a peaceful solution. We must continue to
support his efforts for dialogue and mediation between
the parties in the search for peace and freedom for the
people of Ukraine. We stress the joint responsibility
of the members of the Council to make every effort to
ensure peace. We want to tell the Ukrainian people once
again that our thoughts are with them on their national
day — and every other day. We reiterate our solidarity
with them.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
United Kingdom, I thank the Secretary-General and
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for their briefings,
and we warmly welcome President Zelenskyy’s
participation in today’s meeting.
Six months ago, even as the Security Council
met late into the night to try to avert catastrophe (see
S/PV.8974), Russia launched an unprovoked and illegal
invasion of Ukraine, in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations. In the months since then, Ukraine has
been subjected to the full horrors of war. As we have
heard today, thousands of civilians have been killed or
wounded. More than 17 million are currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. Schools, hospitals and
other medical facilities have been attacked. We have
seen a pattern of Russian violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights abuses and
violations, including reports of torture, inhumane

22-4700013/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

treatment and arbitrary detention. Ukrainian citizens,
including children, have been forcibly deported to
Russia. Six million people are displaced within Ukraine,
and more than 6 million are refugees abroad. And the
people of Ukraine are not the only victims of this war.
Beyond Ukraine’s borders, Vladimir Putin’s decisions
have had a devastating impact on the most vulnerable,
with many millions around the world affected by rising
food and fuel prices. We once again pay tribute to the
work of the Secretary-General, together with Türkiye,
to negotiate the Black Sea Grain Initiative.
Today, in what would be another violation of the
Charter, there are reports that Russia is planning fake
referendums to illegally annex more territory from
Ukraine. Any such attempts will fool no one. After all,
Russia has lied throughout its illegal invasion, using
disinformation to create false pretexts, undermine
Ukrainian sovereignty, obscure the truth and hide war
crimes. Such efforts would also further demonstrate
Russia’s contempt for the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which we have all committed to
upholding as States Members of the Organization.
Thirty-one years ago today, Ukraine declared its
independence, with more than 90 per cent of Ukrainians
voting in favour of it. Today that pride in Ukrainian
identity and sovereignty remains as strong as ever. We
have all seen the courage and ingenuity of the Ukrainian
people as they have fought to defend their nation against
Russia’s attack on their national sovereignty and right
to self-determination. Ukraine’s fight is a fight for the
principles of the Charter, and all of us in this Chamber
have a responsibility to recognize that. It is a fight that
has inspired the world with its courage and defiance
against brutality. So today, on Ukrainian Independence
Day, we stand together with the nation of Ukraine
and its heroic people, who continue to resist Russia’s
attempts to rewrite international borders by force. We
once again call on Russia to immediately withdraw its
forces from Ukraine, and we call for full accountability
for Russia’s crimes.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I acknowledge the
participation in this meeting of President Zelenskyy,
whom I congratulate on Ukraine’s national day. I thank
the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for their remarks.
Six months after the start of hostilities, there
seems to be no solution in sight for the conflict in
Ukraine. The situation is now compounded by a risk of
14/26

24/08/2022

nuclear disaster. It is essential that the parties refrain
from attacks that could threaten the safety of nuclear
facilities, as has been happening in the vicinity of
the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Brazil calls
once again for the two sides to facilitate access for an
International Atomic Energy Agency mission so that
the conditions at the plant can be properly evaluated.
It is deeply saddening to note how little progress
has been made towards a political solution. The most
notable result has been the initiative for grain exports
from Ukrainian ports and for facilitating Russian
grain and fertilizer exports, announced in July. We are
grateful for the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the support of the Government of Türkiye for it. When
the parties engaged in negotiations, an important result
was achieved that partially alleviates the effects of the
conflict on food prices around the world, particularly in
developing countries.
Reality and history show that closing the door to
dialogue is not the right approach to resolving any
conflict, and that applies to Ukraine. Actions that
prolong the hostilities will only result in greater human
suffering and will not resolve the underlying causes.
Brazil welcomes the Secretary-General’s efforts to
ensure the implementation of the Istanbul agreements
and takes note of his visit to the region last week. It
is essential that the international community seek to
preserve that important achievement, which indicates
a possible path towards broader negotiations. We urge
the parties to keep open the channels of dialogue that
made the Istanbul package possible, as they offer the
best prospects for peace.
Lastly, we would like to remind both side of their
obligation under international humanitarian law to
protect civilians and prevent human rights abuses.
Attacks on residential areas and facilities such as
schools, churches and hospitals are unacceptable and
fuel a logic of retaliation that must be avoided at all
costs. It is in everyone’s interest to ensure that the two
countries can live peacefully side by side in the future
and cooperate to achieve their development goals.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for their
respective briefings and welcome the participation of
the President of Ukraine in this meeting.
As the war in Ukraine enters its seventh month,
we remember with great sorrow all who have fallen
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

victim to it since the beginning of the conflict. We
would like to express our solidarity with the survivors,
including the many women, children, elderly and
displaced persons and refugees whose daily lives have
been upended. We pay tribute to the humanitarian
personnel on the ground who are working to alleviate
the horrendous daily effects of the war on its survivors
by providing vital and valuable assistance, often in
extremely difficult conditions. In addition to the war’s
human toll, its material cost has also been very high.
The images of the destruction of public buildings and
roads, and of the infrastructure and means to provide
public services, have become a daily occurrence.
The shelling of nuclear facilities, for which the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant has become a
symbol, raises the risk of a nuclear catastrophe, which
is increasing along with the heightened military activity
around the site. It is urgent to ensure that military
activity in the vicinity of nuclear sites stops and the
warring parties refrain from any action that could put
the world at risk of a nuclear disaster, with irreparable
consequences. We once again call on the parties to
comply with the current nuclear security rules and
to cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) in securing potentially dangerous sites
in order to prevent the risk of disaster. We welcome
the recent announcements indicating the willingness
of the parties to allow a mission of IAEA experts to
visit the Zaporizhzhya power plant in order to avoid
a conflagration.
We reiterate our opposition to the war and our
outrage about attacks on civilians. We will not tire of
repeating that the parties to the conflict must respect
their international commitments under international
humanitarian law.

S/PV.9115

rhythm of the invectives of one camp against another,
while towns and villages are ravaged and women, men
and children are killed by a bloody war. Our mandate
is to stop wars, if not to prevent them. We must take
urgent action in line with our mandate and the purpose
of the Council.
Faced with the hopeless logic of confrontation and
antagonism, my country will continue to choose the side
of peace, negotiation and dialogue. We must activate the
channels of dialogue. That is the unwavering position
of my country, which, since the beginning of the
hostilities, has supported consultations as the preferred
method of resolving conflict. The recent agreement
reached to allow the export of grain from Ukrainian
ports is a ray of hope that can lead to others. It is high
time for peace to return to the top of our priorities.
In conclusion, my country once again calls on the
parties to firmly commit to negotiations in good faith
with the goal of silencing the guns and bringing peace
to Ukraine.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for their updates on the situation
in Ukraine.
Kenya takes this opportunity to convey its best
wishes to President Zelenskyy and the people of Ukraine
on their Independence Day. We regret that what should
be a day of celebration is impaired by a war that has
breached Ukraine’s territorial integrity, contrary to the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The people of Ukraine have suffered greatly
over the past six months. We offer them, and particularly
the bereaved families, our deepest condolences.

The most recent update from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
reports 13,477 civilian casualties, including 5,587 killed
and 7,890 injured. Many civilians, including children,
are maimed by explosive weapons with wide-area and
indiscriminate effects. So long as the fighting continues,
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and surrounding
countries will continue to deteriorate. It is hard to
predict the extent of the physical and psychological
repercussions that will result, let alone the economic
consequences, whose shockwaves continue to spread.

Ukraine’s Independence Day gives us an opportunity
to appreciate our own independence, as I am sure is
the case for every member of the Council. We will
forever be thankful for the brave men and women who
fought for our freedom. We joined the United Nations
within days of becoming independent. We signed up
to its principles because, as a young nation, we needed
assurance that our sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence would be respected. We valued
its mission to outlaw aggression and sought to use its
instruments to help us turn swords into ploughshares so
that we could enjoy the fruits of our freedom.

For seven months, the Council has been plagued
by unprecedented fragmentation. It has moved to the

We remain thankful that the United Nations stood
for decolonization and that it gave voice to the smallest

22-4700015/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

countries in the world, without regard to their military
might or wealth. What a precious heritage we have, and
how intolerable that it should be as endangered as it is
today. We are forced by this moment to recall how its
failed predecessor, the League of Nations, was unable
to stop the conflicts that led to the great fire of the
Second World War.
Multilateralism, as expressed in the United Nations,
including in the Chamber, with all its flaws, is our last
hope against a new world war. The wars we choose to
fight, as Kenya and Africa, as I believe is the case for
most of the world, are for independence from poverty,
ignorance and disease. We have no desire to be drawn
into a worldwide conflict, or for our grievances and
disagreements to be the soil in which wars by proxy
take root.
We see in Ukraine’s war a grim warning that
we too may be engulfed by the competitions and
confrontations that contribute to its ferocity. That
is why we believe that Ukraine’s immediate fate is
so important to all of us. Ukraine deserves the same
freedom and independence that we enjoy. It is a Member
of our United Nations in good standing. Its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence should
be respected. Its people do not deserve to have their
lives and livelihoods destroyed.
Unless the war in Ukraine is stopped through
dialogue and negotiation, it could be the first of a
series of conflicts that future historians will name the
Third World War. Such a disaster would be different
from the last world wars and all the wars before them.
The dangers of direct conflict between nuclear-armed
Powers mean that most of their confrontations would be
undertaken by proxy. Africa and the rest of the world
would be thrown into a mirror of the Cold War, which
shattered our democracies, overthrew and killed our
leaders and robbed us of decades of economic progress.
Stopping this war, in a manner that adheres to the
principles of the United Nations Charter, is what will
keep other old grievances from boiling over.
Not all is lost. Even in such dark times, we must
remember that in the past serious threats to international
peace and security were successfully resolved. There is
yet a chance to build on the slim, but important, success
represented by the agreement between the parties for
the secure export of Ukraine’s food products through
the Black Sea, as well as food and fertilizer exports
from Russia. We commend the Secretary-General and
16/26

24/08/2022

the Government of Türkiye for their crucial facilitation.
The willingness of the parties to negotiate and the
alertness, subtle skill and moral persuasion of the
facilitators demonstrate that diplomacy is still able to
deliver if given a chance.
We cannot leave our fate to the most powerful.
Some of them may be bent on domination, but we
cannot allow it to be at the expense of our common
peace. They may project certainty and great power,
but none can know or control the future. It is time for
intuitive, bold leadership from any and every country
that has influence or leverage to push them to dialogue,
rather than confrontation.
The immediate aim should be the cessation of
hostilities in Ukraine; the opening of safe humanitarian
corridors and unhindered humanitarian access and
the security of all nuclear installations, especially the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Those should be part
of a road map to achieve a comprehensive agreement
that secures the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. Such an end, given the emerging escalation
between the great Powers, would ideally be linked to
a broader negotiation that produces a stable European
security order. The principles underlying such an order
should adhere to the United Nations Charter and be
utilized to stabilize other parts of the world. In the
meantime, Kenya, while in the Security Council and in
all relevant forums, will offer every support to positive
efforts seeking those aims.
We will continue to champion the cause of the
Secretary-General and his team, who should be
commended for their tireless efforts. In that regard,
we applaud the Secretary-General’s recent visit to
Lviv. We also pay tribute to the determined efforts
by United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
to provide humanitarian aid and comfort to Ukraine’s
most vulnerable. Their impact is evidence of a depth
of competence that we hope can be resourced and
deployed with equal ambition in other conflict areas.
We know that even with a multilateralism that is
under grave threat, as this downcast Security Council
reflects, a spirit of urgency and imagination can still
enable us to forge a just peace for Ukraine. I wish
for continued independence for all Ukrainians, as I
reaffirm Kenya’s respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

for his opening remarks and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for her valuable briefing. I also want to express
my gratitude to the Secretary-General and his team for
their effective use of his good offices. As he said in
Odesa, the ships that have left Ukrainian ports over
the past month carrying grain are indeed vessels of
hope. I also thank President Volodymyr Zelenskyy of
Ukraine for his briefing, and I would like to join my
colleagues in congratulating him and all Ukrainians on
their country’s Independence Day.
Today we are marking six months since the
beginning of the war in Ukraine. It is difficult to
overstate the toll it has taken on the dead, the injured,
those remaining in the country and those forced to flee.
A staggering third of Ukrainians have been displaced
from their homes, and 6.6 million have sought
refuge across Europe. Beyond Ukraine’s borders, the
conflict has exacerbated food insecurity and the rise
in commodity prices, both of which add to the daily
hardship suffered by hundreds of millions of people
around the world.
The United Arab Emirates enthusiastically
applauds the agreements brokered with the support
of the Secretary-General and the Republic of Türkiye
to facilitate the export of grain, food supplies and
fertilizers to global markets. However, that rare
example of tangible progress must not be the last. It
must incentivize more concerted efforts to mitigate the
impact of the conflict on the lives of those most in need
and hopefully ensure that we are not here six months
from now, marking a year of conflict and further
global disruption.
The Charter of the United Nations provides a
repertoire of tools to address the peaceful settlement of
disputes, none of which are applicable in the absence of
the political will to use them. That in turn requires all
of us to recognize that the war will end only through a
negotiated settlement and that all wars must eventually
end, as they have done countless times in human history.
There is value in the Council’s meetings on Ukraine
when they are complemented by action, laser-focused
on alleviating the suffering of civilians and finding
a political path to the war’s end. We cannot change
the past, but what happens next is a responsibility
we all share. In the past few weeks, we have seen
signs of progress, particularly with the agreements
on agricultural exports. We have also taken positive
note of the parties’ expressed support for a mission
from the International Atomic Energy Agency to the

S/PV.9115

Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, and we reiterate
how urgent that is. As the Secretary-General said,
warning lights are flashing and a failure to act could
have grave consequences. Those initiatives all have
potential as confidence-building measures that could
unlock broader political discussions. We need to work
hard to preserve and expand those windows towards
viable diplomatic initiatives aimed at de-escalation
and resolution.
Ultimately, a peaceful, sustainable resolution relies
on the Charter of the United Nations and international
law as our guiding principles. Six months in, our call
for a cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine is as
relevant as it has ever been. We cannot become inured
to this war. The stakes are too high, and every life is
too precious. The conflict should end now, and we need
to see leaders from both sides commit to charting that
difficult path forward with all of our support.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I welcome the
participation in this meeting of President Zelenskyy
and the other rule 39 participants. We wish Ukraine the
very best on its Independence Day. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his pertinent briefing
on the humanitarian and security situation in Ukraine,
and I join others in commending his direct involvement
in the multiple mediation efforts aimed at getting
the Russian Federation and Ukraine to cease their
military hostilities and engage in positive dialogue.
In that regard, I want to affirm Ghana’s full support
for the continuing use of the Secretary-General’s good
offices in helping to bring lasting peace to the people
of Ukraine.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative and the agreement
on promoting the access of Russian food products and
fertilizers to world markets — both secured under the
auspices of the United Nations, with active facilitation
by other key actors — have proved that with persistent
diplomacy, an acceptable political solution can be found
to the ongoing military hostilities in Ukraine. It is now
more important than ever for us to seize the positive
momentum generated by those outcomes and intensify
the efforts to find other avenues to significantly defuse
the dangerously escalating tensions.
Indeed, since the signing of the agreements on
27 July and their subsequent implementation, the
maritime humanitarian corridor in the Black Sea created
by that initiative has enabled more than 500,000 metric
tons of grain and other foodstuffs to be evacuated from

22-4700017/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Ukraine’s southern ports to various parts of the world
that had been reeling under the threat of hunger and
food insecurity. We urge Council members to overcome
their persistent divisions and work constructively to
bring the weight of the Council’s authority to bear in
support of such peace initiatives.
Ghana continues to be deeply concerned about
the mounting death toll and destruction of economic
infrastructure in Ukraine. The deliberate targeting
of nuclear facilities meant for peaceful purposes has
further heightened our fears that we are seeing the
start of a dangerous phase in this senseless war. We
stress the need for the parties to heed our genuine calls
and those of the international community generally for
an end to the war. We also urge that all zones around
Ukraine’s nuclear facilities be demilitarized and affirm
our support for allowing international inspectors access
to the facilities, in line with established norms.
Beyond the fact that there can be no military
solution to the parties’ substantive security concerns,
the war is unfortunately accentuating geopolitical
tensions in many areas, putting further strain on the
already fragile international order. We share the belief
that any miscalculation could potentially result in a
wider conflict in Europe, with long-term irreparable
damage to the global peace and security architecture.
We therefore continue to urge for maximum restraint
on the part of all the key actors and for unconditional
respect for the obligations imposed by the Charter of
the United Nations. In that regard, we encourage all the
parties to the conflict to seek a peaceful settlement, as
there should be no question about the need to respect
international law, which underpins the current rulesbased international order.
In conclusion, we want to underscore that it is
crucial that the lives and safety of civilians caught up in
the ongoing war, particularly women and children, be
prioritized above every other consideration. We therefore
renew our call to the Russian Federation to withdraw
all its invading troops from Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders and pursue diplomacy and dialogue
to resolve its legitimate security concerns.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive briefing on his visit to
Ukraine last week. We also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing. I join my Foreign
Minister today in conveying our greetings to the people
of Ukraine on the occasion of their Independence Day.
18/26

24/08/2022

As we meet today to mark six months since
the beginning of the ongoing conflict in Ukraine,
India is ready to dispatch its twelfth consignment of
humanitarian aid to Ukraine, which consists of 26 types
of medicines, including haemostatic bandages meant
to stem the bleeding of deep wounds in children and
adults. That was a specific request by the Ukrainian
side, and we have made sure that we will react in the
fastest possible time to meet it.
In the past six months, India has dispatched 11
consignments, approximately 97.5 tons, of humanitarian
aid to Ukraine and neighbouring countries, such as
Romania, Moldova, Slovakia and Poland. Ukraine and
its neighbouring countries offered their full support
in the relief and evacuation operation involving
approximately 22,500 Indian nationals in February
and March. That humanitarian aid and assistance
symbolizes the human-centric development approach
of the Government of India, a central tenet of our
national beliefs and values, which perceives the whole
world as one family.
India remains deeply concerned over the situation
in Ukraine. The conflict has resulted in loss of lives
and countless miseries for its peoples, particularly for
women, children and elderly, with millions becoming
homeless and forced to take shelter in neighbouring
countries. We believe that, going forward, we need to
focus on the following aspects.
First, in terms of diplomacy, India continues to
advocate for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and an end to violence. We encourage talks between
Ukraine and Russia. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has
himself, more than once, spoken to them in that regard.
Secondly, the situation on the ground calls for
sustained prioritization of urgent humanitarian relief.
I have just elaborated that we continue to give the
highest priority to the requests that we receive in that
regard. We also reiterate the importance of the United
Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
Humanitarian action must always be guided by those
principles, that is, humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence. Those principles should never
be politicized.
Thirdly, we will work with the international
community and partner countries to mitigate the
economic hardships that are resulting from this conflict.
The impact of the Ukraine conflict is not just limited
to Europe. The conflict is exacerbating concerns
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

over food, fertilizer and fuel security, particularly in
developing countries.
Fourth, food security remains a major concern. It
is necessary for all of us to adequately appreciate the
importance of equity, affordability and accessibility
when it comes to food grains. India has been approached
for the supply of wheat and sugar by many countries,
and we are responding positively. In the past three
months alone, India exported more than 1.8 million tons
of wheat to countries in need, including Afghanistan,
Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen.

S/PV.9115

We hope that our position with regard to the usefulness
of the in-person participation of such guests — at the
very least out of respect for them — has become clearer
as a result to those following today’s meeting.

Sixthly, efforts should be made to ensure stability
in the global supply of fuel commensurate with
demand. Open markets must not become an argument
to perpetuate inequity and promote discrimination.

We met here yesterday (see S/PV.9114) in
connection with a concrete threat to international peace
and security, namely, Kyiv’s ongoing bombardment
of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, which is
bringing Europe to the brink of a nuclear catastrophe.
We took note of the explanations of the SecretaryGeneral for why he did not participate in yesterday’s
meeting. Today’s meeting, however, is formally
not related to developments on the ground at all and
is meant to demonstrate the unfailing support of
Western delegations for all actions by the Kyiv regime.
Predictably, we heard numerous mantras about Russian
aggression. As we have already said, over the past 200
years no other explanation for European security issues,
except for references to Russia’s actions, has emerged
in the West.

Lastly, we have delivered for the world in terms
of vaccines; we did it earlier for medicines. I would
therefore like to assure the Security Council that
India will step forward whenever the global South is
constrained on aspects of food, health and energy
security, and we will do so in a manner that is helpful to
the global economy and does not take undue advantage
of countries in distress.

We also heard many claims today about the
catastrophic consequences of six months of hostilities
for the civilian population of Ukraine. No one is
arguing that things are not difficult for Ukrainians
today. However, the responsibility for that lies with the
Kyiv regime, which came to power in 2014 as a result of
an unconstitutional coup carried out with the help of a
number of Western States.

In conclusion, India’s approach will be to promote
dialogue and diplomacy with an overarching aim to end
the conflict and work with other partners to mitigate
the economic challenges emerging from the RussiaUkraine conflict.

From the very beginning, the new Maidan
authorities steadily led the country towards disaster,
choosing the path of Russophobia and the glorification
of Nazi criminals. According to the most conservative
estimates, more than 60 per cent of the population of
Ukraine has been deprived of an opportunity to realize
their Russian-speaking identity, contrary to all relevant
international conventions and Ukraine’s obligations.
Their Western backers, blinded by the geopolitical goal
of weakening Russia, made it clear from the outset that
they would cover up any crimes committed by the Kyiv
authorities and turn a blind eye to things they would
never allow in their own countries.

Fifthly, we are also trying to increase the production
in India of essential agrarian inputs, such as fertilizers.
There is also a need to focus on the availability of
fertilizers and to keep the supply chains for fertilizers
smooth at a global scale.

It is in our collective interest to work constructively,
both inside the United Nations and outside, towards
seeking an early resolution to this conflict. We
continue to reiterate that the global order is anchored
on international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of States.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With regard to the statement by the President
of Ukraine, the reason that the Security Council at one
point decided not to invite foreign leaders via videoteleconference included avoiding technical difficulties,
as we just saw during Mr. Zelenskyy’s statement. It was
very difficult to make out anything at certain points.

The Kyiv regime fully demonstrated its criminal
nature when it burned dissenters alive in the House of
Trade Unions in Odesa and dropped bombs and shelled
the civilian population of Donbas. In that senseless
crusade against itself, Ukraine lost Crimea and
provoked armed resistance from Donetsk and Luhansk

22-4700019/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

residents, who took up arms in the name of freedom and
the future of their children.
This war, which has claimed civilian lives for eight
years, could have ended if Kyiv had fulfilled the Minsk
agreements. However, neither the Ukrainian authorities
nor their foreign patrons needed that. They openly
stated that once again at the beginning of the year
while threatening to abandon their non-nuclear status.
In such a context, in order to establish peace in Donbas
and prevent the obvious threats to Russia emanating
from Ukraine, we had no choice but to launch a special
operation to de-Nazify and demilitarize Ukraine, the
goals of which are being steadily and successfully
met. I repeat again: had the Minsk agreements been
implemented, no special operation would have been
necessary. But the regime in Kyiv decided otherwise.
The criminal shelling of the Donbas republics
continues. In the Donetsk People’s Republic, more than
840 people are estimated to have died at the line of
contact since the beginning of the escalation in February,
while 2,800 have been injured. In the Luhansk People’s
Republic, 80 people have been killed and more than 250
have been injured. Approximately 100 civilians were
killed in the four weeks since the previous meeting on
29 July (see S/PV.9104). The Armed Forces of Ukraine
are deliberately destroying civilian infrastructure,
including kindergartens, schools and medical facilities,
power lines and gas pipelines. Even towns in Donbas that
were recently under their control, such as Lysychansk,
are not spared. And our former Western partners,
instead of condemning their Ukrainian mentees, are
supplying them with more and more types of weapons,
which reach areas where Kyiv could not previously
reach. In doing so, they are becoming complicit in
crimes against civilians, and given that the use of some
artillery systems, as Ukrainians themselves admit, is
impossible without coordinating the targets with the
suppliers, they are becoming co-conspirators as well.
This applies first and foremost to the American High
Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems, multiple launch
rocket systems which were used, in particular, to strike
the prison in Olenivka on 29 July and claimed the lives
of more than 50 Ukrainian prisoners of war. We know
that the President of Ukraine is well aware of the facts
that it is the Armed Forces of Ukraine who are behind
this crime, despite the fact that he sold us a false version
of events today in which Russia was responsible.
From the very beginning, we warned that Ukrainian
armed groups were actively using civilian facilities
20/26

24/08/2022

for military purposes. Meanwhile, local residents are
forbidden from leaving their homes, while all their
attempts to independently evacuate to safe areas are
brutally suppressed. There have been so many instances
of Ukrainian artillery and ammunition being located
on the premises of educational and medical facilities
over these six months that even pro-Western human
rights organizations, such as Amnesty International,
can no longer ignore them. However, instead of forcing
Kyiv to comply with international humanitarian law,
our Western colleagues, after the tantrum thrown by
the Ukrainian authorities, who are used to getting away
with everything, chose to publicly castigate Amnesty
International itself instead. And today Ms. DiCarlo
expressed her concern about the upcoming trial of Azov
Nazis and sadists, but said nothing of the horrific crimes
they committed or their violations of international
humanitarian law, including brutal torture, information
about which is available to the international civil
service community, including Ms. DiCarlo herself. The
United Nations, which Ms. DiCarlo represents, also has
sufficient information about this.
Frankly, this all looks extremely cynical and
denigrates the value of the freedom of speech and human
rights protection. It is too bad that Council members do
not understand that, but ordinary Ukrainians are well
aware of it. They encounter the atrocities of the Armed
Forces of Ukraine and their national battalions and their
inhumane methods. Allow me to cite just one example.
At the meeting in July, we already showed members
of a photo of a “petal” anti-personnel mine. Today, to
make it even clearer, I will show Council members
the training models for those mines, which Ukrainian
troops are scattering by the hundreds in Donbas, in the
territories liberated by the Russian army and even on
Russian territory.
Imagine such an inconspicuous petal lying on the
ground in the grass. It can also be camouflaged, which
makes it virtually invisible on the ground. Considering
that the Ukrainian Armed Forces scatters those mines
in towns and villages far behind the front lines, it is
not soldiers that they pose a threat to at all. No, they
are purposefully designed to target civilians, especially
children, who risk stepping on them or picking up such
a “toy” out of curiosity. A total of 47 explosions of
such mines have already been recorded in the Donetsk
People’s Republic. The petal mine is living proof of
the sadistic, barbaric nature of the Ukrainian regime, a
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

symbol of its true attitude towards the people of the east
and south-east of the country.
Of course, the people see and understand that.
Hence the treatment of Russian soldiers as liberators,
which is widespread in the liberated territories. That
does not in any way fit the narrative promoted by Kyiv
and its Western sponsors. Ukraine is therefore resorting
to terror and intimidation tactics in the Kherson,
Zaporizhzhya and Kharkiv regions. But that cannot
change the minds of people who have seen the true face
of the Kyiv regime. Kyiv is losing the battle for minds,
and its Western backers, who are waging a proxy war
against Russia to the last Ukrainian, are getting mired
deeper and deeper in support of that anti-popular,
anti-human regime, turning a blind eye to examples
of neo-Nazism, extreme nationalism and Russophobia.
They are also shooting themselves in the foot with futile
attempts to isolate Russia politically and economically.
Then again, that is something Council members will
have to answer for to their own voters and taxpayers,
as well as to the international community — for the
unprecedented mendacious campaign to discredit
Russia. Not since the propaganda of the Nazi Joseph
Goebbels has the world encountered such a degree
of fabrication, which is being used by Western and
Ukrainian experts of psychological operations. There
is no doubt that history will afford a correct assessment
of this.
Our Albanian colleague propounded today, à la
albanaise, about Russian prisoners who are allegedly
being recruited by the Russian authorities. However, he
forgot to mention those released from Ukrainian prisons,
Ukrainian prisoners, who were handed weapons in the
first days of the special military operation and who
made themselves known by pillaging and murdering
and who continue to terrorize Ukrainian towns. We
will address that in detail at a future Council meeting.
The Secretary-General’s so-called Black Sea
initiative is considered a kind of success story,
especially as it concerns the unhindered export of food
from Ukraine. However, there are alarming trends there
as well. In four weeks of export operations, only one of
34 dry cargo ships went to Africa. That is completely
inconsistent with the originally stated goal of combating
hunger in the countries in dire need of grain. In that
regard, of course, it is worth remembering the public
relations failure with the dispatch of the first vessel, the
RAZONI, which instead of bringing long-awaited wheat
to Lebanon, brought corn for animal feed instead.

S/PV.9115

Against that backdrop, there is much to consider
with regard to the Secretary-General’s comment at
the port of Odesa on 19 August that grain exports
and lower prices in global food markets will not bring
relief to needy countries that cannot afford to buy it
anyway. This situation clearly reveals the true causes
of global food security issues. It is not about Ukrainian
grain at all. The main reason is the Western countries’
own economic miscalculations and the consequences
of anti-Russian sanctions, which we have spoken
about repeatedly in this Chamber. It was the sanctions
that caused the breakdown of logistical and financial
chains, which provoked a sharp decline in market
supplies. Excuses about the supposedly targeted
nature of the unilateral measures cannot fill hungry
people’s stomachs.
We urge all those involved to take the package
nature of the Black Sea initiative seriously and not to
postpone resolving the financial and logistical problems
that prevent the export of Russian food and fertilizers
to the global market. We emphasize that the extension
of the grain deal, the term of which is 120 days from
the date of its signing, would be facilitated by tangible
results for Russian foreign trade operators, equivalent
to what we see for Ukrainian exports. So far, there are
significant reserves in that part of the grain deal.
It is no secret that our Western colleagues who
requested today’s meeting resolved to have it coincide
with Ukraine’s Independence Day. Much has been
said about that today. A number of our colleagues
directly pointed to Russia as a threat to Ukrainian
independence. We do not agree with that. Eight years
after the launch of the Maidan project, it has become
clear that the main, and in fact the only, threat to
Ukraine’s independence is the current Government
in Kyiv. Over these years, robust mechanisms for the
external governance of Ukraine have been formed,
which are visible to the naked eye. We know that at
all levels of Government, in all key departments of
that country, there are Western advisers without whose
consent no major decision is made. Suffice it to recall
how, in 2014, the notorious Victoria Nuland resolved
issues concerning the formation of the Ukrainian
Government by phone with the American Ambassador
in Kyiv, or that the current President of the United States,
Joe Biden, boasted that he had used blatant blackmail
to remove the Prosecutor General of Ukraine. If that is
independence, then what is dependence? And is there
anything for Ukrainians to celebrate today?

22-4700021/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Throughout Zelenskyy’s rule, and especially
since 24 February, the opposition has been completely
eliminated in the country, dissent has been suppressed
and opposition media have been shut down. People
are being persecuted, arrested and imprisoned just
for reading Russian-language news and watching
Russian television channels. And now, in accordance
with the new law on collaboration, they are also being
imprisoned for accepting humanitarian assistance
from Russia.
Ukraine has fully transformed into a backwards,
ruthless, anti-Russia country and is confidently moving
towards complete ideological and political bankruptcy.
In order to assess the degree of that deep
Russophobic degradation, I would like to once again
quote the words said the other day by the Ukrainian
Ambassador to Kazakhstan, Petro Vrublevskyi, after
the murder of Daria Dugina. He openly declared:
“We are trying to kill as many of them as possible.
The more Russians we kill now, the fewer our
children will have to kill. That is all.”
That was said by the Ambassador of a country in
which those same Russians not only live, but make up
a very significant part of the population. Does such a
country and such an inhumane regime have a future?
Our Western colleagues can prolong its agony, but they
cannot prevent its fiasco.
In conclusion, I would like to express my wish for
the brotherly people of Ukraine to finally gain freedom
and the opportunity to build a society that respects
fundamental human rights and national identity and
lives in peace with its neighbours. That hour is already
close, despite all the efforts of the Kyiv regime and
its patrons.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General and the UnderSecretary-General for their presentations. We listened
with great interest and deep respect to the statement of
President Zelenskyy of Ukraine, whose independence
we celebrate today, tomorrow and always. We also
followed with great attention the Secretary-General’s
recent visits to Ukraine and Türkiye. We recognize
his leadership and efforts, which have led to important
agreements to limit the impact of the food crisis and to
restore hope.
In that regard, we are pleased that the Black Sea
Grain Initiative continues to operate on a regular
22/26

24/08/2022

basis and that it allows 560,000 metric tons of grain to
access markets around the world, as well as to World
Food Programme supplies. That appears to be having a
significant stabilizing effect, finally.
Mexico considers the progress under the Black Sea
Grain Initiative to be a major diplomatic milestone in
times of armed conflict. In that regard, I would also
like to recognize the important work of the President of
Türkiye in facilitating that agreement. We once again
urge all parties, especially those with leverage, to spare
no effort to keep channels of communication open in
order to establish a dialogue to end hostilities.
Despite those advances, it is clear that the
multilateral system and, in particular, the Security
Council, has not been able to put an end to this war.
The invasion of a sovereign country, Ukraine, by
Russia is a flagrant violation of Article 2, paragraph
4, of the Charter of the United Nations. Any territorial
acquisition obtained through the illegal use of force is
null and lacks any validity.
It is necessary to put an end to the war and, with
it, to the numerous violations of international law,
especially international humanitarian law. There have
been six months of bombardment of hospitals, schools,
residential areas and basic civilian infrastructure,
including the Zaporizhzhya power plant and the
destruction of cultural heritage. There have been six
months of violations of the methods and means of
warfare; of human rights violations, including sexual
and gender-based violence; and of the use of weapons
with indiscriminate effects, such as cluster munitions
or mines.
We call most emphatically for an end to all those
attacks, especially those directed against the civilian
population and indiscriminate attacks. We also call
on the parties to comply with the rules of distinction,
proportionality and precaution in the conduct
of hostilities.
We express our unwavering support for the
investigative work of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court and for the establishment of a factfinding mission on the alleged war crimes committed
in Olenivka. Accountability is a fundamental pillar
of our multilateral system, and those responsible for
the crimes that have been and are being committed in
Ukraine — or will be committed in future —must be
brought to justice.
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mexico reiterates its deep concern about the threat
posed by the illicit flow and trafficking of arms to the
region. It is necessary to continue monitoring the full
life cycle of weapons — starting with their transfer and
intermediation and concluding with those who turn
out to be the end users. We must take action to prevent
weapons from falling into the hands of those who
should never have them, especially when hostilities
have ended.
Mexico’s work in the Council will continue to focus
on advancing and cementing peacebuilding in Ukraine.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate our urgent call to
negotiate a cessation of hostilities and to seek a solution
through dialogue and diplomacy.
I conclude by reaffirming our support for
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders.
Those are principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, and all of us present here pledged to respect
and uphold them.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
China’s position on the Ukraine issue is consistent
and clear. We have always maintained that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries
should be respected, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations upheld, the legitimate
security concerns of all countries taken seriously and
all efforts conducive to the peaceful settlement of
crises supported.
However, the Ukraine crisis continues. The
fighting continues to spread, with growing spillover
effects. The prospect of peace has yet to materialize.
The international community eagerly awaits the early
resumption of peace. It also expects the Security
Council to play its due role to that end. What we need to
reflect on is — has the Council found the right tack to
solve this issue? Has the Council made earnest efforts
to alleviate the situation?
China stands ready to work with all peace-loving
countries to promote peace and dialogue and facilitate
the easing of the situation. At present, the priority — in
our opinion — should be the following.
First, there is a need to set up a safety valve for
the conflict. International humanitarian law should

S/PV.9115

guide the conduct of the parties to the conflict.
Civilians and civilian facilities cannot be the targets of
military strikes.
Recently, frequent attacks on the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant have led to extensive attention and
concerns, casting a nuclear shadow over the world.
China once again calls on all the relevant parties
to exercise restraint, act with caution, refrain from any
action that could compromise the safety and security
of the nuclear facility and avoid crossing the nuclearsafety red line. We also expect the International
Atomic Energy Agency to conduct a site visit to the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant as soon as possible in
order to make a professional and technical assessment
of the situation that will enable it to take follow-up
measures to prevent a nuclear disaster.
Secondly, it is important to reduce the humanitarian
impact as much as possible. On the one hand, the
international community should work to help Ukrainian
refugees and displaced persons weather their difficulties
and to reduce the conflict’s effects on global food
supplies, energy and financial stability, on the other.
China commends Secretary-General Guterres and the
relevant parties for their efforts to facilitate the Black
Sea Grain Initiative. We are pleased to see that more
than 20 ships, carrying more than 700,000 tons of food,
have left Ukraine for multiple destinations around the
world. That will go a long way to curbing rising food
prices, stabilizing the international food market and
easing the food shortages in developing countries.
At the same time, removing barriers to the export
of food and fertilizers from Russia is also highly
important. We hope that in accordance with its
memorandum of understanding with Russia, the United
Nations can help address the chilling effect caused by
countries that have been abusing sanctions and ensure
that the global industrial and supply chains are stable
and run smoothly. These are challenging times for
developing countries, and cutting official development
assistance will only make things worse. Developed
countries should face up to the humanitarian impact of
such cuts and adopt responsible policies and measures.
Thirdly, it will be vital to ensure an exit ramp for
diplomatic solutions. Peace can never be achieved by
imposing sanctions or other types of pressure, or by
sending weapons. It must be fought for and maintained
by all the parties, working together. However complex

22-4700023/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the situation or serious the differences, the door to
diplomacy and dialogue must not be closed. The
positive progress on the issue of grain exports shows the
potential of diplomacy and the possibility of a political
solution. We hope that Russia and Ukraine will continue
their dialogue and communication in order to return to
diplomatic negotiations as soon as possible and create
the momentum and conditions needed for a ceasefire.
The United States and NATO should seriously reflect
on the roles they have been playing and focus their
efforts on what is truly conducive to peace rather than
adding fuel to the fire.
The Ukraine crisis and the series of recent tense
developments around the world have shown that in this
era, when the world is in urgent need of solidarity and
cooperation to collectively address its challenges, we
must be highly vigilant with regard to any deliberate
attempts to deliberately provoke and intensify division
and confrontation — and we must safeguard global
strategic stability. We should never allow the world to
slide into a new Cold War. The facts have shown that
a Cold War mentality and bloc confrontation should
be firmly rejected. More than 30 years after the end
of the Cold War, NATO is still expanding eastward,
which has made Europe no safer but has rather sown
the seeds of conflict. Humankind lives in an indivisible
security community, and common security is the most
vital common interest of all countries. One country’s
security should not come at the expense of another’s,
and beefing up military blocs cannot ensure a region’s
security. Today, in the twenty-first century, a Cold
War mentality and zero-sum games are long-outdated
concepts. Obsessing about military force and seeking
absolute security will lead only to a constant escalation
of the situation in the region, which is not in the interests
of any party.
The facts have shown that decoupling and choosing
sides should be firmly rejected. The world’s economies
are deeply integrated. Certain countries have been
wantonly imposing unilateral sanctions and longarm jurisdiction, politicizing and weaponizing the
economy, trade and technology, insisting on decoupling
and building small yards with high fences — further
aggravating people’s livelihood difficulties in developing
countries — and threatening the security of global
food, energy and finance. Developing countries should
not be made to bear the brunt of geopolitical conflicts
and major country rivalry. They have a right to decide
24/26

24/08/2022

their foreign policies independently and should not be
forced to choose sides.
The facts have shown that applying double or
selective standards should be firmly rejected. Upholding
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and respecting sovereignty and territorial
integrity go beyond merely citing them. All countries
should actually abide by those principles in practice,
maintain consistent positions on issues involving
different countries and match their words with deeds.
The Chinese people have a deep understanding of and
strong feelings about State sovereignty and territorial
integrity through first-hand experience. China
consistently respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of other countries and is determined to firmly
safeguard its own.
The Ukraine crisis is a major test of our
generation’s ability to maintain peace. As we stand at
this historic crossroads, we need to ask ourselves what
we want. Do we want peace or turmoil? Cooperation or
confrontation? Progress or regression? We must make
the right choice — one that is worthy of the people’s
trust and of our times.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its 27 member States.
The candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Albania, the Republic of Moldova; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Georgia,
Andorra and San Marino, align themselves with
this statement.
We welcome today’s discussion on Ukraine. It
is essential that the Security Council remain seized
of Russia’s war of aggression on Ukraine. I thank
the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo for their briefings and welcome President
Zelenskyy’s statement at this meeting.
Let me first of all congratulate Ukraine on the
thirty-first anniversary of its independence. The fact
that today also marks the six months that have passed
since Russia’s unprovoked and illegal aggression is a
stark reminder that independence can never be taken
for granted. The EU recognizes the tremendous courage
displayed by Ukraine and its people in defence of its
22-47000

24/08/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

independence. As the Under-Secretary-General told us,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has verified more than 13,000 civilian
casualties since Russia’s attack, with the true numbers
being considerably higher. We express our deepest
sympathy to the families of the victims and reaffirm
our commitment to continuing our support to Ukraine
in any way we can.
The EU reiterates its strongest condemnation of
Russia’s continued violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and disregard for General Assembly resolution
ES-11/1, adopted in March by an overwhelming
majority of the States Members of our Organization
(see A/ES-11/PV.5). We also deplore Russia’s failure to
comply with the International Court of Justice’s legally
binding order for it to immediately cease its use of force
against Ukraine. We call on the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligations under international law,
including the Charter, international humanitarian law
and human rights law. The perpetrators of war crimes
and other serious violations, as well as the responsible
Government officials and military representatives,
will be held accountable. The EU actively supports all
measures to ensure accountability for human rights
violations and violations of international humanitarian
law committed during the Russian aggression
in Ukraine.
Over the past months, we have seen an emerging
risk of nuclear calamity in Europe. It is deplorable that
we even need to say that a nuclear power plant should
never be used as a military base. The deployment of
Russian military personnel and weaponry at the nuclear
facility is unacceptable and disregards the safety,
security and safeguards principles that all members of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have
committed to uphold.
We urge the Russian Federation to immediately
withdraw its military forces and all other unauthorized
personnel from the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant
and its immediate surroundings so that the operator
and Ukrainian authorities can resume their sovereign
responsibilities within Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders, and so that the legitimate operating
staff members can carry out their duties without outside
interference, threat or unacceptably harsh working
conditions. An IAEA mission urgently needs to enter
the power plant to address nuclear safety, security and
safeguards concerns, in a manner that respects full
Ukrainian sovereignty and the country’s control over

S/PV.9115

its territory and infrastructure. IAEA staff must be able
to access all nuclear facilities in Ukraine safely and
without impediment and engage directly and without
interference with the Ukrainian personnel responsible
for the operation of those facilities.
The global implications of Russia’s aggression
are well documented. We support the Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
launched in the aftermath of Russia’s invasion, with
a view to addressing sky-rocketing food and energy
prices. We welcome the progress made in implementing
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, reiterate our gratitude to
the Secretary-General and Türkiye for facilitating its
agreement and acknowledge the positive role played by
other actors, such as the African Union leadership, in
coming to an arrangement.
We call for the continued strict implementation of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative with a view to addressing
rising food prices globally. With its own Solidarity
Lanes initiative, aimed at boosting exports from
Ukraine over land, the EU is proud to have contributed
to increasing Ukrainian exports of cereals, oilseeds
and related products — from 1.3 million tons in April
to 2.8 million tons in July. We are also supporting
agricultural production and resilience in the most
affected countries.
The EU welcomes the active involvement of the
Secretary-General. His recent visits to Ukraine and
Istanbul demonstrate his dedication to address the
crisis, and the EU will continue to support his efforts
and those of his staff, including in the Joint Coordination
Centre. We welcome the Secretary-General’s calls to
demilitarize the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant,
as well as the establishment of a fact-finding mission
to investigate the incident at a detention facility
in Olenivka.
In conclusion, the EU and its member States reaffirm
their commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, within its internationally
recognized borders and extending to its territorial sea.
This war is senseless. The humanitarian consequences
for millions of civilians are disastrous. Russia could
end it tomorrow if it wanted. Until that happens, human
lives will be wasted and the war’s global fallout will
continue, at a time in history when we should focus
on the planetary crises, which are impacting us all.
That is why we reiterate our demand for the immediate
cessation of the military aggression against Ukraine

22-4700025/26

S/PV.9115

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

by the Russian Federation, as well as for the full,
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of its forces
and military equipment from Ukraine’s territory. In the
meantime we would like to assure our partners around

26/26

24/08/2022

the world that the EU will continue to demonstrate
its global solidarity to address the impact of Russia’s
aggression, especially on the most vulnerable.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

22-47000
