2

General AHembly-Seventh Session

---------------------------------•······--·-·-··

RESOLUTION ADOPTED ON THE REPORT OF THE CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
700 (VIl). Credentials of representatives to the seventh 11e88ion of the
General Assembly
The General, Assembly
Approves the third report 1 of the Credentials Commitee.
425th plenary meeting,
8 April 1953.
1 See document A/2374.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE l<"'IRST COMMITTEE
701 (VII). Korea: reports of the United Nations
Agent General for Korean Reconstruction
The General, Assembly
1. Reaffirms the objective of the United Nations,
adopted in General Assembly resolution 410 (V) of
1 December 1950, to provide relief and rehabilitation in
assisting the Korean people to relieve their sufferings
and to repair the great devastation and destruction in
their country ;
2. Recognizes that the need of such relief and rehabilitation continues to be most urgent;
3. Takes note of the reports 1 of the Agent General
on the work of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the period February 1951 to 15 February 1953;
4. Notes with approval that the Agent General
has now undertaken, in co-operation with the Government of the Republic of Korea and the United Nations
Commarw, and in consultation with the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, a programme of relief and rehabilitation projects
for the period ending June 1953, which has received the
approval of the United Nations Advisory Committee to
the Agent General, and looks forward to its successful
executioq;
5. Expresses its appreciation of the contributions
which have been made by governments, specialized
agencies and non-governmental organizations;
6. Requests those governments which have made
pledges to the United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency to make prompt payment of such pledges;
7. Further requests all governments, specialized
agencies and non-governmental organizations to assist,
within the limits of their financial possibilities and in
accordance with the provisions of their constitutions and
statutes, in meeting the great and continuing need of
the Korean people for relief and rehabilitation assistance.

414th plenary meeting,
11 March 1953.
1 See Official Records of the Gfflef'al Assembly, S~r,,th S,s-

siMS, Supplemettt.r Nos. 19 atul 19 A.

702 (VII). Complaint of non-compliance of States
still detaining members of the Greek armed
forces with the provisions of resolution 382 A
(V), adopted by the General Assembly on
1 December 1950, recommending "the repa•
triation of all those among them who express
the wish to be repatriated"
The General Assembly,
Confirming its resolution 382 A ( V) of 1 December
1~50 recommending the repatriation ot all those mem.·
bers of the Greek armed forces detained outside Greece
who express the wish to be repatriated,
Noting with deep appreciation the continued efforts
of the International Committee of the Red Cross with
a view to implementing the afore-mentioned resolution,
Recalling the latest communication2 of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the national Red
Cross societies of the governments concerned,
1. Addresses an earnest appeal to these governments
to conform their attitude in this question with General
Assembly resolution 382 A (V) ;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to consult to this end with the governments in question and to report back to the General Assembly before
the close of its current session;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to keep this humanitarian issue under constant review and to notify the
Member States of important developments as appropriate.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March 1953.

703 (VII). Methods which might be used to maintain and strengthen international peace and
security in accordance with the Purposes and
Principles of the Charter: report of the Collective Measures Committee
The General Assembly,
Having received the second report3 of the Collective
Measures Committee,
2 See document A/2365.
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 17.

___________________
3

adopted on reports of the First Committee
··--···-·· ... _____
- - - - - - - - - - - -Resolutions
-------·-···-··-···--··-----· ·-··--·-- - - - Affirming the need for strengthening furth~r the system of collective security unoer the authority of the
United Nations,
Finding that to this end further steps could be ta~en
by States and by the United Nations in accordance with
the Charter and in conformity with the "Uniting for
peace" resolution ( 377 A ( V) ) and with resolution 503

(VI),
1. Takes note of the second report of the Collective
Measures Committee and expresses appreciation of the
constructive work done by the Committee during the
past year, particularly in the economic. iield, including
the preparation of lists of an~s, _ammumt10n and 1m1:lements of war and of strateg,.c items for considerat1011
by the Security Council or the General A;sembly in
the application of a selective embargo ;
2. Requests the Collective Measures Committee to
continue its work until the ninth session of. the General
Assembly, as directed in paragraph 4 be!ow, for. the
maintenance and strengthening of the Umted Nat10ns
collective security system ;
3. Recommends to States Members, and invites
States not Members of the United Nations:
(a) To give careful consideration to the reports of
the Collective Measures Committee;
( b) To continue and intensify their efforts to carry
out the recommendations of the "Uniting for pcacf.'"
resolution and of resolution 503 ( Vl) ;
( c) To keep the Collective Measures Com1:1itte_e cu~rently informed of the progress they are makmg m tlus
respect;
4. Directs the Collective Measures Committee :
(a) To pursue such studies as it may deem desiraule
to strengthen the capability of the United Nations to
maintain peace, taking account of the "Uniting for
peace" resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present
resolution ;
( b) To continue the examination of information received from States pursuant to the "Uniting for peace''
resolution, resolution 503 (VI) and the present resolution;
( c) In the light of its studies, to suggest to the
Security Council and to the General Assembly such
specific ways and means as it may deem appropriate to
encourage further preparatory action by States;
( d) To report to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly not later than the ninth session of
the Assembly.
415th plenary meeting,
17 March 1953.

704 (VII). Regulation, limitation and balanced
reduction of all armed forces and all armaments: report of the Disarmament Commission
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that:
Under the Charter of the United Nations all States
are bound to settle their international disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that international peace
and security, and justice, are not endangered, and to

refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial mlegrity or political independence of any State, or in an)'. other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the Umted Nat10ns,
The aim ol d. sy~tern -of world-wide disarmament is
to prevent war anJ. release the world's human and economic resources for the pur;_1oscs of peace,
1. Takes note of the report.; of the Disarmament
Commission ;
.2. Reaffirms General A,,,;cmbly rcsoiuti.on 502 (VI)
of 11 January 1952 and requests the Disarmament Com-·
mission to continue its work ior the d1.evdoi.,mc.nt by
the United Nations of comprehensive and ,.o-orJinated
plans J_.lroviding for:
(a) The regulation,, limitatiun and balanceJ i:eduction of all armed forces and armaments;
lb) 'fhe elimiuatic.n anri prohibition of all major
w_eapons, including bacteriological, adaptable to mass
destruction;
( c) The effective international control of atomic
energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons and
the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes only;
The whole programme to be carried out under effective
international control in such a way that no State
would have cause to fear that its security was en-dangered;

J. Requests the Cotmmssion to report to the General
Assembly and to the Security Council no later than 1
September 1953, and hopes that all the members of the
Commission will co-operate in efforts to produce constr:.1ctive proposals likely to facilitate its task.
424th plenary meeting,
8 April 1<;"53.

705 (VII). The Korean question
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its unswerving determination to spare no
efforts likely to create conditions favourable to the attainment of the purposes of peace and conciliation embodied in th•' Charter of the United Nations,
No,ing, iollowing the United Nations Command
initiative for the exchange of sick and wounded prisoners
oi war, the communication 5 by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Central People's Government of the
People's Republic of China dated 31 March 1953 to
the President of the General Assembly, and the exchange of communications6 between the United Nations
Command and the Commanders of the Chinese People's
V oluntecrs and the Korean People's Army in regard
thereto,
Confident that a just and honourable armistice in
Korea will powerfully contribute to alleviate the present
international tension,
1. N ates with deep satisfaction that an agrefment
has been signed in Korea 011 the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war ;
'See Official Records of the Disarmament Commissi011, 195:?,
Special Supplement No. 1.
5 See document A/2378.
11 See

document A/2390.

.....
