S/PV.7160

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7160th meeting

Friday, 25 April 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu/Mr. Sarki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Nigeria)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Mrs. Kazragienė
Mr. Maes
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence

14-31046 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1431046*

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I now give him the
floor.

Adoption of the agenda

The Secretary-General: I thank Nigeria for
convening this important debate.

The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Croatia,
Ecuador, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala, Indonesia,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Portugal, Serbia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rhoda
Misaka of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/181, which contains the report of the
Secretary General on conflict-related sexual violence.

2/74

25/04/2014

Conflict-related sexual violence is an issue of
pressing importance. This grave human rights abuse
is as destructive as any bomb or bullet. It inflicts
unimaginable suffering on women and men, girls and
boys. It destroys families and communities and tears
the social fabric of nations. By targeting society’s most
vulnerable members, it contributes to enduring poverty
and insecurity. It impedes reconciliation, peace and
reconstruction.
That is why the Council has clearly and consistently
stated that conflict-related sexual violence is a matter of
international peace and security. Successive resolutions
have created a strong global framework for prevention.
Grievous violations still occur too often, but we are
beginning to make tangible progress, as the report
before the Council (S/2014/181) shows.
My Special Representative has examined the
progress made by several countries, including the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia. Just a
few years ago, rape in these conflicts seemed intractable
and inevitable. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Somalia are now demonstrating that progress is
possible. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
developing new legal structures to end impunity for
perpetrators. Somalia has shown commitment at the
highest level to ending sexual violence, including by
signing a joint communiqué with the United Nations.
Efforts are now under way to develop an action plan.
The United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict is working
with Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Guinea, Somalia and South Sudan to
strengthen their justice systems. Every day, more
countries are building the technical capacity to prevent
and redress sexual violence. The multidisciplinary and
multisectoral approach of the Office of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict is
driving this progress. The Special Representative
engages in high-level advocacy to generate national
ownership, leadership and responsibility.
Once political commitment has been secured,
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

Violence in Conflict works with countries to build
their capacity to fight impunity for crimes of sexual
violence. The Team is drawn from the United
Nations Development Programme, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and led by the Office
of my Special Representative. It helps Governments to
address reforms to the military and criminal justice
systems and other crucial areas. With sound legislation,
comprehensive prevention and response mechanisms,
and enhanced capacity, military and civilian justice
systems will be better able to address conflict-related
sexual violence promptly and effectively.
Another key element in political and peacekeeping
missions has been the deployment of women
protection advisers. Their expertise on human rights,
gender analysis and peace and security is helping to
mainstream the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence into peacekeeping and special political
missions. In line with the principle of “Delivering as
one”, United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict is an inter-agency network of 13 United
Nations entities, chaired by my Special Representative.
This coordination mechanism ensures that our response
avoids duplication, leading to a measured, sustainable
and coherent strategy that makes the best use of limited
resources and the strengths of each agency. The goal is
to provide services and support for victims and ensure
that human rights are at the forefront of all interventions.
This coordinated response, under the leadership
of my Special Representative, embodies the spirit of
the “Rights up front” initiative. It affirms my vision
of a United Nations that works as one to prevent grave
human rights violations. It is imperative that United
Nations actors and political leaders work together to
stop rights abuses before they happen. The renewed
commitment of the United Nations to better meeting
the human rights responsibilities set by Member States
through the “Rights up front” initiative is central in
this regard. My latest report illustrates what we can
achieve through greater cooperation. Prevention is our
collective responsibility. Only through coordination
and partnership can we succeed in protecting the
most vulnerable. I count on the Council’s continued
leadership and support as we work together to eliminate
sexual violence in conflict.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

S/PV.7160

I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presence here today and for his personal
and steadfast commitment to this issue. I wish to thank
the Government of Nigeria for hosting this open debate,
which comes at a crucial moment of consolidation of
this agenda, as well as the Council for the concerted
focus and priority it has given to this issue for several
years. I am also grateful that Ambassador Téte António
of the African Union (AU) and Ms. Rhoda Misaka,
representing civil society, are able to join us to offer
their valuable perspectives.
It has been almost two years since I took
responsibility for this mandate. I could not have
imagined how difficult and heartbreaking it would
be. The horrors suffered by the women, children and
men that I have met re-affirm my conviction that
sexual violence in conflict represents a great moral
issue of our time.This crime, in its utter destruction
of the individual and the pervasive way in which it
undermines the prospects for peace and development,
casts a long shadow over our collective humanity. That
is why it deserves and requires the singular attention
afforded by the Council.
It was a year ago that I visited Bosnia and witnessed
first-hand the long-term implications of war-time
sexual violence left unaddressed. An estimated 50,000
women were targeted with sexual violence during four
years of conflict, but 20 years after the peace was made
impunity for these crimes still reigns. The truth, most
likely, is that most of the survivors will see no justice
because the evidence is long lost and the perpetrators
have long since fled the immediate scene of the crime.
Yet, the irony is that those same perpetrators are not so
far gone in reality. They still walk among the women
and their families, occupying positions of authority and
power that shield them from justice. For the victims,
those perpetrators are a daily reminder of their broken
lives. But the impunity that the perpetrators continue to
enjoy is also a reminder to all of us — a reminder of our
commitment to justice and accountability.
One of the questions raised by the SecretaryGeneral in this year’s report (S/2014/181) is: “What
about the children born of rape?” In Bosnia, these
children — possibly hundreds or even thousands — are
now teenagers. How have they fared? Are they also
pursued by stigma and shame? What are their health
and psychological needs? What are their prospects for

14-310463/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

education and employment? For me, the survivors of
sexual violence in Bosnia are not only the courageous
women that I met; their children and families are also
survivors. Therefore, today I once again make an
appeal on their behalf. Even if justice in the courts of
law has so far been denied, the survivors must have
reparations, including livelihood support, education
for their children, and the medical and psychosocial
services that they deserve and require.
The Secretary-General’s report also raises a number
of other themes, such as the acute vulnerability of
refugee and internally displaced persons’ communities,
the lack of services for survivors, men and boys as
victims, and the concerted focus now required on
prevention, among other things. The report covers 21
conflict and post-conflict countries. It lists 34 State and
non-State parties credibly suspected to be perpetrators
of sexual violence. It paints a grim picture of a problem
the full scale, scope and character of which we do not
yet fully comprehend. However, today we do understand
more about this phenomenon than we did earlier, and
that knowledge is a source of hope that we can come to
grips with conflict-related sexual violence.
While the road ahead remains long and hard,
there is some light on the horizon. Never before in
history have we seen such a level of political will and
momentum. A historic declaration by the Group of
Eight, and commitment by 144 members of the General
Assembly last year, extend and reinforce the consensus
that already exists in the Security Council.
Today the circle of stakeholders on this issue is
dramatically expanded. This may once have been the
concern of the lone gender adviser, but that is no longer
the case. Now it also engages political leaders at the
highest level, uniformed peacekeepers, mediators,
ceasefire monitors, war crimes prosecutors and the full
range of civilian protection, justice and security sector
actors.
Resolution 2106 (2013) reinforces the infrastructure
and the elements of accountability and compliance
established by resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009)
and 1960 (2010) — an accountability regime based on
reliable and timely information and analysis and the
political- and operational-level actions that must be
taken on the basis of such information. In its scope,
operational detail and clarity, resolution 2106 (2013)
encompasses the evolution of our understanding of
conflict-related sexual violence and what it takes to

4/74

25/04/2014

prevent it. It outlines, for the first time, a framework to
curb and prevent this crime.
Therefore, in terms of international legal norms and
instruments, we now have the tools required to turn the
tide. Our critical challenge now is to convert political
will into practical action, to transform the resolutions
into solutions and to drive real change on the ground.
That progress is crucial, and indicates that
addressing conflict-related sexual violence is not
a mission impossible. I believe that the progress
vindicates the investment and focus of the Security
Council, and is an encouragement to the Council to stay
the course and reinforce its efforts.
Over the past few years, we have also gained greater
clarity on the role that military and other security
personnel can play in protection and prevention, and
an important investment has been made in training to
enhance operational readiness of our peacekeepers.
As we continue to drive this agenda on the ground,
we will need to consider how to deepen the role of the
defence and security sector, peacekeepers as well as
national military and police personnel. To better focus
our collective action, I believe it will be important
to agree and clearly articulate the key priorities for
intervention by defence and security sector actors in
areas such as military justice; monitoring, information
and early-warning; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes; ceasefire monitoring; and in
the context of security sector reform. Those priorities
are consistent with the elements of prevention under
resolution 2106 (2013). Therefore, transforming military
cultures to enhance protection and prevention is one of
our essential priorities moving forward.
Coming into this role, my priority has been to deepen
national ownership, leadership and responsibility.
There have been some modest but meaningful gains in
that regard. Last year, as the Council heard from the
Secretary-General, the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia signed joint
communiqués with the United Nations outlining priority
areas of intervention to address sexual violence. Those
commitments were undertaken at the highest levels of
Government and are the basis for implementation plans
that are now being developed by the national authorities
in concert with the United Nations and other partners.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, there
were 187 convictions of soldiers and commanders

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

between July 2011 and December 2013, and 39
prosecutions related to the Minova incidents. In Guinea,
there have also been high-level indictments related to
sexual violence that occurred in 2009 in the wake of
the contested elections. The United Nations Team of
Experts has also been supporting national authorities
in Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire and South Sudan. And in
Central African Republic, the Team is supporting the
establishment of a specialized rapid response unit of
the gendarmerie to deal with sexual violence crimes.
At the regional level, we have signed a framework
of cooperation between the United Nations and
African Union that outlines key areas in which we
intend to strengthen our cooperation, including more
operationally oriented training for AU and United
Nations peacekeeping personnel.
Unfortunately, the unacceptable reality is that today
it is still largely cost-free to rape a woman, child or man
in conflict. Sexual violence has been used through the
ages precisely because it is such a cheap and devastating
weapon. That is why the international community has
placed such great emphasis on combating impunity.
By focusing on impunity, we direct for the first time
a more determined spotlight on the perpetrators, and
by so doing we begin to re-direct the stigma and the
consequences of sexual violence from the survivors to
the perpetrators.
Therefore, I would like to conclude my remarks
with a message to the perpetrators: the spotlight is now
turned on you, and we are coming after you with all
the ways and means at our disposal. There is no hiding
place. If you commit, or command, or condone such
crimes against humanity, humanity will pursue you
relentlessly, and eventually you will be held to account.
That is our solemn promise to the survivors.
The President: I thank Special Representative
Bangura for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Misaka.
Ms. Misaka: I would like to thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to address it at this debate
on women and peace and security from a civil society
perspective.
I speak today on behalf of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security. I am also
here in my capacity as a founding member of the
South Sudanese Diaspora Association and a member
of the EVE Organization for Women Development.

S/PV.7160

EVE is an organization based in Juba, South Sudan,
that is committed to empowering women and raising
awareness about women, peace and security issues,
including sexual and gender-based violence during
conflict.
I speak here today with a heavy heart, as I continue
to receive reports from my family, friends and my
organization in South Sudan that the violence in our
country has continued to increase. Women in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan internally displaced
persons camp in Bor, which was attacked last week, are
traumatized and devastated, and say they feel as if they
are sitting there waiting to die. I am here with members
in the Security Council today, but I live in fear of what
will happen next in my country — and to my family.
Last week in Bentiu, hundreds of men, women, and
children were killed, and men are being pushed to rape
women of different ethnicity.
The sexual violence we have experienced in
South Sudan is indicative of the larger systemic crisis
throughout the world in countries such as Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Syria and Myanmar. I want to
acknowledge the work of civil society groups that are
not present here but are fighting every day to prevent,
document and respond to such crimes. I am also deeply
honoured to acknowledge the civil society groups that
are here today, including Ms. Naw K’nyaw Paw, another
women’s human rights defender who is working with
sexual violence survivors in Myanmar.
Today, we call on all the relevant actors, including
Member States, the Security Council, the United
Nations and non-state actors, to take a greater role in
the prevention and treatment of this atrocity and threat
to international peace and security. I will discuss six
ateas of serious concern related to the situation in South
Sudan and sexual violence in all conflicts, including
in those situations that are not in the focus of the
international community.
First, with regard to ending impunity, the Security
Council, Member States and the United Nations must
take on leadership roles and actively advocate for ending
impunity and promoting investigation, documentation
and accountability. At this moment in South Sudan,
mechanisms are being set up to investigate atrocities,
including the Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
of the Cessation and Hostilities Agreement. In addition,
the African Union Commission of Inquiry is currently
in South Sudan and will be investigating sexual

14-310465/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

violence in conflict as part of its mandate. In all cases
of conflict and in all such mechanisms, sexual violence
in conflict must be on the list of types of violence to be
documented. Without documentation, there will be no
accountability.
In South Sudan, women are discriminated against in
laws that do not meet internationally accepted standards
of human and individual rights. Weak judicial systems
lead to a low rate of arrests and convictions. Security
and judicial professionals should receive stronger
training on sexual and gender-based violence. Alleged
perpetrators must be prosecuted, including those with
command responsibility, and women should be active
agents in judicial processes and sectors.
Secondly, we must consider comprehensive
services for survivors. We call on Member States
and United Nations agencies to ensure that survivors
of sexual violence can access, in a timely manner,
nondiscriminatory and comprehensive health services,
which should include, as referenced in Security Council
resolution 2122 (2013), the full range of sexual-violence
and reproductive health services, HIV awareness and
response and access to safe abortion, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. Equally important
are psychosocial, legal, livelihood assistance and
other multisectoral services and appropriate services,
especially for adolescent girls.
In South Sudan, survivors of sexual violence face
many barriers to all those services. One challenge is
that survivors do not report abuses early enough, owing
to fear and stigma. They also face systemic barriers,
such as poor infrastructure and the lack of health and
psychosocial services. It is vitally important that the
humanitarian community receive additional technical
and financial resources to meet the specific needs of
women and girls. In turn, the humanitarian community
must ensure that the needs of women and girls are met
when services are provided.
Thirdly, the prohibition of amnesty is another
factor. Ceasefire agreements and peace agreements
must not provide amnesty for sexual violence, as is
stipulated in numerous Security Council resolutions.
That in turn must not be undermined in subsequent
post-conflict mechanisms, including legislative and
constitutional provisions. Amnesty provisions must
not make accountability for sexual-violence crimes
impossible, breach international law or do nothing to
deter perpetrators of sexual violence.

6/74

25/04/2014

Fourthly, we must work towards women’s
meaningful participation in peace negotiations. All
women must have the opportunity to participate
and to have their views and needs represented in
decision-making processes. That requires outreach
to women who have been marginalized, including
young women, indigenous women, those who have
been displaced and those with disabilities. Many of
those groups are at increased risk of being targeted for
conflict-related sexual violence.
Although there are six women involved in the
formal negotiations in South Sudan, as a result of heavy
advocacy by women’s groups and the international
community, women are still underrepresented in the
peace process. Seats at the peace table should not be
reserved only for parties to the conflict. That is why
my organization has developed a statement to the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, with
signatories from across South Sudan and Africa, calling
for women’s networks and organizations to be part of
the peace process.
Fifthly, we must consider mission mandates. The
Security Council has long recognized, most recently in
its resolution 2122 (2013), that United Nations mission
mandates should include strong and comprehensive
language on all aspects of the women, peace and
security agenda. Following armed attacks in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) camp
in Bor, we have received reports from women living
in the camp who do not feel safe and are requesting
more protection and evacuation. Given the UNMISS
mandate and the large number of women seeking refuge
in UNMISS compounds and internally-displacedpersons camps, UNMISS must take serious measures
to guarantee the rights of South Sudanese women and
to ensure their protection. In that vein, the Security
Council should urge UNMISS to ensure vetting, pre- or
post-deployment training and sensitization of all troops
on gender-based violence and protection.
In addition, we recognize that United Nations
bodies and international humanitarian organizations
need unhindered access to conflict areas. The denial of
access cannot serve as an excuse for perpetrators and
Governments to avoid their accountability for crimes
of sexual violence.
Sixthly, we need to look at root causes. In South
Sudan, all we want is peace. The prevention of conflict
and dealing with its underlying causes must be given

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

priority, rather than waiting until it is too late. The
proliferation of arms and light weapons adds to the
insecurity of girls and women. We therefore call
on the Security Council and all actors to focus on
gender-sensitive disarmament and conflict prevention,
including early warning. Member States should ratify
and fully implement the Arms Trade Treaty, particularly
in relation to the prevention of gender-based violence.
Finally, we remind Member States of the importance
of creating space and support for independent civil
society. Local women’s rights groups often have
the strategic and political knowledge needed to end
sexual violence and are usually the first to respond to
survivors. All too often, civil society is the only voice
to address ongoing sexual violence in forgotten and
neglected conflicts.
I leave the Council with the story of Sarah, who was
interviewed by our organization in Bentiu, where her
uncle was killed in front of her, her mother was burned
and Sarah herself was raped. She also told us about
10 other women who were shot because they refused
to be raped. We need members of the international
community to work with us in South Sudan. We ask
that they not forget our country, our people, our women.
The President: I thank Ms. Misaka for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Madam
President, I would like thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Bangura, and Ms. Misaka for
their informative and powerful briefings.
In the past decade, the Security Council has
identified the scourge of sexual violence in conflict as
a matter of acute and urgent concern. We meet today to
assess progress in combating that pernicious form of
criminality and to consider next steps. We begin with
confidence that the standards we have established are
clear and the terrible knowledge that those standards
are regularly being ignored. We have made abundantly
clear that there should be zero tolerance for rape and
zero tolerance for other forms of sexual abuse in all
circumstances and at all times. The terror of sexual
violence is uniquely horrific and merits our continued
and determined efforts to eliminate it. Neither the fog
of war nor the associated breakdown of law provide
any explanation or excuse for actions that violate the
rights and disrespect the fundamental dignity of human
beings.

S/PV.7160

To articulate a zero-tolerance standard is, of course,
not difficult. Indeed, we have done it many times. But to
endow it with real meaning in real conflicts remains a
challenge of great urgency and one of many dimensions.
This is not work that should be delegated only to a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, even one as capable as Special
Representative Bangura, or to women’s protection
advisers in a peacekeeping mission or to UN-Women.
Those offices and officials and the United Nations as
a whole assuredly have an indispensable role to play,
but the key to further progress in reducing suffering
and in protecting the vulnerable is action by the parties
to conflict. Every Government has a responsibility to
establish standards, develop institutions and pursue
policies that protect its people from sexual violence,
whether perpetrated by the Government’s own forces
or by others. That responsibility includes, as Special
Representative Bangura just put it, redirecting the
stigma from the survivors to the perpetrators.
That duty extends to men and boys, who have
suffered sexual violence to an extent we have only
recently begun to appreciate — in places like Colombia,
where boys were turned into sex slaves by illegal armed
groups; in Rutshuru, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which was under the savage control of the
Mouvement du 23 mars for much of 2013; and in Libya,
where the United Nations reported that armed brigades
used rape in detention as a form of torture.
In far too many countries, the victims of sexual
violence still have little, if any, effective legal recourse.
Until that changes, predators will not be deterred, victims
will hesitate to come forward and justice will remain
beyond reach. In places where Governments are weak,
we must help to improve their capabilities while also
holding accountable those who commit crimes. Among
the most culpable are the ruthless militias in the Central
African Republic, whose assaults on civilians have
almost literally torn the country apart, and where rape,
forced marriage and sexual slavery are widespread; in
Burma, where there are widespread reports of soldiers
raping women and girls; and, as we have just heard, in
South Sudan, where only this week militants have gone
on the radio — radio, which my Rwandan colleague has
called an evil multiplier — to incite the use of sexual
violence against named ethnic groups; in Yemen, where
child protection workers have attested to the abduction
and abuse of boys by Ansar Al-Sharia. With all of
that in mind, we should express special outrage at the
continued and widespread incidence of sexual abuse

14-310467/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

practised by Syrian Government armed forces as part
of the regime’s ruthless campaign to terrorize civilians
and drive families from their homes.
Despite chronic underreporting and difficulties of
access, we know more about the nature and scope of
the problem than ever before. The Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2014/181),
the
information-collection
mechanisms on which it is based, and the steadfast
leadership shown by Special Representative Bangura
are all welcome developments. In addressing sexual
violence, the United Nations must set the right
example in what it does both here in New York and in
places around the world where tensions are high and
United Nations peacekeepers or political missions are
deployed. Ms. Bangura has shown determination in
coordinating United Nations efforts across agencies
in order to ensure that the imperative of putting a stop
to sexual violence is addressed in training, included in
mission mandates and reports, and becomes a central
focus of enforcement activities and a major part of
holding perpetrators accountable for war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
As members of the Security Council, however, we
must do our part by exercising proper oversight and
pushing for the full implementation of the objectives
we set, mission by mission. In that connection, I note
that women protection advisers were deployed last year
to Somalia and Mali, and are expected this year in the
Sudan, South Sudan, Côte d’Ivoire and the Central
African Republic. In Somalia, the United Nations
has helped to train 12,000 police officers, and the
Government has supported the increased recruitment
of women police. An improved effort has also been
made to strengthen investigative and prosecutorial
capabilities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where sexual violence perpetrated by Government
and rebel forces has long been a source of chronic and
massive injustice.
We must also strive to help the Secretariat
achieve its goal of 20 per cent female participation
among United Nations police. But for that to happen,
each of our countries must themselves increase their
recruitment of women police into their domestic forces,
so that there is a far broader pool on which the United
Nations can draw. We must also insist on enforcing the
absolute prohibition on sexual abuse by United Nations
peacekeepers. Again, that requires that home countries
hold perpetrators of sexual violence accountable once
they are sent home.

8/74

25/04/2014

In conclusion, I would like to voice the strong
support of my Government and of the American people
for a concerted strategy across the globe to address the
problem of sexual violence, both in and outside combat
situations. For far too long, such abuses have been
treated as part of the spoils of victory or the rewards
of physical might. Let us be clear: sexual abuse is
among the worst of crimes, because it robs people of
the precious and inalienable right to be secure in their
bodies, and because it is inflicted out of cruelty. In our
efforts to stop it, we have made gains in recent years,
but we have a very long way to go.
Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile would
like to thank the Nigerian presidency for convening this
open debate on sexual violence in conflict. We would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their
briefings. And we are grateful to Ms. Rhoda Misak for
her statement, which calls us to act decisively to prevent
and eradicate this scourge and the stigma that goes with
it, and to ensure the restoration and reintegration of its
survivors.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the Human Security Network, of which my
country is a member.
We would like to highlight the priority that the
Secretary-General has accorded this subject since
the publication in 2006 of his report on the “In-depth
study on all forms of violence against women”
(A/61/122/Add.1), which addressed sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. In the eight years
since then, we have adopted resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013), all sponsored
by Chile, and whose implementation will contribute to
the Secretary- General’s recommendations in the report
before us today (S/2014/181). That comprehensive,
multisectoral and multidimensional report, and its
preventive and protective framework, will enable us to
establish early-warning mechanisms and appropriate
responses. We commend the field visits the Special
Representative has conducted and the commitments
made by national and regional authorities to the
United Nations system, which have been reflected in
resolutions renewing mandates. We would also like to
highlight the Special Representative’s recent visit to
the Central African Republic, during which President

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7160

Samba-Panza renewed the commitment expressed in
the 2012 joint communiqué.

Affairs, an Arria formula meeting on the protection of
internally displaced persons on 30 May.

Such efforts must be backed up by holding
perpetrators of sexual violence to account and combating
their impunity. The International Criminal Court is an
important complement to the work of national courts
and hybrid tribunals in this area, as we saw in the trial
of Jean-Pierre Bemba and the voluntary surrender and
subsequent arrest of Bosco Ntaganda. The proliferation
of arms has helped to create an environment conducive
to this type of violence. Chile, aware of the problems
associated with that proliferation, has signed the Arms
Trade Treaty and urges other States to support it.

Chile supports the systematic inclusion of the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence and its
follow-up in the relevant country-specific resolutions
and in the mandates of special political and peacekeeping
missions. These missions, commissions of inquiry and
other related mechanisms should consider including
women protection advisers. We also look forward to
the possibility of including this issue in the work of
the monitoring bodies of the relevant Security Council
sanctions.

Chile welcomes the policy and operational
recommendations for preventing and eradicating this
type of violence, and stresses that primary responsibility
in this area belongs to the States concerned. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the importance
of multidisciplinary, timely and non-discriminatory
assistance to survivors of sexual violence, including
children born of such violence, of ensuring targeted
and appropriate services for children and adults and of
promoting survivors’ empowerment and reintegration.
We call on all parties to conflicts who are responsible
for, or suspected of, committing acts of sexual violence,
including those listed in the report, to put a stop to
such violations and make concrete and time-bound
commitments to protect. Mediators and envoys
involved in mediation, ceasefire, peace and preventive
diplomacy processes must be properly trained in this
area and ensure that peace agreements contain concrete
provisions concerning them, including ensuring
adequate preservation of the evidence of such crimes.
Preventive measures should be explicitly
reflected in the processes of security sector reform, of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and of
justice reform initiatives in areas such as capacity and
policing. We reiterate the important role of reporting,
prevention, protection and reintegration played by civil
society, including women’s organizations, community
leaders, religious leaders, the media and human rights
activists, and we support the efforts of the system to
build the capacity of these groups.
The situation of internally displaced persons and
refugees — who are particularly vulnerable to this type
of violence, which is often used as a tactic to induce
displacement — is of concern to the Council. Chile is
organizing, together with Australia and with the support
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian

As the Secretary-General recommends, we urge
the consideration of the links between conflict-related
sexual violence and the illicit trade in natural resources,
as well as such illegal activities as the illicit drugs trade
and the traffic in persons covered by the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, its
protocols and relevant legal instruments.
We stress the importance of deepening the
exchange of information among the system’s actors
and strengthening the training of all peacekeeping
personnel using innovative tools, among others, those
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the corresponding United
Nations initiative. We encourage the international
community and donors to support the prevention and
eradication of the scourge through the United Nations
Action Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
At the regional level, in July 2013 Chile’s Joint
Peacekeeping Operations Centre, together with the
United States Naval Postgraduate School, organized
a seminar in Santiago on theme “Women, peace
and security: new challenges to implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000)”, with the participation of
regional professionals. It included training in genderbased sexual violence and resolution 2106 (2013), inter
alia. At the national level, the Centre’s 2014 curriculum
addresses resolution 1325 (2000) and related resolutions
and the prevention of abuse and sexual exploitation,
with a focus on the norms expected of peacekeeping
personnel.
Sexual violence continues to be used to humiliate
opponents in conflict, as a form of torture, to inflict
injury, to extract information, to stigmatize, degrade
and intimidate, to destroy communities, to displace
communities and groups from their land, and to
intentionally spread HIV or reward fighters. We cannot

14-310469/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

continue to ignore the scourge and reiterate our firm
determination to implement resolution 1325 (2000) and
related resolutions on such violence, while supporting
efforts towards its prompt eradication and the healing
and reintegration of victims and survivors.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2014/181) and personal
leadership against sexual violence in conflict, and
Special Representative Bangura for her fearlessness.
Both have been instrumental in driving the
unprecedented global commitment we have to ending
conflict-related sexual violence. But the challenge, as
we know, simply never ceases.
Last week in South Sudan, we witnessed the horror
of radio-broadcast hate speech inciting rape and sexual
violence against women and girls as a brutal weapon
of war. It is very dangerous being a women or a girl
when the rule of law fails and insecurity prevails. I also
thank Ms. Misaka for her briefing, which has been a
good and inspirational reminder of how essential it is
that the entire international community — the Council,
Governments, regional organizations, the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations — work
collaboratively and actively to combat sexual violence.
We support regular briefings to the Council by such
experts.
The international prohibition on sexual violence in
conflict is long-standing, but our plan for combating it
has not previously been laid out. That is why the advances
last year were so important. Those include the adoption
of resolution 2106 (2013), setting out a comprehensive
prevention framework, and the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
signed now by over 140 nations. We congratulate the
United Kingdom and Foreign Secretary Hague on their
efforts on the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, in
which Australia’s Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop, is an
active champion.
Our challenge, now as always, is implementation—
turning the resolutions into solutions, as Ms. Bangura
has just said. Fundamental to that is timely and
comprehensive information. Unhindered humanitarian
access is essential, as are measures to fight the stigma
and threats of reprisal against survivors, which impede
its reporting. Increasing the numbers of women in
peacekeeping missions and police units can help, and we
must address barriers to their recruitment, deployment

10/74

25/04/2014

and retention. We must ensure the early deployment of
women protection advisers in United Nations missions.
Commitments on the part of Governments and
parties to conflict to combating sexual violence are
crucial to change on the ground. We commend Special
Representative Bangura for securing new commitments
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Somalia. Reaching armed groups is hard, but we must
try. Ceasefire agreements should always include sexual
violence as a prohibited act.
Specific actions to prevent sexual violence must be
included in security sector reform, rule of law initiatives
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. As resolution 2117 (2013) recognized, the
misuse of small arms and light weapons exacerbates
sexual violence, and we call on all States that have not
yet done so to sign and ratify the Arms Trade Treaty.
There must be situation-specific training for all
peacekeeping personnel, including military and police,
that addresses the full range of sexual violence crimes,
including abductions, forced marriage and sexual
slavery. Particular attention must also be given to the
needs of the most vulnerable populations, including
the marginalized, children, older persons, indigenous
communities, people with disabilities and displaced
persons. The needs of men and boy survivors must also
be considered.
As Ms. Misaka reminded the Council this
morning, it is crucial that survivors have quick access
to comprehensive services, including sexual and
reproductive health services and psychosocial, legal
and livelihood support. We must confront the issue
of pregnancy as a result of rape, particularly where
abortion services are illegal and the health consequences
of unsafe abortion and a lack of maternity care are dire.
Civil society and women’s organizations providing
services and giving political voice to women affected
by conflict must also be adequately resourced.
Australian Foreign Minister Bishop announced
in Jordan this week a $20-million contribution to the
United Nations “No lost generation” initiative to support
Syrian refugee children, including child survivors of
sexual violence. Sexual violence is a persistent and
deliberate feature of the conflict in Syria, brutalizing
civilians and displacing populations, and is a constant
threat in the refugee camps, themselves.
Decisively, we must move beyond just the immediate
or short-term provision of support, vital though it is.
14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

Empowering survivors with their own economic future
can be a transformative way to reconstruct their lives.
Obviously, accountability is centrally important. States
must accept their primary obligation to investigate and
prosecute sexual violence crimes, provide support for
survivors and protect witnesses who testify. Teams of
experts working to support local justice mechanisms
can have lasting impacts. As part of the regional
peacebuilding mission to Solomon Islands, Australia
has mentored female Solomon Islands police to take
victim statements, compile evidence and support
survivors throughout court processes. Such models
are naturally being applied elsewhere and should have
broad application.
Where national jurisdictions are unable or unwilling
to prosecute perpetrators, the Council should consider
referrals to the International Criminal Court. Targeted
Council sanctions have a clear role to play — to
expose and circumscribe the perpetrators and create
a powerful deterrent to others. The current events in
South Sudan encapsulate the challenges we face in that
regard. In consultations two days ago, the Security
Council was told the exact times and the content of the
media broadcasts inciting rape and the names of the
individuals who made them. We must ensure that they
are held to account.
To conclude, the Security Council’s debate on
sexual violence may only take place once a year, but our
work to end that barbaric practice — that crime — must
be a daily commitment and attract our serious attention
across the whole of our agenda. The Council must take
every opportunity available and use every tool it has
to end that abhorrent crime and provide survivors the
justice and services they need to rebuild their lives.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation wishes to thank Nigeria for the
initiative of organizing today’s open debate. I wish
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Special
Representative Bangura for their briefings. We also
listened carefully to the statement just made by the
representative of the non-governmental organization.
In recent years, thanks to the joint efforts of the
United Nations and the international community,
countries in conflict have achieved substantial progress
in preventing fighting sexual violence and supporting
the rights of women in conflict. However, in many
armed conflicts in today’s world, vulnerable groups,
including women, continue to bear the brunt of the
consequences of war. The practice remains rampant

S/PV.7160

where the threat of violence has been used as a method
of war. That constitutes not only a serious affront to
the rights and dignity of women, but also flagrant
challenge to the peaceful reconstruction efforts of the
countries concerned and shocks the human conscience;
it therefore should be fought by the international
community in a concerted manner.
China condemns and opposes all violence against
civilians in armed conflict, including sexual violence.
We call for the comprehensive implementation of the
Councils resolutions and urge the parties to conflict
to respect international human rights law and relevant
international law, immediately stop all sexual violence
and take concrete actions to protect the security and
rights of vulnerable groups, including women and
children.
I would now like to stress the following three
points.
First, the fight against sexual violence and armed
conflict should depend mainly on the efforts of the
affected countries. Relevant national Governments
bear the primary responsibility for implementing
Council resolutions and fighting sexual violence in
conflict. The international community, including the
United Nations, should fully respect the sovereignty
and will of the affected countries. They should focus on
helping with the capacity-building of those countries
and resolve the financing and technical difficulties they
encounter.
It is important to put into practice the principles
referred to in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/181), namely, national ownership, national
leadership and national responsibility. It is also
important to encourage and support the efforts
carried out by the affected countries in prevention and
resolution of issues arising from sexual violence in
armed conflict.
Secondly, in addressing issues involving women
and peace and security, including sexual violence,
the relevant organs of the United Nations should
respect the division of labour and work in a concerted
manner. As the primary organ for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should focus on conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding so as to create an enabling
political and security environment for reducing and
eliminating sexual violence in armed conflict. The
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,

14-3104611/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

the Human Rights Council and UN-Women should
each leverage its advantage and work closely with the
Council so as to create synergy. The Council should
strictly abide by its relevant mandate in dealing with
sexual violence and avoid stepping into areas of
responsibility enjoyed by other organs. United Nations
missions should also observe Council mandates in
carrying out security sector reform and post-conflict
peacebuilding. It is important to pay special attention
to strengthening communication and cooperation with
the countries concerned.
Thirdly, special attention should be given to
addressing the root causes of sexual violence in
armed conflict. To prevent and curb sexual violence
in armed conflict, punishment and monitoring have to
be strengthened. It is also important to tackle the root
causes that are the breeding ground for conflicts. It is
important to promote the overall economic and social
development of the countries concerned and maintain
political security and stability to enhance the status
of women and achieve women’s empowerment. The
international community should scale up its assistance
to women’s development in those countries.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Madam, for convening today’s important debate.
I would like to express my delegation’s sincere
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative Zainab Hawa Bangura and
non-governmental organization representative Rhoda
Misaka for their briefings and statements.
We have made progress over the past several years
in combatting conflict-related sexual violence. Since
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in particular,
a gender perspective has been increasingly integrated
into key United Nations mandates.
In spite of those institutional gains, sexual violence
in conflict remains one of the most egregious forms
of human rights violations. Its impact goes far beyond
an individual victim’s pain and stigma. Even more
troubling is the fact that sexual violence is often used
as a tactic of armed conflict. As noted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/181), sexual violence is
wielded to attack specific ethnic and religious groups,
used to displace civilians and unleashed to encourage
predatory behaviour. The international community
must scale up its collective efforts to combat the
scourge, especially in the three areas of prevention,
protection and prosecution.

12/74

25/04/2014

First, we must strengthen the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violence, establishing legal frameworks,
promoting improved governance and the rule of law and
raising public awareness; those are just some examples
of the concrete actions we need to take. In that way, we
believe that the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, to be held in London in June, will provide
an opportunity to mobilize political commitments and
promote public awareness. In addition, the participation
of women together with the mainstreaming of a gender
perspective in conflict resolution and peace processes
should be ensured. Women can and must play multiple
roles during periods of armed conflicts, as they often
demonstrate resilience and ingenuity in the face of
extreme adversity.
Secondly, we should pay increased attention to the
protection of women facing rape, sexual slavery and
other forms sexual violence in conflict. Building the
capacity of national institutions and promoting relevant
legislation and resource allocation are prerequisites
for providing sustainable assistance to victims
and survivors. At the same time, we must enhance
international frameworks and tangible measures to
protect women suffering from sexual violence in
conflict. In that regard, we recognize the crucial role
of peacekeeping operations and women protection
advisers.
Thirdly, the politics of impunity should be
terminated through the investigation and prosecution
of perpetrators of sexual violence. We cannot eradicate
conflict-related sexual violence completely without
bringing those responsible to justice. We note the
contributions of the Team of Experts-Rule of Law/
Sexual Violence in Conflict in building national
capacity and expanding expertise in addressing
impunity. The international justice system, including
the International Criminal Court, should also play a
leading role in ensuring accountability.
To conclude, the Republic of Korea as a strong
supporter of resolution 1325 (2000) and the preventing
sexual violence initiative reaffirms its commitment to
international efforts to combat sexual-related violence.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this debate on
such an important issue. I thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181). I thank Ms. Bangura, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Rhoda Misak for

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

their statements, and I welcome their tremendous work
in the fight against sexual violence.
Women are routinely subjected, to different
degrees in various societies, to physical, sexual and
psychological violence, and are even further victimized
in situations of conflict to all sorts of brutal aggression.
Despite several years of intensive action on the part
of the international community, whose commitment
and determination to fight sexual violence I welcome,
women unfortunately continue to be victims of such
violence the world over, wherever conflicts occur. The
number of countries cited in the report of the SecretaryGeneral is tangible proof of this.
States must uphold their obligations to prosecute
those who perpetrate such violence and ensure that the
victims of sexual violence enjoy equal protection under
the law and access to justice. There can be no place for
impunity within frameworks seeking to achieve lasting
peace, justice, and national truth and reconciliation.
When national judicial systems fail, the perpetrators
of sexual violence should be subject to prosecution
under international criminal justice, the jurisprudence
of which when it comes to such violence represents a
major step forward. Chad believes that all States are
obligated to implement the principle of zero tolerance
when it comes to sexual violence against women and
girls. In this regard, we would like to welcome the
stringent zero -olerance policy applied by the United
Nations regarding cases of sexual violence perpetrated
by members of peacekeeping contingents.
The repercussions of sexual violence for women
and their loved ones are enormous, and the victims
are changed for life by what they have suffered. Not
only do they often find themselves left alone with no
medical or psychosocial assistance, but they are obliged
to remain silent in the face of threats against them
and any witnesses. The fight against sexual violence
in conflict requires victims and witnesses to be
protected so as to allow them to report the perpetrators
of these crimes. Likewise, efforts should incorporate
information, training and awareness-raising to enhance
the prevention of sexual violence through capacitybuilding for States and other relevant stakeholders. In
this regard, Chad welcomes the crucial role played by
the United Nations and civil society, and encourages
them to strengthen their warning systems and their
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
with a view to fine-tuning a comprehensive response to
issues related to sexual violence.

S/PV.7160

The wake-up calls issued by the adoption of
the various resolutions of sexual violence marked
significant progress that must be further strengthened
by the effective implementation of all of the measures
they provide for. Chad recognizes the central role
women can play in efforts towards peace and security
in situations of conflict. Their active participation at
all levels of decision-making and in the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, in brokering peace and in postconflict peacebuilding is of great importance.
In conclusion, I must underscore that the ongoing
struggle towards peace and security to build a better
future for the world can attain its goals only if all
forms of violence against women in general, and sexual
violence in conflict in particular — which are war
crimes and crimes against humanity — are eradicated.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
welcome your initiative, Madam President, to convene
under the presidency of Nigeria this open debate on
sexual violence in conflict. The Secretary-General’s
presentation and his regular participation in open
debates on this topic show the commitment to the fight
against sexual violence at the highest level within
the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her
intervention, and especially for the exemplary work she
is carrying out with the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. I would like to
assure them of the full support of my delegation. Our
thanks go too to Ms. Rhoda Misak, who compellingly
gave voice to civil society — an indispensable partner
in the fight against sexual violence. I fully associate
myself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union.
Since our last open debate on sexual violence in
June 2013 (see S/PV.6984), new conflicts have broken
out and others have intensified. The magnitude of the
phenomenon has intensified proportionately, showing,
unfortunately, that sexual violence goes hand in hand
with conflict. I refer to the conflict in Darfur, which
continues to deteriorate, and to that in South Sudan,
where, as Ms. Misak has just outlined, the fighting
that erupted since 15 December 2013 has led to serious
violations of human rights, including a great number
of cases of sexual violence. I refer, too, to the Central
African Republic, where sexual violence has been
the main feature of the attacks carried out against the
civilian population since March 2013.

14-3104613/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

In Syria, sexual violence has been a constant
since the beginning of the conflict. The independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic gathered information showing that
Government forces and affiliated militias have
committed sexual violence, including rape, in detention
centres and prisons across the country, often during
interrogations conducted by intelligence services. We
also know that certain armed groups in Syria have also
committed such violence. All of these conflicts and the
other situations addressed in the annual report of the
Secretary-General lead us to the conclusion that the
Security Council must remain mobilized in the face
of these despicable practices that deliberately target
civilian populations and destroy the social fabric of
entire communities.
Last year’s open debate focused on the fight against
impunity. That topic remains relevant. It is at the heart
of our efforts to end sexual violence. Condemning the
perpetrators of sexual violence does not mean only
punishing the guilty parties but also preventing future
violence, righting wrongs and doing justice by victims
and survivors. The international community must step
up its efforts to support national authorities to assume
their responsibility in the fight against impunity.
The partnership between Justice Rapid Response,
UN-Women and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations is a good example of what can be done.
Luxembourg supports that partnership, which has made
it possible to establish a list of specialized experts
who can be rapidly deployed to lead and participate in
investigations and to provide assistance to the victims
of acts of sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
settings.
Along with strengthening national capacities, there
must be continued support for international criminal
justice so it can play its role in cases where States
either fail to live up to their obligations or lack the will
to do so. I would like to reiterate the importance that
Luxembourg attaches to the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The Security Council is
responsible for considering all of the means at its
disposal to combat sexual violence, including referral
to the ICC.
In recent years, the information available to us on
cases of sexual violence has increased in both quantity
and quality. Procedures for the monitoring, analysis
and communication of information on sexual violence
have begun to be implemented following the adoption

14/74

25/04/2014

of resolution 1960 (2010). It would be advisable to
accelerate the implementation of those procedures, as
envisaged in resolution 2106 (2013). It is also critical
that advisors on the protection of women continue to
be deployed in a systematic way. The Security Council
should also ensure that it systematically takes into
account the prevention of sexual violence in framing
country-specific resolutions and in considering the
renewal of the mandates of peacekeeping missions and
special policy missions.
We commend applaud the efforts of the United
Nations campaign against sexual violence conflict,
headed by Ms. Bangura, in particular the preparation
of early warning indicators for cases of conflict-related
sexual violence addressed by United Nations missions
in Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and South Sudan.
The struggle against sexual violence can succeed
only if the States concerned, the United Nations and all
its Member States mobilize and unify their efforts. In
that context, we welcome the signature on the sidelines
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly
of the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict. That initiative, which has since
been endorsed by more than 140 countries, shows the
will of the international community to put an end to
that scourge. We hope that the June follow-up Global
Summit in London will lead to the adoption of further
specific commitments.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate that
Luxembourg will maintain its firm commitment to
ensuring that the struggle against sexual violence is
taken into account as a priority by the Council and that
the Council’s resolutions are translated into solutions
on the ground, to borrow Ms. Bangura’s expression.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. I also
thank the Secretary-General, his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as Ms. Rhoda
Misaka, representing civil society in South Sudan. I
would also like to align my country with the statement
of the European Union.
Sexual violence is a weapon as old as war itself.
Thanks to the action of civil society, our Council has
been seized of the matter and broken the complicit
silence that has surrounded that abominable crime.
However, this is not the time to celebrate. We have
failed to protect civilians in Syria. Women, men and

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

children are being sexually abused there, even as we
speak. France, as is well known, is working on a draft
resolution that would make it possible to refer the main
perpetrators and instigators of such crimes, whoever
they may be, to the International Criminal Court.
Although I have spoken of our failure in Syria, the
fight against sexual violence has also had its share of
victories. First, we have put an end to silence. From
a silent form of evil that was understood to be an
inherent part of war, we have made sexual violence
an issue affecting international peace and security.
In that regard, the creation of the mandate of the
Special Representative has been critical to enhancing
the international visibility of the issue. She can speak
directly to Governments at the highest level and is able
to present problems that they have often preferred to
ignore.
That political work is based on mechanisms that
provide us with information and awareness, which
are indispensable tools for action. Women protection
advisers within peacekeeping and political missions
are the cornerstone of that endeavour. In the Central
African Republic, where the State has collapsed and
everything needs to be rebuilt, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission has
a strong mandate to protect civil and human rights,
including with respect to sexual violence, thanks to the
deployment of women protection advisers.
In a second success, shame has changed sides. It
now weighs on the executioner and not on the victim.
The Secretary-General’s list of shame exposes to the
whole international community the parties that are
using sexual violence in an orchestrated and systematic
manner and provides United Nations missions with a
solid basis for initiating a dialogue with such groups.
We should draw the logical conclusions from
such changes and prioritize the struggle against
impunity with respect to sexual violence. That task
redounds above all to Governments, which have the
responsibility to prosecute and punish. We must be
vigilant in that regard; too often, States announce with
great fanfare — and development agencies fall into line
with support — the establishment of special courts,
special prosecutors and extraordinary laws, which
serve only to cover up their lack of political will. We
have witnessed that over many years in Darfur. When
States fail to comply, the International Criminal Court,
whose jurisdiction is universal, can and must fulfil its
role.

S/PV.7160

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, impunity
with respect to mass rapes has long been the rule.
There has recently been a degree of progress. That is
why we call upon the Congolese authorities to pursue
their efforts to prosecute those responsible for the rapes
in Minova, including the commanders of the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo, with
the necessary rigour. An exemplary judgement in that
affair would send a message to all Congolese troops that
the era of impunity has come to an end. We welcome the
technical support being provided to the trials currently
under way by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose mandate for the protection of civilians
has recently been strengthened.
None of those changes can take root if we do not fully
implement the mandate established by the resolutions
on women and peace and security by ensuring the full
and complete participation of women in the settlement
of conflicts. In the framework of its national action plan,
France has launched programmes of cooperation on the
matter of sexual violence and in favour of women’s
political and economic empowerment in Africa and the
Arab world, in partnership with UN-Women, especially
in Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Before concluding, I would like to add one point that
remains important for France. In peacetime, but even
more so during war, access to sexual and reproductive
health services is indispensable. We know that women
and girls exposed to sexual violence run the risk of
premature and unwanted pregnancies. The risk of
maternal mortality in such circumstances rises tenfold.
The refusal to provide abortion services represents
a violation of one of the principles of international
humanitarian law, which covers non-discrimination
with respect to the provision of medical services to
victims. Such discrimination, which adds a terrible
injustice to women who have been the victims of sexual
violence, must be brought to an end.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madame President, for convening this important debate
today. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2014/181), and in particular Special Representative
Bangura, her staff, the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, and United
Nations country teams around the world for their
continual efforts to raise awareness and to tackle sexual
violence in conflict.

14-3104615/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

I warmly welcome Ms. Rhoda Misaka from South
Sudan and the recommendations that she has made. I
look forward to hearing the statement that the African
Union ambassador will make on behalf of Ms. Bineta
Diop, whose appointment as Special Envoy of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
Women, Peace and Security makes clear the importance
that the African Union places on the most vulnerable
victims of conflict, including the victims of sexual
violence.
The Secretary-General’s report is alarming. He is
right — this crime is as destructive as any bomb. With
data from all over the world, the report demonstrates that
sexual violence is prevalent and a matter of profound
importance to international peace and security. When
unpunished, such crimes sow the seeds for future
conflict, perpetuate violence and undermine the
prospects for sustainable development. If implemented,
the report’s recommendations, based on resolution 2106
(2013), will improve support for survivors, reduce the
space for impunity and help prevent future crimes.
Today I want to make three particular points. First,
preventing and redressing sexual violence in conflict
is integral to the wider work on conflict prevention
and a moral duty for the Governments and citizens of
a civilized world. As Special Representative Bangura
put it, it is a great moral duty of our time. Many
United Nations agencies, women’s and civil society
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
human rights defenders work diligently day by day
to achieve this. But their efforts can succeed only if
Governments commit their support and work together
in a coordinated way to enable robust mechanisms
for documenting and investigating acts of sexual
violence, greater support to survivors, increased
gender-based responses and security sector reform,
and greater international coordination. If we are
serious about eradicating sexual violence in conflict,
we must resource the fight. We must also eradicate the
root causes of this inhumane crime, including gender
inequality, discrimination and false perceptions of
masculinity.
Secondly, the United Nations leading role in this
is absolutely critical. The breadth of United Nations
activity is impressive and it is also having an impact.
The United Kingdom supports all the United Nations
work and encourages United Nations agencies to deliver
as one in their efforts to support States in fulfilling
their responsibilities. Tackling sexual violence must

16/74

25/04/2014

also be at the heart of strong protection-of-civilians
mandates in United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which are primarily delivered through military and
police personnel. We welcome the deployment of
women protection advisers in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and look forward to their deployment in the
Central African Republic and other missions.
Thirdly, as noted in the report, my Foreign Secretary
and the whole British Government remain committed
to this cause. In just over six weeks time, Foreign
Secretary William Hague and Angelina Jolie, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, will co-chair the Global Summit to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The goal is to end the
culture of impunity for the use of sexual violence both as
a tool and as a side effect of war worldwide. In line with
the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, the summit will identify specific actions by
the international community where we believe greater
progress is necessary. That will include a number of
conflict and post-conflict affected States. We hope they
will use this platform to set out their plans and activity
for combating sexual violence.
Collectively we must change the calculus of anyone
who thinks that they can use the fog of war as cover to
get away with rape and other forms of sexual abuse. We
must shift the stigma for such crimes from the victim
to the perpetrator. We must ensure there is nowhere
to hide for those guilty of grave violations of human
rights. We must, as Special Representative Bangura
said, hold perpetrators accountable. Where violations
do occur, we must empower survivors to speak out,
safe in the knowledge that they will be supported and
protected and able to access services and legal redress.
I am pleased that since the publication of the
Secretary-General’s report on 13 March, Chad, Lesotho,
Saint Lucia, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, have
all endorsed the Declaration of Commitment, taking
the number of endorsing countries to 145. That is
hugely encouraging. We look forward to welcoming all
endorsing countries to the London summit in June. The
United Kingdom strongly encourages countries that
have no yet endorsed, particularly those on the Security
Council, to do so as soon as possible and to attend the
summit.
Under the Charter, the Security Council has
the primary responsibilty for the maintenance of

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

international peace and security. We know that we
can improve international peace and security if we
eliminate sexual violence in conflict, and we have the
opportunity to do so. Through the June Summit, next
year’s high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) and
the building of the sustainable development goals, the
Security Council and Member States can make progress
towards ending this terrible crime. We should all now
commit to that goal.
Mrs. Kazragienė (Lithuania): Let me begin by
expressing our appreciation to the Nigerian presidency
for convening an open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence, an issue that plagues and exacerbates many
contemporary conflicts.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2014/181) and recommendations, including
the country-specific ones, and the updated annex on
suspected perpetrators. We also sincerely commend
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and her team all over the world for their hard work and
dedication, as well as the members of the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Friends
of 1325 and the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security. Our sincere congratulations go
to Ms. Bineta Diop, the first African Union Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, on her recent
appointment.
At the outset, Lithuania aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by observer of the European
Union.
Despite all of the efforts of the international
community and the establishment of legal and normative
frameworks, including seven Security Council
resolutions, conflict-related sexual violence is on the
rise. It is getting more complex. It is used to displace
civilian populations, to seize land and property and to
illicitly extract natural resources. Children are sexually
assaulted and suffer from stigma when born out of
rape. Young girls are trafficked, forced to marry rebels
and used as messengers. Boys and men are subjected
to sexualized violence. Sexual violence has become
a tactic and weapon of war and impunity prevails.
The only way to effectively address this scourge is a
comprehensive and integrated approach which entails
prevention, early warning, justice, accountability,
the participation of women in political processes and
economic empowerment.

S/PV.7160

The inclusion of provisions on sexual violence
in the Arms Trade Treaty is just one of the recent
encouraging examples of action in that regard. In its turn
the Security Council, in resolution 2106 (2013) — the
fourth resolution focused on conflict-related sexual
violence — has reaffirmed the centrality of gender
equality and women’s political, social and economic
empowerment to preventing sexual violence and further
developed the operational framework on conflictrelated sexual violence. Among other operational
provisions, it calls for the further deployment of women
protection advisers and gender advisers to the relevant
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions, as
well as humanitarian operations.
The Security Council has also recognized the
need for more systematic monitoring and more timely,
objective, accurate and reliable information as a basis
for prevention and response. The Security Council’s
support of the monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements on conflict-related sexual violence has
contributed to a better understanding of the scope and
roots of the problem and facilitated a more proactive
stance of United Nations teams on the ground. Having
more robust monitoring and reporting mechanisms,
the Security Council could also consider developing a
procedure that would ensure systematic monitoring of
the implementation of its decisions and commitments
taken up by parties to conflict.
At the same time, the lack of adequate national
capacity and expertise to prevent, investigate
and prosecute violence remain among the main
impediments in combating sexual violence and ensuring
accountability. We are encouraged by the United
Nations efforts to assist the strengthening of national
capacities. We welcome the extremely important work
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which is being rapidly deployed in
situations of particular concern with respect to sexual
violence in armed conflict to assist national authorities
in strengthening the rule of law.
Another concrete and laudable example is the joint
UN-Women/Justice Rapid Response training, roster
management, and deployment mechanism established
upon a request of the Secretary-General to ensure that
each commission of inquiry is provided with expertise
on investigations of sexual and gender-based violence.
It is also of paramount importance that peacekeepers
continue to be trained to prevent and respond to
conflict-related sexual violence, and that special

14-3104617/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

training materials be prepared, preferably in the native
languages of peacekeepers. Peacekeeping forces must
ensure that internally displaced persons camps are
free of alleged perpetrators. The United Nations Blue
Helmets themselves must strictly follow the rules of
conduct.
Lithuania strongly supports the Group of Eight
declaration on preventing sexual violence in conflict,
and we are glad to learn that over 140 States have already
endorsed the declaration of commitment that was
introduced in New York in September 2013. Lithuania
looks forward to the global summit in London in June
this year, where specific actions are to be identified and
agreed.
However broad and strong it may be, international
assistance will not provide sustainable results unless
it is complemented by national commitment. National
political leaders have a major role to play in ensuring
that international law is transposed into national
law and implemented. National ownership and
responsibility should be key priorities. We welcome the
facilitation of national responsibility efforts through
the joint communiqués between the United Nations
and the Governments of the Central African Republic,
Côte D’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea and Somalia, as per the Secretary-General’s
report.
We note with appreciation that women, peace and
security issues are included in the Secretary-General’s
country-specific reports under a separate heading.
The Security Council could also consistently include
the women, peace and security agenda in the terms
of reference of its visiting missions. As the Council
continues to horizontally integrate the issues of sexual
violence into its work, including in the drafting or
renewing mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions, relevant sanctions
committees must review their listing and de-listing
guidelines, add sexual violence to their lists of criteria,
harmonize designation criteria for listed individuals
by including any relevant charges from international
justice mechanisms, consider sanctioning parties
identified by the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
Council at its disposal has and should actively consider
other means to ensure accountability, such as a referrals
to the International Criminal Court, special tribunals
and commissions of inquiry.

18/74

25/04/2014

The International Commission of Inquiry on the
Central African Republic should provide all relevant
information to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) in order to list the perpetrators
and send a strong signal that all offenders will be
held accountable. The capacity of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic to monitor and report
human rights violations, including sexual violence,
must also be enhanced.
The sexual violence in Syria against women and
men, including in Government detention facilities;
non-State armed groups targeting female family
members of Government forces; and more than 300
cases of gender-based violence in three health clinics in
Damascus and Rural Damascus alone are clear violations
of international humanitarian law and resolution 2139
(2014). We support referral of the situation in Syria to
the International Criminal Court. Only by using all
available tools at our hands will we be able to prevent
further violence and end this vicious cycle of impunity.
The experience in combating conflict-related sexual
violence in the Central African Republic, Syria and
many other countries, as reported by the SecretaryGeneral, shows that the United Nations has to find
meaningful ways to engage non-State actors.
Finally, let me touch upon the issue of survivors.
Care for and protection of survivors of sexual violence
are another vital issue to address in order to fight
stigmatization and reprisals and prevent violence and
impunity in the future. We believe that reparations
could significantly contribute to restoring justice,
especially when other means are not feasible.
Twenty years after the end of the Balkan War, an
estimated 20,000 survivors of crimes of sexual violence
have not seen justice. The alleged perpetrators enjoy
positions of influence while victims and their children
born of rape are left to suffer stigmatization and shame.
Women were excluded from the peace negotiations,
even though women’s organizations were the first to
initiate meetings with people from the other side, trying
to find common ground and ways to stop the violence.
That is the probable reason why the Dayton peace
accords did not include the provisions recommended
in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing
Platform for Action.

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

Indeed, our toolbox is full of useful instruments
but it is now time to take matters into our own hands,
consolidate our actions on the ground and deliver
together and in close cooperation with all humanitarian,
diplomatic, justice, security and civil society actors.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): We
are grateful to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative Zeinab Bangura and Ms. Rhoda Misaka
for their important comments and insights this morning,
and for the outstanding work undertaken by Special
Representative Bangura and her dedicated staff.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/181) makes
for grim reading, and very clearly there is much we,
the Member States concerned, need to do. And in
that context, when it comes to the presence of Syrian
refugees in Jordan and their vulnerabilities, as alluded
to in the report, even though we note that the principal
refugee camp for Syrians falls under the supervision of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the Jordanian Government accepts full
responsibility for whatever may happen on its territory
and is committed to ensuring the security of all refugees,
especially women and children. Naturally, we condemn
any attempt by any individual or individuals to exploit
them. We also need help — much more help — and
perhaps we will soon reach a stage at which other
countries with real capacities may consider sharing
the burden and accepting greater numbers of Syrian
refugees than is presently the case.
Turning to the Secretary-General’s recommendations,
I join others in stating that it is pointless discussing
accountability for sexual crimes perpetrated against
women, girls and boys unless we do two things. The
first is our need to properly understand the extent to
which functioning courts are second only in importance
to the provision of security and on an equal footing
with humanitarian considerations when it comes to the
United Nations involvement in conflict or post-conflict
environments. Without a properly resourced single
vehicle for the delivery of legal and judicial support, the
United Nations will continue to fall short in delivering
what it should to distressed communities. Secondly, the
International Criminal Court needs to be supported by
the Council to the hilt, and no serious discussion on
combating the worst forms of sexual violence can be
obtained from a Council unwilling to do that.
Finally, I ask once again the painful question of
whether we as a collective membership, bound together
in this Organization by its Charter, actually have the

S/PV.7160

credibility to offer strong opinions on this subject matter?
Do we have the credibility when all of us have refused
to undertake the complete range of actions necessary to
ensure that sexual exploitation and abuse by our own
peacekeepers — United Nations peacekeepers — is
reduced to zero? Can we not be accused by others of
hypocrisy when in this Chamber we rightly condemn
all expressions of conflict-related sexual violence
committed against women, girls and boys, and speak
of them as criminal and intolerable — as we have done
for 14 years now — while down the hall, only a few
metres from here in the Sixth Committee, we do next
to nothing, year in year out, on the draft convention
on criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission — a draft that has been on the
agenda of the Sixth Committee since 2007.
Let us be clear about what it is we are saying by
our inaction. We are saying that it is okay by us when
a United Nations civilian staff member commits rape
in a United Nations peacekeeping mission, where the
host country has no functioning judiciary and when
the country of nationality cannot exercise its criminal
jurisdiction extraterritorially over the accused because
it has no law allowing it to do so. Is that our view? Rapes
perpetrated by United Nations civilian staff members in
that context can go unpunished? That is precisely what
it is we are saying, year after year. Please do not think
those crimes have not happened, because they have.
Do we have any credibility when we also insist that
the United Nations has no business in relation to the
conduct of investigations for alleged crimes committed
by our own United Nations uniformed peacekeepers,
knowing that in the past we, the Member States, were
not reliable enough in guaranteeing that justice be
done in respect of the victims? Are we credible when
in the last reporting period of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) we still had 42 cases of
sexual exploitation and abuse involving United Nations
peacekeepers being investigated by that Office? By
now, some nine years after we identified both the
challenge and the plan needed to eliminate this odious
phenomenon, there should be practically no cases at all.
I do not wish to be misunderstood: if we had done
everything we should have done over the past nine
years to ensure the total elimination of this abominable
practice by our own peacekeepers, and they still
occurred, then we could accept that there was little
more we can do. But we, as Member States, have not
done everything, and so we cannot make that claim.

14-3104619/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

The United Nations is required to set an example
before our publics as an Organization that will without
question pay special attention to the most vulnerable
and defenceless of protected persons in war, with first
a guaranteed protection provided by ourselves, from
ourselves, and then from others.

various forms. Sexual violence is one such phenomenon,
an abhorrent act that calls for resolute condemnation
and severe punishment. This crime is a consequence of
the prevailing impunity and, as correctly pointed out in
the report (S/2014/181) of Secretary-General, is closely
related problems in ensuring security.

What must we therefore do? We must adopt
the convention on criminal accountability as soon
as possible. We must make the United Nations a
co-examiner of the facts, even when the allegations
involve United Nations military personnel. We must be
more transparent with regard to the severity and nature
of the crimes being committed by United Nations
peacekeepers. We believe that the OIOS takes too long
in establishing the facts, which then must be prepared
by the criminal jurisdiction concerned in order for them
to become admissible in courts of law. Perhaps, as it
was originally suggested, another slim but effective
investigative capacity needs to be considered.

The work carried out to prevent and eradicate
violence must be comprehensive and, above all,
aimed at eradicating its sources by settling conflicts
and restoring order and security. Combating just the
manifestations of sexual violence is unlikely to bring
about the desired results.

We must do better on matters relating to paternity.
In situ courts martial for military offenders must be the
rule, and not the exception, for sexual offenses. And we
must consider again the proposal that all United Nations
personnel destined for field service submit a sample of
their DNA to the United Nations before they deploy,
both to serve as a deterrent to the commission of crimes
and for the sake of possible subsequent investigations,
including establishing paternity.
Finally, we, the Member States, need to report to the
United Nations clearly and at the earliest possible time
what judicial steps were undertaken by our authorities
with respect to alleged crimes.

The prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict
and punishing perpetrators should be considered in the
context of the whole series of problems associated with
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction.
That is the balanced approach laid out in resolution
1325 (2000), and it is on that basis that the work to
elimiate sexual violence should be based.
An important prerequisite for overcoming
violence against women is the full participation of
women themselves in peace talks and post-conflict
reconstruction. The Council should consider the issue of
women and peace and security in the context of armed
conflict and post-conflict situations. The focus of the
Council’s attention should be on the most urgent and
large-scale armed conflicts and situations of massive
and systematic rape and violence. Individual cases of
sexual violence, which are criminal acts and not war
crimes, should not become the subject of consideration
by the Security Council.

If we are serious about confronting the odious
phenomenon of conflict-related sexual violence
generally, and we are not to be hypocrites, we must
think about these issues more seriously.

We must also avoid duplication of effort in this
area by other United Nations entities with relevant
competence — for example, the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council, the Commission on the Status
of Women and UN-Women.

Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I, too, would like to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting. I also thank
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative and
Ms. Misaka for their statements and the information
they have presented to us on issues of sexual violence
in armed conflict.

We call on the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict to
act in accordance with her mandate when carrying out
her activities and to give priority attention to situations
on the agenda of the Security Council, where sexual
violence is one of the main issues in the context of the
protection of civilians.

For almost six years, the Security Council has
constantly paid close attention to issues of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict. Any armed
conflict is characterized by a high level of violence in

Sexual violence in armed conflict is the topic
we are considering today. We should avoid broader
interpretations of what has been agreed at the
intergovernmental level and enshrined in Security
Council resolutions — a scope that pertains to armed

20/74

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

conflict and post-conflict situations. We believe that
the expansive interpretation of the terminology being
used, and this issue as a whole, can have a negative
influence on the functioning of the Security Council
and the United Nations in this area, as well as on the
effectiveness of the fight against sexual violence.
Furthermore, we must not forget that in the course
of armed conflict, women and children are not subject
only to sexual violence; they continue to be victims of
killing and maiming, including as a result of terrorist
acts, and the indiscriminate or disproportionate use of
force. Such crimes in particular often go unpunished or
are justified by the inevitability of so-called collateral
damage.
Combating sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict is impossible without the active involvement
of national authorities in the process. The report of the
Secretary-General therefore places particular emphasis
on the need for national ownership and the leading
role and responsibility of States. Measures taken by
the United Nations system and civil society should
complement the efforts of States.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important open debate.
I would also like to convey my sincere gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and to his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, for their respective
statements. Under their leadership, the silence has been
broken surrounding the crime of sexual and genderbased violence, and they have rallied the Security
Council to put in place a normative framework. But as
Ms. Bangura has consistently stated, sexual violence
continues to be pervaisive in crisis. We also wish to
acknowledge the statement made by Ms. Rhoda Misaka,
representative of the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security.
A few years ago, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda established that rape and other
forms of sexual violence were used as a weapon of war
during the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
Although no one can tell the true number of the victims
of rape during the genocide, it is reported that between
100,000 and 250,000 women were raped. Some of
those women survived with scars, some with incurable
diseases, such as HIV/AIDS. The consequence of those
heinous crimes is beyond description. Nevertheless,
the perpetrators of those crimes in Rwanda, now
acting under the umbrella of the Forces démocratiques

S/PV.7160

de libération du Rwanda, continued their mayhem in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where they
terrorized communities and committed rape against
women and girls.
Sexual violence is also a reality in Syria, the
Central African Republic and many other conflict
areas. In South Sudan, the radio is even used to call
for the rape of women based on their ethnicity. We
totally agree with Ms. Bangura that sexual violence in
conflict needs to be treated as a war crime, not as an
unfortunate collateral damage of war. It is therefore up
to us as Member States to end this scourge.
It must be made clear that sexual violence is not
only a United Nations issue but an issue that requires
the leadership, national ownership and responsibility
of States. National ownership is imperative because
it is at the national level that Governments create a
platform for awareness and outreach against those
crimes. Governments, whether in conflict or at peace,
have a primary responsibility to prevent any acts of
sexual violence against women, children and men,
and to ensure accountability for such crimes. That
responsibility is transferred to non-State actors under
whose control civilians are.
We call on the established United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict to continue supporting national institutions to
strengthen their response in addressing sexual violence.
Ending impunity for those who commit sexual violence
during conflict should be our collective effort and goal.
Along the same lines, the Council should ensure that all
country reports and mandate renewals evaluate the level
of protection and promotion of women’s human rights,
as set out in several Security Council resolutions.
In that regard, I totally agreed with what our
colleague Prince Zeid that rapes perpetrated by United
Nations civilian staff while on a peacekeeping mission
cannot and should not go unpunished.
As the Council discusses options for the United
Nations engagement in several conflict-stricken
countries where the situation continues to worsen,
with women bearing the brunt of the conflict and with
human rights violations increasing, the United Nations
presence should have a robust mandate to protect
civilians. Protecting those in need should be given
priority by ensuring that we take full measures, in
particular to provide more effective protection to the
civilian population at risk, to create the conditions for

14-3104621/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

humanitarian assistance and to allow the investigation
of violations and abuses. All peacekeepers should be
trained on gender issues and ways to support victims of
rape before deploying to peace operations.
On our part, Rwanda has adopted predeployment
courses for all our troops that include lessons related
to sexual and gender-based violence. In the same vein,
we call for the deployment of gender advisers, women
protection advisers and child protection advisers in
all United Nations peacekeeping missions to focus on
violations and abuses committed against women and
children, including all forms of sexual violence in
armed conflicts.
Needless to say, the fight against impunity and
accountability is key to eradicate the scourge of sexual
violence in conflict. The Security Council should
reinforce its efforts to ensure that investigations and
prosecutions are carried out through the national justice
systems when possible, or through various international
justice mechanisms. Regardless of any debate we may
have, our main objective is to ensure that justice is done
for the victims, which can also serve as a deterrent for
all belligerents.
In conclusion, allow me to restate our understanding
that sexual violence in conflict, like any other growing
violent trend, is a criminal practice that we can eradicate
if we have the political will. We strongly believe that
our joint efforts can yield tangible results and create a
changed environment on the ground for those affected
by that terrible scourge. My delegation will continue
to support and work closely with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict in the implementation of
its mandate.
Ms. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2014/181). Our respect, immense appreciation
and sentiments go to Ms. Zainab Bangura. Our full
solidarity goes to Ms. Rhoda Misaka. I wish to thank
them for their briefings and for their commitment to
making progress on full equality for women.
I am going to take a different angle in relation to
referring to how much we have done. I am going to
focus not only on what how much we still have to do,
but also to add a hint of optimism.
First, the international governmental community
has agreed that sexual and gender-based violence in

22/74

25/04/2014

armed conflict constitute a war crime and a crime
against humanity. It is worth mentioning it when we
in the international community agree to say things in
the same way and to work to the same end — in this
instance towards the eradication of a problem.
Secondly, there is also reason for optimism owing
to the international tribunals, such as those for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone. Today, the International Criminal
Court and those tribunals have been building a clear
definition of sexual violence as a war crime and as a
crime against humanity. Certain countries in my region
of Latin America and the Caribbean are also doing so.
In my country, 1,083 persons have been prosecuted and
443 have been convicted for crimes against humanity,
with a gender perspective and the aspect of women’s
human rights having been incorporated in all the cases.
Sexual crimes reported by victims in their
testimony were not subject to punitive action until
Rwanda, Yugoslavia and Sierra Leone, until the
initiatives undertaken in our own countries, because
they remained invisible. They were part of war, the
spoils that came with vengeance and hate that targeted
women’s bodies. But while gender-based violence, and
sexual violence aimed at women and girls in particular,
is not a new phenomenon in history, the adoption of
measures to investigate and prosecute it nationally and
internationally is very recent. For that reason, we had
to continue to work patiently but collaboratively. As
my dear Jordanian colleague said, gender-based crimes
used to be considered collateral damage in war; their
investigation in many cases was peripheral and often
resulted in impunity for the perpetrators.
The Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights says that acts of sexual violence against women
are crimes against humanity when they are used as
weapons to inspire terror. It has defined sexual violence
as any physical or mental abuse committed as an act of
violence and also characterizes it as a crime of torture.
Sexual crimes against women are now internationally
codified. There is no statute of limitations, which we
should recall here in the Security Council. Crimes
against humanity have no statute of limitations.
The Belém do Pará Inter-American Convention on
the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence
agaisnt Women says that it is not only an offence to
human dignity but also a violation of human rights. Let
me speak not just about what the justice system has

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

said, the words I have just read out. Justice in fact now
says that because the victims had begun to be heard.
In one horrible case, a woman named Susana was
raped in the hospital after just having been operated on.
To this day I can hear her crying and saying that she had
been a virgin. That was a crime against nature. For a
woman, rape is an act of the worst possible humiliation.
Another woman, Monica, said:
“I asked them, when the Red Cross came to see us, I
asked, ‘As a woman, how is it possible that I did not
become pregnant after being raped so many times?’
They explained to me that women’s periods tended
to stop. They said that in concentration camps, like
here, we did not become pregant, we were afraid to
getting pregnant. We did not menstruate. We did
not want to end up pregnant by a rapist.”
Estela said:
“They did not allow us to bathe. It was very hard
not to be able to wash after being raped and to have
to remain soiled. They would give me stale bread.
I was able to wash in a bathroom only a couple of
times. I have images in my mind of being raped
in the bathroom. By the final rapes I was fainting;
I do not have a recollection of those. They would
blindfold me. I heard a girl screaming, ‘Mama,
mama, mama’. We were in the same camp, and she
was being raped.”
A man named David said:
“They would give us electric shocks to our gums,
under our lips, to our genitals. In my case, I had
an abcess on my penis the size of a peach. They
also placed things in my rectum that would conduct
electricity. We were humiliated. I could not bear
the agony. How could we go back — to say that a
boy had been raped?”
I hope that all the victims will be heard, as those
victims were heard and it was possible to do justice and
combat impunity. We hope we will be able to work not
just to eradicate this crime against humanity in conflict
situations, but also to build equality for women in times
of peace. Our friend Ms. Bangura has said it. “We will
go out to find them”, the children and grandchildren of
the State terrorism that took place in Argentina call out
in the streets. “As with the Nazis, we will find them,
no matter where they are.” They call out in the streets
for the sake of the memory of their mothers and for the
sake of truth, justice and reparation.

S/PV.7160

“We seek them without weapons, without hate or
vengeance. We seek them for the sake of truth,
memory, justice, reparation and peace.”
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I would first like to join others in thanking the
Secretary-General for his insightful report (S/2014/181),
which has provided this important debate with ample
guidance. I would also like to express our appreciation
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zainab Hawa Bangura for her determined and enduring
efforts to ensure global involvement in the fight against
the abhorrent crimes of rape and sexual violence,
especially in conflict.
Those present will all agree with me that Ms. Rhoda
Misaka stirred our conscience this morning with
her impassioned statement. She reveals the horror of
sexual violence in conflict and invites us to fight this
barbarism — more than barbarism — with unrelenting
determination and commitment. We want to thank her
and say that we support her in her work.
Nigeria takes note of the highlights of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, including the actions taken by States
and the challenges confronting them in conflict and
post-conflict situations in preventing sexual violence.
We welcome the broad-based consultations that guided
the report’s preparation, which involved United Nations
entities in the United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict, field missions and country teams,
all concerned Member States and non-governmental
organizations. We acknowledge the important work of
the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We encourage Member
States to draw on their expertise in strengthening the
rule of law and the capacities of civilian and military
justice systems.
That is all part of a broader effort to strengthen
institutional safeguards against impunity for conflictrelated sexual violence. Donors should be encouraged to
ensure sustainable funding for this valuable resource for
the countries concerned. Nigeria shares the SecretaryGeneral’s view that the lack of capacity remains one
of the major impediments to ensuring accountability,
which leads to widespread impunity. In turn, that has a
detrimental impact on access to justice and the security
and safety of survivors. It is evident that survivors’
access to justice can be hindered by restrictions on
physical access and inadequate legislation, or, indeed,

14-3104623/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

by the financial and social costs associated with
reporting and pursuing justice for crimes of sexual
violence. Regrettably, many countries lack legal aid
services and protocols for the protection of victims and
witnesses, and an already weakened criminal justice
system amplifies the lack of access to justice. We are
pleased to note that United Nations actors, including
the Team of Experts, continue to support national
authorities in that regard.
It is a matter of concern, as highlighted in the
report, that the prevalence of sexual violence during a
conflict often leaves not only an impact but especially
bitter memories, with acute consequences for the
security of women and children even when peace
has been restored. That may ultimately have a direct
bearing on the durability of peace and prospects for
sustainable development.
With that in mind, the time has come for us to
redouble our efforts in the fight against the scourge
and to hold all perpetrators accountable. That is the
consensus in the Chamber.
The Security Council demonstrated leadership in
that regard in June 2013, by adopting resolution 2106
(2013), which underscores the need for more systematic
monitoring of sexual violence in armed conflict.
It is therefore imperative that the Council develop
appropriate response mechanisms and consistently
improve existing ones to ensure the participation
of women in all aspects of mediation, post-conflict
recovery and peacebuilding.
We acknowledge the critical role of women
protection advisers within human rights and women’s
empowerment and gender units in peacekeeping
operations.
At the global level there is now unprecedented
commitment and momentum on the application of all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The international
community must sustain that momentum. As part of
those accomplishments, we believe that a great deal
more needs to be done to implement commitments on
women and peace and security. For example, there is a
need for increased sex-disaggregated data on security
threats in order to contribute to greater security for
women.
My country welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations that outline critical elements for
the prevention of sexual violence in conflict, specific
actions required at political and operational levels
24/74

25/04/2014

and the need for national ownership, leadership and
responsibility.
The determination to tackle sexual violence in
conflict is not confined to the United Nations. At the
regional level, under the auspices of the African Union,
the African Solidarity Initiative held a high-level
meeting in October 2013 on preventing and responding
to sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
countries and beyond. That consultation was organized
under key international policy and action frameworks,
particularly resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly
resolution 60/1), the Protocol on the Rights of Women in
Africa, the protocol on the prevention and suppression
of sexual violence against women and children and the
2009 African Union gender policy. The meeting was
aimed at significantly reducing and eliminating sexual
violence and accelerating the implementation of agreed
responses, especially those related to prevention and
protection and victims’ access to care and justice.
At the subregional level in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has also put in place strong mechanisms
with regard to the role of women in conflict prevention
and management. Those include the protocol on conflict
prevention, management, resolution, peacekeeping and
security and the supplementary protocol on democracy
and good governance. Those mechanisms form the
basis of the ECOWAS conflict-prevention framework.
The women and peace and security component
of the framework is aimed at consolidating women’s
role, participation and impact at all stages of conflict
management, including humanitarian provisions, while
reinforcing various national and regional mechanisms
on their protection and promotion.
Other regional initiatives of that nature include the
women’s network for peace and security in the ECOWAS
region; the West Africa Network for Peacebuilding; the
Movement against Small Arms and Light Weapons in
West Africa; and the Alliance of African Initiatives for
peace and stability in West Africa.
At national level, through the Law Reform
Commission and the Federal Ministry of Justice,
Nigeria has initiated reforms in the criminal justice
system to ensure the delivery of gender justice in law
and practice. Bills on addressing gender equality and
all forms of violence against women and girls have been
sponsored at both the federal and state level. Strident

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

steps have been taken at the national level to ensure the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). In the same
vein, Nigeria stresses the importance of compliance
with resolution 1820 (2008), on ending acts of sexual
violence against women in conflict.
Nigeria fully embraces the adoption of political
commitments to prevent sexual violence in conflict,
namely, the historic declarations adopted by the Group
of Eight countries in April 2013 and the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which has been signed by more than 140 nations. We
believe that Member States should implement those
commitments as a matter of high priority. Member
States that have yet to sign that important Declaration
should be encouraged to do so before the October
deadline — about six months from now.

S/PV.7160

The current world conflict scenario has become
even more complicated due to economic dynamics.
Countries in crisis view the arms trade and war as
ways to strengthen their economy. But truly nothing
will undermine human rights and women’s rights more
than strengthening the economy through the arms
industry. The total world military expenditure in 2013
was $1.747 billion. The 15 countries with the highest
military expenditure together represent four-fifths of
all military spending in the world.
Moreover, it is a paradox of our time that, although
the growing technological sophistication has not
resolved the basic problems of a large part of the world
population in achieving sustainable development, it has
provided weapons of mass destruction. And there is
still no end to poverty and inequality.

It is critical for States to focus collectively on
converting the political commitments into concrete
preventive action, particularly at national level. It is in
that spirit that Nigeria today, in this forum, declares its
intention to sign on to that laudable initiative as a means
of demonstrating its unwavering commitment to the
fight against sexual violence and all its ramifications.

Ecuador is convinced that, to deal with the
fundamental causes of conflict and violence, genuine
commitment is needed to curb the current arms race
and new forms of war and conflict, such as so-called
preventive war, cyber espionage and the involvement of
outside actors in fomenting conflict within countries in
support or defence of their own interests.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

It must be acknowledged that armed conflict and
violence are often generated by inequality among
States that themselves have been generally affected by
an unjust international economic system, various forms
of social exclusion, religious intolerance and ethnic
and gender discrimination. In that regard, we must
call upon States to avoid wars of aggression and the
use of force based on alleged threats out of respect for
the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples. With
those considerations, we do not see that the problems
of sexual violence in conflict have diminished, due
to the persistence of a social permissiveness with
respect to violence against women and girls, which,
unfortunately, in many areas of society, has come to
seem almost natural.

I wish to request all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Her Excellency Ms. Maria
Fernanda Espinosa, Minister of National Defence of
Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to highlight the importance of the issue
before us — sexual violence — which particularly
affects women in conflict situations and is an issue that
gravely affects human rights. In that respect, this debate
should directly involve the General Assembly. It is also
necessary to stress the importance of combating the
root causes of war and conflict, namely, the influence
of the arms trade and violent actions by the powerful.

Sexual violence is a violation of fundamental human
rights and, in particular, the human rights of women.
International humanitarian law and international
criminal law are dedicated to protecting women from
sexual violence. However, we do not see the indices of
violence against women diminishing this year. As we
have said before, it is the responsibility of all States to
put an end not only to that form of violence, but also to
impunity for war crimes, including war crimes related
to sexual violence, for example, such horrors as forced

14-3104625/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, forced
sterilization and other types of sexual violence.
In the case of Ecuador, our armed forces are
considered to be an institution that protect the rights,
freedoms and guarantees of all our citizens — men
and women. We therefore look at defence as a public
good that integrates human rights, international
humanitarian law, gender equity and multiculturalism
in a cross-cutting manner. This takes concrete form
in the implementation of our gender policy in the
Ecuadorian Armed Forces, which has been in force
since March 2013. The gender policy fosters a change in
the cultural patterns that cause gender-based violence,
through which related subjects are incorporated into
training for all military personnel and the promotion
of educational programmes designed to prevent sexual
violence that are tailored specifically for the training
of troops. The policy has also brought improvements to
military infrastructure so that adequate conditions are
in place for military personnel, female and male alike.
We must also say that in some regions of the world
we continue to undertake peaceful means of conflict
resolution, building a culture of peace and new forms
of coexistence, as well as a clear position for achieving
global disarmament. As members of the Union of
South American Nations and the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, we are contributing
to the creation of a true region of peace. But those
efforts undertaken at the national or regional levels
can be strengthened only by the effective actions
of international bodies such as the International
Criminal Court, which brings the timely prosecution
of crimes against humanity, especially those related to
discrimination and violence against women.
Lastly, Ecuador again insists upon the need to come
up with multilateral and global strategies that fight the
underlying causes of war and conflict and bring to light
warmongering policies, adopting measures that bring
an end to them and subjecting them to international
law. We remain committed to building a true culture of
peace through social justice, the fight against impunity,
dignity and equality of women and the good living of
our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the President for organizing today’s open debate,
which gives us the opportunity to address the Security

26/74

25/04/2014

Council on conflict-related sexual violence — a subject
on which my country has been very active due to its
deep conviction that we should keep fighting against all
forms of violence against women and girls.
I would also thank both Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura for their
briefings, and Ms. Rhoda Misaka, representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
for the statement she made on behalf of civil society.
Sexual violence is a repugnant and criminal
phenomenon that is closely linked to insecurity and the
impunity associated with a weak institutional framework
for the rule of law. Those issues have been very present
in earlier debates of the Council, as well as those, in
other contexts, in the General Assembly, including the
work in progress on the post-2015 development agenda.
States have adopted measures to confront the scourge
and to protect women and children, who are the most
vulnerable to sexual violence in situations of armed
conflict. However, in each new report, the SecretaryGeneral takes stock of horrendous situations caused by
offenders, particularly those that appear as systematic
violators in the annex of the report (S/2014/181).
In addition, the United Nations has taken concrete
measures, including, inter alia, the creation of the
position now occupied by Ms. Bangura, the application
of provisions for monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements, and the deployment of women protection
advisers to numerous peacekeeping operations. Despite
those achievements, however, the phenomenon persists,
as we have sadly observed in such recent cases as Syria,
Mali, the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
For that reason, the Council should not stop insisting
that States in conflict or post-conflict situations give
priority to reforming the rule of law and strengthening
the capacity of national institutions, including civilian
and military justice systems, because those weaknesses
are the primary obstacles to ensuring accountability.
That leads to a widespread impunity, which in turn has
negative effects on access to justice and the safety of
survivors.
In our own internal conflict, which ended more than
17 years ago, there remain victims and consequences
of the atrocities committed, and that has helped us to
produce legislation on violence against women and
girls so that they can live in a stable and democratic
society. Preventing violence against women is a priority

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

for the Government of Guatemala, and in recent years
legislation has been adopted and institutions and
policies created to complete that mission.
Finally, one of the legacies of our own presidency
of the Security Council in October 2012 was the
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2012/23,
which
addressed the need to eliminate obstacles to women’s
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We are pleased to have made a contribution to the work
of the Council in the matter.
The President: I call on the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): First of all, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, for their briefings. I would also like to
thank Ms. Rhoda Misaka for her powerful briefing as a
representative of civil society.
Japan welcomes the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on this agenda item (S/2014/181). Newly
introduced national-level policy recommendations
will help the Security Council to continuously monitor
country-specific situations. Japan also appreciates that
the report highlights the role of United Nations Action
as a coordination mechanism, and its activities on
enhancing prevention.
Security Council resolution 2106 (2013) provided,
for the first time, the theme of sexual violence in
conflict with a comprehensive prevention framework.
We believe that the emphasis on prevention is vital if
we are ever to defeat conflict-related sexual violence.
Progress on the ground is dependent upon concrete
action by both national Governments and civil society
in affected countries. The international community
must support them to achieve change on the ground.
The Japanese Government fully supports the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General’s
new priorities of strengthening national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. In appreciation of the work
of the Special Representative, the Japanese Government
invited Ms. Bangura to Japan last November. During
her visit, Prime Minister Abe reassured her of Japan’s
commitment to cooperating closely with her Office.
We are deepening our collaboration with her Office,
as well as its Team of Experts and United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. Japan
is now the second largest contributor to the Special
Representative’s Office, after Sweden.

S/PV.7160

One example of Japan’s assistance is a contribution
of $2 million dollars to support the work of the
Team of Experts in Somalia and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In those countries, the Special
Representative and her Team of Experts, through their
engagement efforts, have succeeded in forging political
commitments with national Governments. Joint
communiqués were later signed between the Special
Representative and the respective Governments. Japan’s
financial contribution will help those Governments to
implement the communiqués.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, we are helping the Government expand and
consolidate the special police for the protection of
women and children. We will also support the activities
of the special representative of President Kabila on
sexual violence once that post is filled.
Furthermore, on International Women’s Day,
the Japanese Mission and the Office of the Special
Representative co-hosted a special event here in
New York in order to raise awareness of the topic
we are discussing today. We look forward to further
cooperation with the Special Representative in that
regard, including at the upcoming Global Summit to
End Sexual Violence in Conflict, to be held in London
in June.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I wish to thank you, Madam
President, for convening this debate on the important
matter before us. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks and for his report (S/2014/181).
I am also grateful to Special Representative Zainab
Bangura for her presentation, and I wish to commend
her and her Office for the crucial role that they have
been playing in international efforts to combat sexual
violence in conflict.
May I also to refer to the very moving presentation
by Ms. Rhoda Misak, from the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security. May the Council and
the United Nations membership more broadly heed
the six areas of serious concern related to the situation
in South Sudan and sexual violence in all conflicts,
including in those situations that are not the focus of
the international community.
Let me also express my satisfaction in welcoming
the Minister of National Defence of our sister nation
Ecuador, Her Excellency Ms. Maria Fernanda Espinosa,

14-3104627/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

to participate in this debate. I think that all of us in South
America feel very well represented by her statement.

measures should build on those and other frameworks
under international law.

The use of sexual violence as a weapon of war
is abhorrent and utterly unacceptable. These crimes
destroy the social fabric of communities and inflict
long-lasting psychological trauma.

However, in practice, peace agreements rarely
make reference to the need to eradicate all forms of
violence against all women and girls. They seldom
include provisions linked to accountability for genderbased violence. Post-conflict arrangements hardly
ever deal with the situation of women who have been
subjected to violence during conflict and its aftermath.
Sexual violence, including domestic violence, is still
not sufficiently viewed as a threat to peacebuilding and
related to broader issues of insecurity.

We welcome the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, issued at the beginning
of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
which Brazil supported.
The latest report of the Secretary-General serves
as a stark reminder that sexual violence is still being
used as a tool of intimidation and social control in
conflict and post-conflict situations. It rightly states
that the prevalence of sexual violence during conflict
often leaves lasting effects with acute consequences
for the security of women and children in peacetime.
Ultimately, that has a direct bearing on the durability of
peace and prospects for sustainable development.
Brazil has repeatedly condemned all forms of
violence against all women and girls, including sexual
violence in conflict. We continue to advocate that
one of the most important ways to combat conflictrelated sexual violence lies in policies aimed at the
prevention and peaceful resolution of armed conflicts.
Preventative measures could prove instrumental to
spare the human and psychological costs associated
with sexual violence. They involve, among other
things, strengthening national capacities, changing
how victims are perceived in their communities and
protecting witnesses. They also encompass curbing
the availability of weapons used to commit those
atrocities, ensuring, through adequate predeployment
training, that peacekeeping missions are increasingly
instrumental in preventing conflict-related sexual
violence, and promoting criminal accountability and
due prosecution of sexual violence crimes.
The international community has adopted an
extensive legal framework dealing with violence against
women. The 1993 General Assembly Declaration on
the Elimination of Violence against Women (General
Assembly resolution 48/104), the 1993 Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action, and the 1995
Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, inter alia,
include requirements for the prohibition of all forms of
gender-based violence to be incorporated into national
legislation. Peace agreements and post-conflict

28/74

Conflict-related sexual violence needs to be
explicitly addressed in security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. More has to be done to ensure that women
are active participants in peace agreements and in the
negotiation, design and implementation of post-conflict
and peacebuilding arrangements.
Brazil is aiding victims of sexual violence in
various countries, including Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A Brazilian
donation of $1 million to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, specifically
intended to help victims of sexual violence seek
reparations and justice, has so far benefited 510 victims
of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the same spirit, the Brazilian Cooperation
Agency has implemented projects with the United
Nations Population Fund in Haiti and Guinea-Bissau,
focusing on capacity-building to deal with victims of
gender-based violence in areas such as health, justice
and security.
On the domestic front, Brazil has incorporated, in
its National Policy Plan on Women for the 2013-2015
biennium, the relevant recommendations contained
in resolution 1325 (2000), including those aimed at
fighting sexual violence as a weapon of war. In March
2013, the Brazilian Ministry of External Relations
hosted a seminar, organized by the Igarapé Institute
think-tank, on the theme “Women, Peace and Security
in Brazil: overcoming challenges and bridging gaps”.
The event proved to be a fruitful opportunity to assess
ways in which Brazil could advance the discussion at
the national level and contribute towards multilateral
efforts on women and peace and security.
I would like to highlight once more the importance
of the empowerment of women for the prevention of

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

sexual and all other forms of violence against women
and, in a broader context, for the prospects of sustainable
peace. As already recognized by the Peacebuilding
Commission, the transformative potential of greater
participation by women in the economic and political
spheres can make an invaluable contribution to building
more peaceful, democratic and prosperous societies.
During a recent trip to Guinea-Bissau, in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I was impressed by the
contribution that women’s organizations have made to
forging a more inclusive political culture in the country.
Finally, I wish to pay tribute to those who have been
working closely with the victims of sexual violence to
lessen their suffering. The name of Dr. Denis Mukwege
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo comes to mind
as an example of courage, selflessness and solidarity.
His authoritative call for action during his statement to
the General Assembly in 2012 continues to resonate to
this day.
The international community should use this
periodic debate as an opportunity to renew its
commitment to the creation of a world where women,
men and children do not have to endure the suffering of
being a victim or a victim’s relative of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Madam, on your country’s accession to the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also welcome
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
am gratified by the participation in this meeting of the
Minister of National Defence of Ecuador, Ms. Maria
Fernanda Espinosa.
My country has spared no effort in providing the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral with data, forensic reports and formal letters
documenting the responsibility of the various armed
terrorist groups in my country for the sexual assault,
rape, abduction and killing of women and girls in
Syria. These crimes are part and parecel of the Salafist,
Wahabi and takfiri ideology they seek to spread
throughout the region. We have demonstrated our
commitment to supporting international efforts to end
all forms of sexual violence, holding their perpetrators

S/PV.7160

and instigators accountable, and ending the silence and
unjustified indifference in the relevant reports of many
specialized agencies of the United Nations concerning
all such ethically and socially abnormal behaviour
against Syrian women.
While we appreciate Ms. Bangura’s efforts in the
preparation of the report before us (S/2014/181), her
interpretation of events in Syria remains unfortunately
partial and unilaterally sourced. In order to explain why
this is so, I have prepared the following remarks on the
section of the report pertaining to the situation in Syria.
First, those who drafted the report continue to allege
that the information contained therein was not verified
“largely owing to a lack of access” (S/2014/181, para.
55). In the regard, I assert that the Syrian authorities
have received no request from any United Nations office
in Damascus or elsewhere, including that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to visit any
location in order to verify information provided by the
Syrian Government. I recall that we have extended a
formal invitation to the Special Representative to visit
Syria on more than one occasion since her appointment,
and before the drafting of her two reports, in order to
help her assess events on the ground rather than relying
on misleading allegations arising from the media. We
have done so because of our interest in objectivity and
balance and in order to prevent politicization. However,
for reasons unknown to us the Special Representative
seems not to have found time to undertake such
an important visit. Clearly, her failure to do so has
prevented her Office from reporting accurately on
sexual violence in Syria.
Secondly, in the report the Special Representative
indicates that her allegations are based on
“[i]nformation gathered from displaced civilians
outside the Syrian Arab Republic and reported
by the independent international commission of
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic” (ibid.),
as well as by former detainees. I insist that the work
undertaken by the commission since its establishment
has been neither professional nor objective. Instead, it
has been political in nature and supremely biased against
the Government of Syria. In that regard, I confirm that
the Government of Syria rejects all accusations against
the Syrian national army, including the allegation
that women have been subject to sexual violence at
checkpoints that are in busy, open locations — a fact

14-3104629/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

that in itself negates any possible truth or validity of
such accusations.

this information to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflicts.

Thirdly, despite the attempts of the Special
Representative and her team to document crimes of
sexual violence committed by the armed terrorist
groups in Syria, she remains unable to verify them,
preferring to keep references to them vague and
indirect. Fully aware that the Syrian Government has
provided her with documentation of crimes of sexual
violence committed by members of these groups
against women — including murder, kidnapping, gang
rape, slavery, torture and marriage jihad — the Special
Representative and her team have unfortunately
not bothered to verify any such allegation or to seek
additional information from the Syrian Government or
other entities.

Here we would ask: If it is claimed that the failure
to document the crimes of sexual violence committed
by the terrorist armed groups is due to the inability to
access locations within Syria, how can it be explained
that none of these violations in the camps — which
their host countries have always declared open to
whoever wishes to visit — is being documented? And
why did the Special Representative not mention the
host countries’ violations of their commitments to
those displaced Syrians?

In this connection, if the Special Representative
has been unable to verify what she calls “media
reports” concerning the crime of marriage jihad, we
are prompted to ask whether the statement made by the
Minister of the Interior of Tunisia before the Tunisian
Parliament on 19 September 2013, which falls within
the reporting period covered by the report, to the
effect that 300 Tunisian women had fallen victim to
this sick fatwa from the Gulf, is also to be considered
a media report that cannot be verified. The United
Nations, as represented by the Special Representative,
plays a key role in eliminating this unprecedented
humiliation of women. This phenomenon affects not
only Syrian women, but women and girls worldwide.
One such incident, although surely not the last,
involved four minor girls — two from Austria and two
from France — who fell prey to this heinous fatwa, as
reported by the French and Austrian official media.
Fourthly, it is critical for us to focus on the suffering
of displaced women in camps in neighbouring countries.
We are deeply concerned over the deteriorating security
situation in the camps in neighbouring countries that
host Syrian women and girls, who suffer insecurity,
human trafficking, rape and false marriages. All this
is documented in reports of the United Nations and
the Western media, which highlight the tragedy of
displaced Syrian minors below the age of 14 who have
found themselves shipped to major slave markets in
the Arab world, where petrodollar sheikhs and humantrafficking mafiosi enslave them in the name of religion.
Moreover, two documented reports confirm 18,000
cases of trafficking in the organs of Syrian girls and
children in Turkish hospitals. We have communicated

30/74

Syria reaffirms that it is serious about dealing
with such grave and heinous violations. Furthermore,
we assert that we continue to desire to cooperate with
the United Nations, and in particular with Ms. Zainab
Bangura, to highlight the reality in Syria without
incitement or politicization. The Syrian authorities
are ready to look into any name or incident that has
been referred to the Special Representative so that it
may be investigated within the framework of ongoing
cooperation and dialogue with her Office.
In conclusion, the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence at King’s
College London has uncovered that 10 women travelled
from Britain to Syria to fight side by side with the
armed terrorist groups in Syria.
Belgium has called on the nine European States
concerned with the issue of foreign combatants in Syria
to meet in Brussels on 8 May, alongside representatives
of the United States of America, Turkey, Morocco,
Jordan and Tunisia. The Minister of Interior of Belgium
has said that addressing the issue of the return of
foreign combatants to their countries of origin is one
of her most important concerns. This issue, which we
have warned against that repeatedly over the past three
years, has now become a concern of Europe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Burgstaller (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and, my own country,
Sweden.
First, let me thank the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, and Ms. Misaka of the NGO Working
Group on Women, Peace and Security for their

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

informative statements, and express the continued and
strong support of the Nordic countries for their work
against sexual violence in conflict.
The appalling situation faced by survivors of
sexual violence calls for our urgent attention. Sexual
violence in conflict must stop. A strong normative
framework is in place, the Security Council resolutions
on women, peace and security being the most prominent
constituent, and we call on the full implementation of
those resolutions. As the Secretary-General points out
in his report (S/2014/181), we have reached a stage where
implementation is what counts. The responsibility
lies with all of us and Member States must commit
themselves to implementation. The burning question
is: how do we do it?
It is important to address both the causes and
consequences of sexual violence. We need to work on
deterring new crimes and we need to hold perpetrators
accountable. While the primary responsibility for
that lies with the States, the role of the International
Criminal Court is also of crucial importance. The
Nordic countries commend the work done by the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict in strengthening the capacities
of States to address such violence. The Justice Rapid
Response/UN-Women roster of sexual and genderbased violence justice experts has proven to be another
important and effective tool to address crimes related
to sexual and gender-based violence in conflict.
Promoting gender equality and women’s
participation is critical if we are to ever tackle the
causes of sexual violence. We must always remember
that women are not only victims; they are also a
great resource for their communities and countries.
A fundamental part of combatting sexual violence
is that women will be actively involved in political
decision-making and in the economic life in their
societies, and that their voices are heard and respected.
Women’s input is key to finding the right solutions and
putting an end to these crimes. The role and influence
of civil society in preventing and addressing sexual
violence are essential and must be supported.
Therefore, investments in gender equality and
women’s full enjoyment of human rights — not least
in fragile States — must be seen as core to preventing
sexual violence in conflict. We know that women’s
participation is essential for building sustainable peace.
We need to ensure that women’s rights must never be a
marginalized side activity that takes place only after

S/PV.7160

all the hard security issues have been dealt with. It is
crucial to ensure that the women, peace and security
agenda is duly reflected in all engagements relating
to international peace and security. We expect the
Security Council to ensure that gender perspectives are
consistently mainstreamed in country resolutions and in
authorizations and renewals of mandates, as laid out in
resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). We would like
to highlight in particular the requirement that missions
establish monitoring and reporting arrangements on
sexual violence.
The Nordic countries would also like to emphasize
the importance of women’s participation in the design
of security sector reform (SSR) and in disarmament,
demobilisation and reintegration (DDR) processes.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s focus on that in
his report. Flawed SSR and DDR processes can lead
to impunity and insecurity with widespread sexual
violence, even after the end of a conflict.
The number of internally displaced persons and
refugees continues to rise to unprecedented levels.
In his report, the Secretary-General points to sexual
violence as a driver of displacement and highlights the
increased risks faced by displaced women and girls,
who make up the majority of displaced persons. To
further assist in that regard, the United Nations should
advance the deployment of women protection advisers
and gender advisers in both peacekeeping and political
missions, as well as in humanitarian operations. Across
sectors and actors, the United Nations needs to remain
vigilant about the need to address sexual violence in
conflict by ensuring the highest standards and training
of its personnel.
Another issue that is reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report and which deserves more attention is
sexual violence perpetrated against men and boys. The
lack of national legislation, specialized services and
the stigma associated with those violations are among
the factors that prevent recognition of that violence as
a crime.
Effective measures to end impunity should be
combined with multisectoral services for survivors of
sexual violence, including their access to legal services
and health services. The Nordic countries support the
Secretary-General’s call for survivors’ access to the full
range of sexual and reproductive health services and
welcome his acknowledgement of the United Nations
particular responsibility in that regard.

14-3104631/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity
to share some of our views on preventing sexual
violence in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Nigeria for holding this open debate
and the Secretary-General and Ms. Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their statements.
One of the major challenges facing the international
community in this area is that of bringing perpetrators
to justice to put an end to the culture of impunity. In
addition to that, there is the serious problem that an
overwhelming majority of survivors never have access
to means of reparation and reintegration. Accountability
mechanisms, both nationally and internationally, are
therefore essential to address that problem. Mexico
emphasizes the relevance and usefulness of the
International Criminal Court and its complementary
power to investigate and prosecute those responsible
for international crimes, including war crimes and
sexual crimes, if a State is unable or unwilling to do so.
At the same time, we should not forget that sexual
violence in conflict is almost never reported as a result
of the risks facing both survivors and witnesses, which
complicates the creation of accurate records on the
incidence of that crime. We need closer cooperation
among States and greater coordination among United
Nations bodies to set up a joint international strategy
to combat the culture of impunity, enable the full
inclusion of women as key actors in peace processes
and ceasefires, and promote their participation in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
measures and in security sector reform.
Mexico acknowledges that the commission of
certain crimes is so serious that it transcends national
interests and affects the international community as
a whole; therefore, all States have an obligation to
investigate and punish such crimes with the two-fold
objective of ending impunity and preventing recurrence.
Our country actively participates in the actions and
efforts of the international community to prevent
international crimes. One example is our membership
in the Latin American Network for Genocide and Mass
Atrocity Prevention, which held a training seminar this
week in Mexico City on international mechanisms for
the prevention of mass atrocities, with the participation

32/74

25/04/2014

of Government experts, international organizations and
members of civil society and academia.
Likewise, at the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly, Mexico endorsed the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict and
agreed to serve as a regional promoter of the initiative
launched by the United Kingdom in 2013. As part of
those efforts, Mexico will host a regional seminar next
month that will bring together a multidisciplinary group
of experts and officials from the United Nations system
to gather input from experts from Latin America and the
Caribbean and to foster the exchange of best practices
in combating sexual violence in conflicts.
Mexico has also supported the development of
an international protocol on the documentation and
investigation of sexual violence in conflict, as a result
of the Declaration of Commitment, and it has appointed
an independent expert to assist in that process. We hope
that the protocol will become a new tool that facilitates
research aimed at prosecuting those responsible and
providing comprehensive care to victims.
Moreover, my country is also reviewing its legal
and institutional framework with a view to possibly
creating an action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000). That process involves the relevant areas of
Government and systematizes some activities already
carried out nationally, such as capacity-building for
our armed forces in the human rights of women and in
gender equality.
While the international community now has a
comprehensive legal and institutional framework for
addressing sexual violence under consideration by
the Security Council, we must do much to continue to
strengthen and implement it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada..
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to convey our congratulations
to you, Madam President, and to Nigeria for presiding
over the Security Council this month and to thank you
as well for the invitation to participate in this important
debate.
(spoke in English)
This open debate is an important opportunity to
review the shocking but all too constant tragedy of
sexual violence against women and girls in conflict
situations. The debate today serves as a necessary
14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

bridge between the considerable political commitment,
concrete programming in the field and high-level
activities. In 2013, at the United Nations and elsewhere,
the international community worked to raise awareness
and establish a framework for the prevention of violence
against women, including conflict-related sexual
violence. Canada is encouraged by the momentum
demonstrated by upcoming high-level activities
focused on practical measures to improve the lives of
women and girls, and to empower them to participate
and contribute fully to the development of their
communities and countries unhindered by the effects
of sexual violence, female genital mutilation and child,
early and forced marriage.
(spoke in French)
In the past year, the United Nations Human Rights
Council adopted a resolution (A/HRC/RES/23/25) on
accelerating efforts to eliminate all forms of violence
against women with a focus on sexual violence,
including in conflict. The Human Rights Council
also passed the first-ever stand-alone resolution
(A/HRC/24/23) that addresses the harmful practice of
child, early and forced marriage. Canada is honoured to
have played a role in those resolutions and is pleased by
the support for them by many other delegations.
In New York in June 2013, the Security Council
passed resolution 2122 (2013), which further addresses
sexual violence in conflict and emphasizes the essential
role of women’s participation in preventing sexual
violence. In September 2013 at the General Assembly,
some 140 Member States endorsed the United Nations
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which was co-sponsored by the United
Kingdom, Canada and many other champions of
preventing sexual violence.
(spoke in English)
The impact that conflict and long periods of postconflict recovery have on the safety and security of
women and girls and the barriers that the various forms
of sexual violence represent for their capacity to learn
and to develop their full human potential is an issue
that we all must address.
Canada continues to call for support for women’s
civil society organizations, particularly those assisting
survivors of violence to ensure their health, safety and
dignity, and those amplifying women’s participation in
decision-making processes.

S/PV.7160

(spoke in French)
Canada welcomes the Security Council’s resolve
to include explicit requests for protection and support
for women and children affected by conflict in mission
mandates. The missions can play a key role in helping to
monitor, investigate and report on violations committed
against women and girls, including all forms of sexual
violence in conflict, and to contribute to efforts to
identify and prosecute perpetrators.
(spoke in English)
I can assure the Council that Canada remains
committed to women’s political and economic
empowerment as essential elements in efforts to
address and prevent conflict-related sexual violence. In
that regard, we plan to continue to work closely with
Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
the Council in a forthright, integral and results-focused
manner to try to put that detestable practice behind us.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, as well as Ms. Rhoda
Misaka, who spoke on behalf of civil society, for their
statements.
Conflict-related violence continues to claim lives
and lead to serious and irreparable consequences for
its survivors, their communities and their families,
including children born of rape. That is clearly reflected
in the alarming information in the latest report submitted
by the Secretary-General (S/2014/181). We therefore
call on the Security Council and all stakeholders to
continue to focus on measures aimed at preventing
sexual violence, protecting and assisting its survivors,
bringing its perpetrators to justice and ensuring that

14-3104633/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

women and women’s organizations participate in all
our efforts to foster peace and security.

(resolution 2134 (2014)), which includes sexual violence
as part of the designation criteria for targeted sanctions.

We welcome the steps taken towards a consolidated
approach to conflict-related sexual violence and, more
broadly, to the issue of women and peace and security,
as well as the progress made in moving from the
principles and goals established to creating operational
measures and tools. We must live up to our political
commitment through concrete and measurable action.
In that regard, we strongly agree on the need for all
of us to assume national ownership, leadership and
responsibility.

In South Sudan, we are very concerned about the
recent reports from the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan of targeted killings of civilians based on
their ethnic origins and hate messages calling for sexual
violence against people on the basis of the community
they belong to. We are also concerned about women’s
participation in conflict prevention, resolution,
protection and peacebuilding processes. None of our
actions will be effective unless they are backed by
the expertise, support and ownership of women and
women’s organizations, as well as that of civil society
and community leaders.

We commend the work of the Special Representative
and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, and welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The European Union agrees that
more work on a comprehensive, multisectoral and
multidimensional approach to preventing conflictrelated sexual violence should be done. In that regard,
we would like to particularly emphasize the following
issues.
Reporting, monitoring and information-sharing
should be based on intensifying the establishment and
use of monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
in the context of country-specific resolutions and
mandates. It also depends on increasing the deployment
of women protection advisers in the relevant
peacekeeping missions. We also note the importance of
continued and enhanced information-sharing, including
through briefings by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by the Executive Director of
UN-Women, when the Council is discussing mandate
renewals and country situations.
Concerning access to justice and accountability,
crimes of sexual violence must be prosecuted and
punished under national and international law. In
that regard, we emphasize the significant advances
made in international law by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and the non-permanent
international criminal tribunals relating to combating
sexual violence in conflict, as well as national efforts
to implement the Statute. We also support targeted and
graduated measures by the relevant Security Council
Sanctions Committees aimed at perpetrators of sexual
violence in conflict. In that regard, we note the resolution
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic

34/74

The European Union continues to implement
its dedicated policy on women, peace and security,
including through close cooperation with other
international and regional organizations. In that regard,
we welcome the designation of Ms. Bineta Diop as
the African Union Commission Chairperson’s Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security. Among the
EU’s support for efforts to address sexual violence is
a project in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
focuses on empowering women, combating impunity
and reforming the security sector. The EU is continuing
its work on specific training modules on human rights
and gender in crisis management, helping to focus on
sexual violence in armed conflicts and on training for
trainers on gender and human-rights issues.
We welcome the provisions related to gender-based
violence and violence against women and children in
the Arms Trade Treaty, which has been signed by all
European Union member States and already ratified by
a majority of them. We also welcome the endorsement
by 144 States of the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, proclaimed last September
in New York, to be followed up in June at the Global
Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict. We must
stay focused on combating sexual violence. I can assure
the Council that the European Union will do its part to
contribute to that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António: I would first like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement, and Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura for hers and for her very important role,

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

and Ms. Rhoda Misak for the very insightful statement
she made.
I am pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Bineta Diop. Due to unforeseen commitments,
Ms, Diop could not come in person, and I therefore
wish to convey her apologies and best wishes for the
success of this debate. Ms. Diop wishes to thank the
Federal Republic of Nigeria in its capacity as President
of the Security Council for the month of April and for
her invitation to this important debate. Ms. Diop is
currently in South Sudan as a member of the African
Union commission of inquiry on that country. She
and her colleagues are there to investigate humanrights violations and other abuses committed in the
context of South Sudan’s current crisis, and to make
recommendations on fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability, national reconciliation and healing. She
has therefore asked me to make the following statement.
“I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181) and leadership, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, for her commitment to preventing
conflict-related sexual violence and protecting
women, men and children around the world from
that scourge. I also thank the Executive Director
of UN-Women for her full support for the women,
peace and security agenda in Africa.
“The Chairperson of the African Union
Commission has made the protection of women’s
right across the continent a priority, and she is
committed to promoting and working to achieve
gender equality. She is also making sure that the
Commission has a 50/50 workforce parity, in line
with the gender policy adopted by the African
Union (AU) in 2009.
“In January I assumed my mandate as
Special Envoy of the African Union Commission
Chairperson on Women, Peace and Security. With
that appointment, I recommitted to continuing
to work closely with the women of the African
continent. I resolved to amplify their voices and
concerns within the African Union and other
decision-making bodies, and to ensure that women
assume their rightful role in ensuring peace and
security in Africa.

S/PV.7160

“The number of victims of sexual violence
during armed conflict in Africa is staggering, and
tackling the issue of conflict-related sexual violence
is one of the critical areas of concern in my new
mandate, requiring urgent and effective action at
the community, national, regional and international
levels. Additional areas of my mandate relate to
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and
women’s participation in peace processes.
“I am therefore pleased to report that in
January of this year the AU Commission signed
a cooperation framework, with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on preventing and
responding to sexual violence in conflict and postconflict situations. That agreement complements
ongoing efforts by the African Union Peace and
Security Department, which is working to put in
place a code of conduct and zero-tolerance policy
that clearly outlines the AU’s strong position
against sexual violence, exploitation and abuse by
AU troops.
“The code of conduct and the zero-tolerance
policy will be shared with all troop-contributing
countries and integrated into all related training.
We are already seeing progress in that area with
the African Union Mission in Somalia, which
already has a policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse. Furthermore, the agreement strengthens
the collaboration and common commitment of the
African Union and the United Nations to combat
impunity, promote accountability, implement
capacity-building and training programmes, foster
improved coordination and national leadership and
ownership, facilitate the provision of multisectoral
services to survivors and alleviate their stigma and
trauma.
“Article 11 of the Protocol to the African Charter
on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of
Women in Africa — the Maputo Protocol — calls
on State parties to
‘protect asylum-seeking women, refugees,
returnees and internally displaced persons
against all forms of violence, rape and other
forms of sexual exploitation, and to ensure that
such acts are considered war crimes, genocide
and/or crimes against humanity and that their

14-3104635/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

perpetrators are brought to justice before a
competent criminal jurisdiction’.
“Implementation of the Protocol and all existing
AU instruments that address the issue of conflictrelated sexual violence must be accelerated. There
is still a long way to go and a lot of work to be done.
We must start by doing away with the tradition of
inequality between women and men, which is one
of the overarching reasons why violence against
women is widespread and so easily carried out. Our
young boys and men must be educated and engaged
in the fight against the culture of sexual violence.
“In discharging my mandate, I am committed
to looking beyond the view of women as only
victims and men as only victimizers. Instead, I
will recognize them as active agents in the fight to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence. Conflictprevention and early warning mechanisms must
fully involve both women and men and must
be approached through community efforts with
monitoring and financial support made available to
ensure their successful implementation.
“We must undertake progressive, aggressive
prevention measures and challenge societal norms
that portray girls as less valuable than boys,
causing them to develop low self-esteem and selfworth, thus further contributing to the cycle. We
also need to prosecute perpetrators and hold them
accountable for their actions in conflict-related
sexual violence.
“In recognition of the critical need to
investigate sexual-violence atrocities committed
in conflict situations, one of the objectives of the
AU Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan is to
document atrocities of sexual violence with a view
to ensuring the accountability of those responsible
and fighting impunity.
“We must ensure that the cries of the people
of South Sudan do not go unheard. We cannot say
that we do not know; and once we know, we have
no excuse — we have to act. The responsibility lies
with all of us.
“Moreover, we need to raise the profile of
women’s networks and civil society organizations,
which in many instances serve as first responders
to address the scourge of conflict-related sexual
violence and are the first to stand in solidarity

36/74

25/04/2014

with survivors. Sustained progress and action on
those issues requires the strengthening of local
initiatives and mechanisms to combat conflictrelated sexual violence, including those targeted
at protecting judicial independence, promoting
gender-sensitive school curricula, training civilian
police, sensitizing youth and combating stigma and
ethnic discrimination.
“The African Union has had a genderparity principle in force since 2002. The Solemn
Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa, adopted
in 2004, applies to all AU member States, and we
hope to see its full implementation reflected in
the approach to Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).
“If it is agreed that women’s rights are
human rights and that women are essential to the
establishment of peaceful societies, we need, in
our approach to tackling conflict-related sexual
violence, to enable the full participation of women
during peace processes. The African Union and the
United Nations should continue to build a critical
mass of women mediators and appoint more women
as lead mediators.
“As the Special Envoy, I am working very
closely with the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
regional bodies, national and international partners
and Africans from all walks of life to ensure
that women contribute meaningfully in peace
negotiations. Conflict-related sexual violence is
a global scourge and the approach to combating
it should, accordingly, be both local and global.
We count on the joint effort of the United Nations
and the AU. I count on the support of the Security
Council in implementing the women, peace and
security agenda across the continent.
“As we approach 2015, the Common African
Position on the Post-2015 Development Agenda
commits us to the eradication of all forms of violence
against women and children. The African Union’s
Agenda 2063, which represents a commitment
to build a prosperous and peaceful Africa, puts
particular emphasis on the engagement of women
and youth in the continent’s development.
“In conclusion, I humbly appeal to all here
present to continue your support of our efforts in

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

the fight against sexual violence, and I leave you
with the words of former President Nelson Mandela.
“‘As long as we take the view that these are
problems for women alone to solve, we cannot
expect to reverse the high incidence of rape
and child abuse. Domestic violence will not
be eradicated. We will not defeat this scourge
that affects each and every one of us, until we
succeed in mobilizing the whole of our society
to fight it.’”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Allow me to begin by thanking
you, Madame President, for organizing today’s open
debate of the Security Council. I also wish to thank
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her work, as well as the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/181) and
the speakers for their important contributions to the
discussion.
Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.
Two months ago, Italy released a revision of
its national action plan on the women and peace
and security agenda with a view to accelerating the
implementation of the plan over the next three years.
The revised plan not only reports on our progress but
also shows the efforts made to adopt a more effective
approach. The paradigm of our new national action
plan towards the realization of that agenda is based
on three concepts — coordination, integration and
mainstreaming.
First, with respect to coordination and integration,
our reference point at the national level is the
Interministerial Committee on Human Rights, which
coordinates within the various administrations all
activities relating to women and peace and security
issues. To facilitate communication and share
information, we are also setting up a specific online
roster of experts who will be made available to relevant
civil society organizations and Government ministries.
Lastly, our revised national action plan introduces a
self-evaluation exercise, by which we are committed
to a periodic self-monitoring of all initiatives. An
assessment report will be issued by the end of the year.

S/PV.7160

Secondly, with regard to mainstreaming, for some
years now, we have been mainstreaming gender-related
issues into all socioeconomic initiatives, and at the
international level we have definitively overcome the
limitations of separate targeted gender-emancipation
programmes. We are convinced that by using that
cross-cutting approach we will be more effective in
preventing all forms of violence.
We have promoted gender mainstreaming across
the armed forces, in training programmes carried out
by Centre of Excellence for Stability Police Units in
Vicenza, and in our police force, and by establishing
a specific gender-perspective unit at the Ministry of
Defence. I would also like to state that close to eight per
cent of Italian peacekeepers are women, which is above
the average ratio in peacekeeping operations.
Italy has been a strong advocate of initiatives on
women and peace and security since the beginning,
having been, inter alia, in 2010, the first country to
call for the women and peace and security agenda
to be introduced into the framework of the universal
periodical review mechanism. In 2015, the Security
Council will hold a high-level meeting to review the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). It will be a
moment — the moment — where we will have to provide
responses to the recommendations made and shape the
way forward. For the sake of brevity, in that respect, I
will make only two suggestions about weaknesses in
implementing the agenda, where we think still more
engagement is needed.
First, with respect to the lack of information,
as the observer of the European Union has stated,
we need to enhance data sharing, which can provide
critical support for the advancement of the agenda
by providing a clearer picture of the reality on
the ground and subsequently by exerting political
pressure where needed. Secondly, with respect to the
lack of accountability and the persistent impunity of
perpetrators, reversing the social dynamics so that
we can move from the stigmatization of the victims to
the criminalization of the perpetrators is an attainable
goal. In that fight, the International Criminal Court
has a unique role to play in complementing the efforts
of national courts when they are unable or unwilling
to bring perpetrators to justice. That is an aspect that
we tend to overlook and which does not always clearly
emerge in United Nations reporting.
In the firm belief that all of the elements of resolution
1325 (2000) must be systematically addressed in the

14-3104637/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

work of the Security Council, Italy stands ready to act.
We cannot afford to let those issues fall off the United
Nations agenda. Women and peace and security must
continue to remain a political priority for the Security
Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): At the outset, I would
like to thank the delegation of Nigeria for having
organized today’s open debate. My thanks also go to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms. Bangura, for their very insightful briefings. I also
thank Ms. Rhoda Misaka for the statement she made on
behalf of civil society.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s comprehensive
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181),
and we commend the United Nations staff in the various
agencies and in the field that have contributed to the
report in such detail.
Progress has been made in the fight against sexual
violence in conflict since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. However,
sexual violence has not been eliminated. It is time to
take stock of what has been achieved. Implementation
and the consolidation of measures to prevent and end
conflict-related sexual violence have to be our main
objectives. Let me make a few suggestions on how to
further advance the women and peace and security
agenda:
First, we cannot emphasize enough the importance
of the effective and meaningful participation of
women, in the interest of promoting gender equality,
which is the essence of resolution 1325 (2000), and
of ending sexual violence. Women themselves know
best what they and their children need in order to feel
safe, to protect themselves and their families, and to
rebuild their lives and their communities after a crisis.
They need a seat at the table at all levels of conflict
prevention, peace negotiation, transitional justice
and reconstruction. It is not enough to just let them
be observers of decision-making processes. That is
especially important not only at the local level but also
in the national and international context. The United
Nations needs to ensure that women are involved in all
United Nations-led peace and reconciliation talks.

38/74

25/04/2014

In efforts to achieve the active involvement of
women, civil society organizations can play an important
role. They can connect women’s organizations and train
women representatives and thereby empower women
to take their rightful place in all decision-making
processes.
Secondly, it is well known that sexual violence
is a prevalent element in most armed conflicts and is
sometimes even used as a tactic of warfare. Recent
events in South Sudan, where radio broadcasts were
used to incite sexual violence, are a stark reminder
of that appalling reality. Most perpetrators still go
unpunished and are not held accountable for their
actions. Those actions destroy the lives of women,
children and whole communities. Accountability is
the promising way to promote lasting reconciliation. If
hatred and fear prevail in a society, peace will not be
possible.
Accountability is first and foremost the
responsibility of each State. Therefore, national
capacities need to be supported and built. Justice- and
security-sector reforms are essential. When effective
prosecution in the State concerned is not possible, the
only way to achieve justice for victims and survivors
is to have those cases transferred to an international
jurisdiction, including to the International Criminal
Court.
Thirdly, the prevention of sexual violence,
especially by preventing conflict in the first place,
has to be the goal of all our efforts. In order to prevent
sexual violence in ongoing conflicts, the elimination
of gender-based imbalances in a society is crucial. To
that end, coordination between all relevant sectors is
essential. That includes security, service provision,
justice, human rights, development and peacebuilding.
We thank United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict for its work in ensuring such
coordination in order to achieve more efficient results
and a better use of resources, and we encourage all
United Nations agencies to continue their commitment
to that critical inter-agency initiative.
Fourthly, data collection is essential for our ability
to prevent, protect and respond and is the precondition
for any justice and accountability mechanism at the
national and international levels. Women protection
advisers therefore need to be deployed and monitoring
and reporting arrangements should be established
in all relevant peacekeeping and special political
missions. We welcome the mandating of women
14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

protection advisers in the newly established Mission
in the Central African Republic, which will face the
challenges of integrating women protection issues into
all disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform processes, and of ensuring
that the survivors of sexual violence have access to all
psychosocial and medical services in order to protect
their sexual and reproductive rights.
Germany has recently ratified the Arms Trade
Treaty, which has clear provisions related to serious
acts of gender-based violence or serious acts of violence
against women and children. We would like to call on
all States to follow our example and sign and ratify the
Treaty in a timely manner.
Germany
will
continue
its
support
to
UN-Women and all other relevant actors, including
civil society organizations, to ensure that women’s
active participation and their important contribution to
conflict resolution and peacebuilding are adequately
taken into account.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
Nigeria on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Malaysia welcomes its initiative
in convening an open debate on this important issue.
Malaysia also wishes to align itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
Violence against women is one of the most
widespread violations of human rights and most
broadly discussed topics. It is utterly deplorable that
one in three women and girls experiences violence in
her lifetime. Violence against women, especially sexual
violence, has massive repercussions. The incidence of
sexual violence in conflict, in particular, often has
grave consequences for the security of women and
girls during peacetime. Malaysia joins other Member
States in strongly condemning sexual violence against
women and girls, men and boys. My delegation remains
concerned that sexual violence is almost universally
under-reported. We must reverse this trend. We need
to urgently address the factors and underlying reasons
for the continued acts of sexual violence committed
against women and girls and the emerging incidence of
sexual violence perpetrated against men and boys.
Ending impunity is crucial to our quest to put an end
to sexual violence in conflict. We must move urgently

S/PV.7160

to replace the prevailing culture of impunity with one
that promotes the rule of law, justice and accountability.
We welcome the ongoing work of the United Nations
and other stakeholders, including the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which focuses its efforts on strengthening the capacity
of national rule of law and justice actors. We agree
with the Secretary-General’s recommendation and call
on countries to draw upon the expertise of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, as we believe that its engagement with
relevant Governments would strengthen the latter’s
institutional safeguards against impunity for conflictrelated sexual violence.
Underlining the importance of ending sexual
violence, Malaysia joined many others in endorsing the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which makes clear the collective view on the
need for greater action to address the issue. Malaysia
also welcomes the recent adoption of the Agreed
Conclusion of the 58th Session of the Commission on
the Status of Women, strongly condemning all forms
of violence against women and girls. It is crucial that
we now focus our collective efforts on converting those
political commitments into concrete actions.
My delegation supports the zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse in all peacekeeping
operations. We believe that it is fundamental to ensuring
that the rights and dignity of women are safeguarded.
Malaysia, in this regard, welcomes the delivery of
scenario-based training for peacekeepers in several
training centres to improve their operational readiness
to react swiftly to sexual violence. We commend the
work of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict in rolling out a framework of early-warning
indicators to help enhance prevention capabilities in
mission settings.
My delegation believes that this issue requires
continued vigilance on the part of the Security Council.
We are therefore pleased to note the progress made in
the implementation of the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements as mandated by resolution
1960 (2010) to promote increased and timely action to
prevent and respond to sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
We have made strides in addressing sexual violence
in conflict, but we can and must do more to put an end
to this scourge. Malaysia therefore reaffirms its strong
commitment to efforts to address sexual violence in

14-3104639/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

conflict and post-conflict situations. We will continue
to work with others to advance the agenda and ensure
the participation of women is mainstreamed in activities
towards securing peace and security.

Council itself has also acknowledged on numerous
occasions that the fight against impunity for sexual
violence crimes has been strengthened through the
work of the ICC.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.

However, the ICC will never be able to ensure
accountability on its own. To reverse the near complete
impunity that perpetrators of sexual violence currently
enjoy, it is important that States build the capacity to
ensure accountability. States lacking the necessary
national legislation to investigate and prosecute
perpetrators should therefore incorporate the ICC’s
provisions into their own legal systems. We would
emphasize here that the ICC Statute has some important
innovative provisions. For instance, the scope of
crimes of sexual violence in international law has been
expanded, acknowledging that sexual violence can be
committed against both men and women. It also provides
safeguards to ensure that victims of sexual violence can
testify without being put on trial themselves and with
minimal re-traumatization.

Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of Latvia and Estonia. Our
countries would like to join others in thanking you, Sir,
for organizing this open debate on the important issue
before us. We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered no behalf of the European Union.
We thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Misaka for their statements. We also thank
the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report on
which today’s discussion is based (S/2014/181).
Both of our countries agree with the SecretaryGeneral that important advances have recently been
made on the issue before us. It is crucial that we now
focus on converting these political commitments into
concrete action — that is, prevention and services on
the ground. Indeed, the Security Council, through its
five resolutions, has developed a robust framework to
prevent and address sexual violence in armed conflict.
However, gender crimes remain an enduring part of
most armed conflicts and rape continues to be used as
a weapon of war.
We are concerned by the alarming facts reflected
in the report that, despite the extensive legal framework
we have been able to agree on, violations continue,
or are even on the rise. Among other things, we have
been informed about an increase in reported incidents
of sexual violence in Afghanistan, and there are clear
indications that conflict-related sexual violence has
been a main feature of attacks in the Central African
Republic and a consistent characteristic of the crisis in
South Sudan.
Estonia and Latvia believe that accountability for
sexual violence crimes is crucial for deterring and
ultimately preventing their commission, and for doing
justice by victims. To date, sexual and gender-based
violence as a war crime or crime against humanity has
been prosecuted primarily at the international level. As
the only permanent international criminal tribunal, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) therefore has an
important role to play where States lack the capacity
or political will to hold perpetrators to account. The

40/74

By serving as a model for the international
community, the ICC’s accomplishments can therefore
be seen as part of a broad-based effort to adequately
address sexual violence at both the international and
domestic levels. Given its pivotal role, the Court should
enjoy the support and cooperation of all States, the
Council and international and regional organizations.
In order to enhance accountability, the Council could
adopt targeted measures against those responsible for
conflict-related sexual violence and include individuals
sought by the ICC on the sanctions lists.
The Secretary-General’s report describes the
increased incidents of forced marriage, campaigns
of forced pregnancy and the fact that lives are being
put at risk through unsafe abortions. We call on
everyone to respect what we have agreed concerning
the full enjoyment of human rights by all women and
girls. In addition, I would especially like to stress the
importance of quality sexual and reproductive health
services for survivors.
It is of utmost importance that peacekeepers
continue to be trained to enhance their capacity to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence,
that women protection advisers be deployed within
peacekeeping and special political missions, and that
ceasefire or peace agreements explicitly reflect sexual
violence considerations

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

Latvia and Estonia commend United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict and the efforts of
the United Nations system to establish the monitoring
and reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence, as mandated by resolution 1960 (2010). We
would also like to commend the work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict for assisting Governments in building national
capacity and expertise in addressing impunity for
those crimes. Estonia supported the Team of Experts
financially in 2013 and plans to do so again this year.
In conclusion, let me stress once more an evident
fact that, regrettably, does not yet seem to be very
evident to everyone in the world — the use of sexual
violence as a method of war must stop. It is an inhuman
practice that, as Ms. Bangura has rightly pointed out,
should belong to the history books and not to everyday
reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): In a few months, we will
mark 14 years since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) and four years since it adopted
resolution 1960 (2010). While those resolutions are
the subject of frequent discussions and debates within
these halls, sexual violence continues to be used as a
tool of subjugation and war. It is a crime of humanity
against humanity and a plague that must be eradicated.
If a nation refuses to prosecute domestic sexual abuse,
marital rape and honour killings in times of peace,
then there is little hope for justice in times of war and
conflict.
I look around the world today and see an epidemic
of sexual violence. The number of victims is so large
and overwhelming that we often lose sight of the fact
that we are speaking about individuals: the husband who
spoke out against an oppressive regime and is forced to
watch as his wife is raped by Government forces; the
brother who is sexually violated in a detention centre
to force a confession; the daughter who is subjected to
gang rape and then forced to deliver a child because
abortion services are illegal in her country; the sister
in a refugee camp who is forced by her family to marry
her rapist so as to protect the family’s honour.
Our family of nations is failing millions of families
throughout the world. The problem is particularly
widespread in the Middle East and Africa. In Yemen,
child abduction and sexual abuse are on the rise. In

S/PV.7160

Mali, young girls are being kidnapped and gang-raped.
In Somalia, women are being forced into marriage
and sexual slavery. In Syria, Government forces and
pro-Government militias have used sexual violence,
including rape, in detention centres and prisons across
the country.
By failing to prevent sexual violence, we are failing
an entire generation. In conflict situations, parents
keep their girls out of school to keep them safe. Without
an education, those girls are unlikely to find work and
more likely to become young mothers. And so the cycle
of poverty is passed from one generation to another.
Israel is proud to be among the 140 States that have
signed the Declaration on Sexual Violence in Conflict
initiated by Special Representative Zainab Bangura and
the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdon, William
Hague. While the number 140 may sound impressive,
we must note that 48 Member States have refused to
join the call to end sexual violence in conflict. There
is no place for sexual violence in a civilized world. We
must stand together to prevent those barbaric crimes,
and we must stand united with the victims of sexual
violence so they will know that they are not alone.
The alarming report that we are discussing today
(S/2014/181) finds that sexual violence is almost
universally underreported. The reasons are well
known — victims are denied legal recourse or face
stigmatization and reprisals. Few countries have
programmes like those in Sierra Leone, where women
can safely report an attack to a family support unit. The
Secretary-General’s report offers clear guidance on the
important steps that the international community must
take. Israel strongly supports the recommendations in
that report.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of Special Representative Bangura and United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
work they are doing, including training peacekeepers
and providing technical support at the country level,
is laying the foundation for improving the situation
on the ground. Israel also values the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, which is partnering with governments to
strengthen national legal systems.
The international community has a collective
responsibility to the victims of sexual violence in
conflict. All of us — Governments, civil society and
United Nations agencies — must work together to pass

14-3104641/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

stronger laws, strengthen enforcement mechanisms and
introduce tougher penalties for offenders. We must act
as a family of nations but, more importantly, we must be
a family of compassion. Every victim of sexual violence
has a name, a family and the right to live in peace and
dignity. Every one of them deserves our support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank
Nigeria for convening this open debate on women and
peace and security, with a particular focus on sexual
violence in conflict, an issue to which Portugal attaches
great importance. I also wish to warmly congratulate
Ms. Zainab Bengura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, on
the excellent work she has been carrying out.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement made this
morning by the observer of the European Union, but
I should like to make a few remarks in my national
capacity.
While acknowledging that important progress has
been made in the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security, we need to recognize
that significant challenges remain. Women are still
underrepresented at the several levels of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts, just as they are inadequately
represented in formal peace negotiations. The exclusion
of women from peace talks and peacebuilding efforts
often means that insufficient attention is paid to
addressing women’s needs and concerns in the postconflict phase, thereby reinforcing a circle of inequality
and marginalization. Moreover, the abuse of the rights
of women and girls is a dominant feature of conflict,
and sexual violence is often widespread and systematic
both in conflict and in periods of political instability.
Sexual violence and rape are prevalent in regions
of war as well as in refugee camps. Violence against
women, including rape and sexual slavery, is often
used as a weapon of warfare in order to dehumanize
women themselves or the communities to which
they belong. Importantly, high levels of sexual and
gender-based violence also rarely cease at the end of
hostilities and continue well into the post-conflict
phase. The costs of sexual and gender-based violence
are largely underestimated and ignored. Such violence
is surrounded by a culture of silence and impunity,
and the range and complexity of the underlying causes

42/74

25/04/2014

make it a difficult issue to address, particularly in
conflict-affected contexts where judicial and security
institutions are weak.
Durable peace and reconciliation are heavily
compromised if the perpetrators of such acts are not
prosecuted. Impunity for perpetrators and insufficient
response to the needs of survivors are unacceptable. The
grave violations of women’s human rights through mass
rape and other sexual violence require the immediate
attention of such organizations as the International
Criminal Court and other relevant tribunals.
Furthermore, international and national courts should
have adequate resources, access to gender expertise,
gender training for all staff, and gender-sensitive
programmes in order to more effectively prosecute
those responsible for such crimes.
Further prompt action on the part of all actors
is necessary to change the reality on the ground
for women and girls at risk of becoming victims of
violence or already affected. We need to redouble our
efforts, notably in the fight against impunity. Often,
in the name of peace amnesty is given to combatants
who had used sexual violence as a tactic of war. We
believe that there can be no sustainable peace without
justice for victims; targeted and graduated measures
should be imposed against all parties to a conflict that
are responsible for grave violations of women’s rights.
Perpetrators, including commanders who commission
or condone the use of sexual violence, should be held
accountable.
On these matters, zero tolerance has to be the
rule. We also need to strengthen support networks to
ensure that survivors of violence can return to take an
active part in public life, especially in peacebuilding
efforts. And we need to work with UN-Women and the
United Nations country team partners to help countries
to develop national action plans to coordinate the
implementation of all women and peace and security
resolutions.
Women have indeed a crucial role to play in
rebuilding war-torn societies and in preserving social
cohesion. They did it in Europe during and after two
world wars; they did it in South America; and they
have done it in Africa in countries divided by civilian
strife. They still do it on a daily basis in several
countries tormented by conflict. What is essential is to
guarantee that women are included in peace processes
and to ensure that their perspectives, direct knowledge

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

of the concrete situation and concerns are taken into
account as important contributions to the reshaping
of torn societies in post-conflict situations and in
peacebuilding efforts.
To conclude, Portugal has been striving to support
the promotion and protection of the human rights of
women and their political participation. In this context,
my country reaffirms its commitment to ensuring
women’s effective participation in peace and security
and to translate this commitment into enhanced action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): First I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on behalf of the
Moroccan delegation for convening this debate on
sexual violence in conflict, which is important for the
international community. This is the first time I am
speaking here in my capacity as the new Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Morocco, and I am
delighted to do so under your presidency and on a topic
chosen by Nigeria, to which my country attaches great
importance.
I should also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and Ms. Rhoda Misaka of the NGO Working Group on
Women, Peace and Security for their briefings.
We welcome the convening of this debate, which
enables us to take stock of the progress made and
difficulties encountered by Member States in protecting
women and childrenfrom sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/181) is an exhaustive list of events that
took place during the reporting period and of national
experiences that have much to teach us and which
reflect a desire to assume national ownership in ending
sexual violence on the part of the countries concerned.
Women often need protection and support; they
are the hardest hit by devastating impact of violence
and, regrettably, pay a high price for their increased
vulnerability and difficult living conditions. Protecting
women against sexual violence in conflict remains a
collective responsibility and requires us to act with
resolve, coordination and as one to strengthen measures
to stop the perpetrators and instigators of the violence
and to prevent such violence from recurring.

S/PV.7160

The Secretary-General’s report rightly underscores
that the slowness of progress made in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as the
impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of sexual violence,
promote a high-risk environment for women and girls.
Resolution 2106 (2013) seeks to strengthen the existing
legal arsenal protecting women against multiple types
of violence. The resolution has allowed us to define a
comprehensive prevention strategy through concrete,
targeted and situation-specific actions. The SecretaryGeneral’s report also underscores that rape is often
the most widespread use of violence in refugee and
internally displaced people camps. Unfortunately, these
camps offer no security to women, particularly single
women or heads of families, because of the proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, the infilftration of
armed elements among the refugee population, and
even the militarization of camps.
The reform of the security sector, accountability
and strengthening the access of victims to justice, as
well as awareness-raising of human rights and training
within national security institutions, would provide
better protection for victims. My delegation would
like to welcome the work done by the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
in assisting countries to strengthen their national
capacities, to promote transitional justice and to reform
the security sector.
The signing of peace and ceasefire agreements
and implementing programmes to prevent genderbased violence, and the drafting of codes of conduct for
security forces have helped to launch investigations to
establish the criminal responsibility of the perpetrators.
My delegation welcomes the efforts made by United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict in
training peacekeeping personnel so as to strengthen
their operational capability for rapid reaction and
response to prevent violence.
My delegation also wants follow-up, analysis and
information-sharing arrangements established pursuant
to resolution 1960 (2010) to be improved in order to
take better account of realities on the ground through
the collection of objective, viable and credible data. We
also want the orientation note on contact points between
these arrangements and the information-management
system on gender-based violence established by United
Nations Action to enable us to improve the ways in
which we gather and share information. Awarenessraising campaigns to protect women in conflict

14-3104643/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

depends on the involvement of public authorities and
national human rights institutions, civil society and
local women’s organizations, as well as religious heads,
who play a key role.

Ms. Bineta Diop to help in addressing conflict-related
sexual violence. Spain has also cooperated with the
African Union in such difficult areas as providing
gender advisers in Guinea Bissau, Mali and Somalia.

My delegation belives that the mandates of women
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations and
special political missions need to be clearly defined and
periodically evaluated in order to enable each context to
be borne in mind and to improve coordination between
among the advisers in carrying out their missions so as
to avoid any possible duplication of work on the ground
and to ensure better consistency in their work.

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/181) is
magnificent and lengthy. We have read it extremely
carefully. I should like to emphasize six elements that I
believe to be of vital importance.

While parties to conflict bear the primary
responsibility for violence against women and girls,
United Nations action must reflect the benefits
not only of dialogue and cooperation, but also of
deterrence through resort to legal means, prosecution
and incarceration for the perpetrators of these heinous
crimes. Accountability must be the principle on which
the United Nations should base its work. Combating
impunity must be an ongoing parameter for the work
of the international community in combating sexual
violence, strengthening access to justice systems in
place, promoting and strengthening the rule of law,
and restoring security, peace, stability and sustainable
development in the countries affected.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
debate, and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
for her important contributions.
Spain fully aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union. The full version
of my statement will be circulated in the Chamber, but
I should like to share what I believe to be its most vital
elements.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a violation of
human rights and possibly one of the most abhorrent.
My country therefore firmly supports the idea of
an optional protocol that would help to mitigate and
document violations of human rights. We believe that
if we are to effectively combat conflict-related sexual
violence, we need the cooperation of regional and
subregional organizations. Therefore, we particularly
welcome the appointment by the African Union of

44/74

First is the importance of prevention, as we all
know. Secondly, in post-conflict situations, which
are perhaps the most serious and most traumatic of
situations, we need to incorporate a specific provision
for care for victims. Thirdly, we must never forget the
victims themselves, whose situation is truly tragic and
alarming. Fourthly, we must keep in mind in particular
victims from vulnerable sectors, such as indigenous
groups or the disabled. Fifthly, it is important to ensure
appropriate training for armed forces because they
can play a definitive role in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Lastly, we need to combat helplessness.
I have two positive concluding remarks to make.
First, we have made progress and have certainly done so
because of the work of Ms. Bangura’s Office. Secondly,
we must duly exploit the current momentum. I should
also like to comment on remarks made by Ms. Bangura
and by the Ambassador of Malaysia.
Ms. Bangura said this morning that we need to
move from resolution to solution. I think we have a
sufficiently broad normative corpus of resolutions and
decisions that enable us, legally speaking, to address
this very tragic phenomenon. The Ambassador of
Malaysia said something that I wholeheartedly endorse,
to the effect that we must have zero tolerance for sexual
violence in conflict, which, I repeat, is one of the most
heinous and tragic violations of human rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): It is my great honour to
address the Council today on behalf of the Human
Security Network. Our cross-regional network consists
of Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan, Mali,
Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland, Thailand,
South Africa as an observer, and my own country,
Austria. Women’s full enjoyment of all human rights
remains at the core of our group’s agenda.
Let me first thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

Ms. Bangura, and Ms. Rhoda Misaka for their
comprehensive statements.
The Human Security Network welcomes recent
progress on the women and peace and security agenda,
including the most recent resolutions 2106 (2013) and
2122 (2013). The Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict issued in September 2013
was also an important landmark, and we look forward
to these commitments being converted into concrete
actions, including through the Global Summit to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is to take place in
June.
We are appreciative of the efforts of Special
Representative Bangura and the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/181). Conflict-related sexual violence
is pervasive, although, as the report clearly states, it
is almost universally underreported due to factors
such as stigma, reprisals and the targeting of survivors
and those who support them, including humanitarian
workers, human rights defenders and journalists. We
welcome the progress and commitments made by States
and the work of United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
However, our group is concerned about elements in
the report indicating the systematic and widespread use
of sexual violence as a tool of intimidation and social
control. In addition, the report highlights the continued
use of sexual violence as a means of displacing
populations, as well as the pregnancies resulting from
sexual violence and the plight of children born of rape,
which requires much more attention. We call on all
parties to cease such sexual violence-related violations
and to hold perpetrators to account.
Ceasefire and peace agreements should contain
provisions that stipulate conflict-related sexual violence
as a prohibited act in the definition of a ceasefire, and
amnesty provisions must not be applicable to crimes
of sexual violence. Furthermore, parties to conflict
have to provide remedy and assistance to victims
and survivors of sexual violence, including healthcare services. We also call upon the members of the
Security Council to use all means at their disposal to
address sexual violence in armed conflicts, including
by making referrals to the International Criminal Court
and other relevant actions.
We welcome the recommendations in the report,
including those on steps that can be taken by the Security

S/PV.7160

Council to reinforce and implement the prevention
framework outlined in resolution 2106 (2013). Let
me also highlight that women’s empowerment and
participation are essential to any prevention and
protection response.
Regarding our own behaviour as an organization,
we encourage the Secretary-General and all other
relevant actors to ensure the full implementation of
the zero-tolerance policy against any kind of sexual
exploitation or abuse. According to the report contained
in document A/68/756, concerning allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations system,
despite a slight increase in 2013 there has been a
general downward trend in the number of allegations of
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse received in recent
years. Nonetheless, one substantiated case is one case
too many and is unacceptable.
Strengthening civil society, including grass-roots
women’s organizations and networks that provide
assistance to victims and survivors of sexual violence
in conflict, can enable the restoration of dignity and
respect and provide the necessary skills, treatment and
care to empower individuals to protect themselves and
defend their rights.
To conclude, I should like to reiterate our group’s
commitment to promoting and enhancing the role of
women in peace processes. The importance of women’s
participation in decision-making in conflict resolution
processes cannot be overstated. We also remain strong
supporters of women protection advisers within the
United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
and believe that their positions should be financed from
within mission budgets. We must all strive towards
enabling stronger protection for women and girls in
conflict situations while simultaneously addressing
the drivers of sexual violence before it occurs, and the
Human Security Network will continue to contribute to
this shared goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia has just lived through five decades of armed
conflict that particularly affected the most vulnerable
groups among our people, children and women, who
are nearly always in the most isolated and rural areas.
We face many huge challenges. Obviously, a country
that has experienced such prolonged conflict has also
suffered from the aberrant conduct of illegal armed

14-3104645/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

groups, which particularly affect our women and girls.
Therefore, as a representative of my Government, but
first and foremost as a woman and Colombian citizen,
I should like to emphasize the fact that we are guided
by our firm conviction that we should not tolerate the
existence of one single victim. Colombia aspires to an
end of conflict and the acheivement of lasting peace.
That is why, in reading the report (S/2014/181)
we are discussing in this open debate, convened by
the Nigerian presidency, I should have liked to have
seen recognition of the progress made by Colombia
in its public policy, domestic legislation and the
implementation of both. We should also like to have
seen the report reflect the crucial political juncture that,
as we move towards peace after 50 years of conflict,
initiated by President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón,
and which we hope will lead to a peace agreement with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia.
This is a position of principle with respect not only to
sexual violence against women in conflict, but also to
all victims in general.
First, Colombia adopted a victims and land
restitution law in 2011, which included such huge
advances as in a programme to heal and fully reintegrate
victims and survivors of sexual violence in particular,
highlighting the problem and earmarking the necessary
resources for compensation, 57 per cent of which go to
women.
Secondly, in 2013, the year covered by the report,
the Colombian Government through its National
Council on Economic and Social Policy, which
guides all Government policies nationally and locally
where conflict generally breaks out, promulgated an
inter-institutional strategy to combat impunity and
provide comprehensive care to victims of genderbased violence in the framework of armed conflict,
in particular victims of sexual violence. The strategy
seeks to identify the barriers that often hinder access to
justice and care for women victims of sexual violence.
Thirdly, in an historic achievement, the Defence
Ministry issued a protocol for the armed forces on
the prevention of and response to sexual violence, in
particular in conflict, which was drafted with civil
society and the United Nations office in Colombia.
Capacity-building was implemented for 350,000
soldiers and police officers in order to ensure its due
implementation.

46/74

25/04/2014

Fourthly, our Ministry for Foreign Affairs, led by
Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, began in 2011 to
promote initiatives to prevent the participation of boys
and girls in armed conflict — which, as Ms. Bangura
knows, often occurs — through a comprehensive
programme that provides opportunities and safe havens
for boys, girls and adolescents in districts where there
is likely to be a high level of recruitment of minors.
We call these safe havens “leisure houses” where
children can come into contact with art, sports and
new technologies during after-school hours, which are
often prolonged in our villages and countryside. These
havens are very well designed, with the help of our
communities. This year, they will be established in 25
municipalities.
Fifthly, I should like to emphasize the active role
of two women, plenipotentiaries of the Government
of Colombia in the peace process. They represent
a necessary complementary perspective in the
decision-making process to put an end to conflict in
my country. All of this demonstrates the Colombian
Government’s political resolve to deal with the
phenomenon here.
I should not like to conclude without referring to
the recommendations in the report, and in particular
that on the 2012 the legal framework for peace and its
implementation. To paraphrase Ms. Bangura, we need
to move from legislation to implementation. We need to
strengthen the institutional and legal framework so that
all citizens can enjoy the necessary means to be sure of
access to truth, justice and reparation for all conflictrelated sexual violence. This is our daily priority. As
the report suggests, Ms. Bangura can certainly rely
on our commitment to continuing to comply with the
various Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1960 (2010), and to coordinate with the
United Nations agencies, always provided that they are
in full agreement in the national authorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to congratulate the Nigerian
presidency on having convened this debate, and to
thank all those, particularly women, who work day in
and day out to promote peace and security. Our thanks
also go to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
for her contributions.

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) , the
women and peace and security agenda has clearly
progressed both in reach and depth and now occupies
a recognized place among the panoply of legal and
political instruments and specific actions carried out
by the Organization to champion the importance of
adopting a gender perspective in which the needs of
women and girls are included in all conflict situations,
and particularly in post-conflict rehabilitation and
reconstruction.
Lamentably, despite the progress made in recent
years, as a troop-contributing country we can say that in
the areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding, civilians,
in particular women and girls, continue to be those
most severely affected by conflict and in post-conflict
situations. Likewise, the reports on women and children
show that they remain the most vulnerable sector in such
situations and the main physical and emotional victims
of sexual violence. Next year will mark the fifteenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
which will offer us the opportunity to assess good
practices, the progress achieved, and the shortcomings
and challenges remaining, and to consider identifying
new goals.
The situation of children born as a result of
violence is of great concern to us. They suffer social
stigma with grave economic and serious psychological
consequences. This is also true of forced marriages
of women and girls carried out by armed groups in
the situation of women victims of trafficking, sexual
slavery and forced displacement. We emphasize the
need for greater attention to be paid to restoration of the
rights and rehabilitation of victims of serious violations,
in particular in cases of abuse and sexual exploitation.
It is important to stress that in post-conflict
situations the number of women head of families
is on the rise. It is therefore critical to guarantee the
economic and social rights of women in such contexts.
Moreover, promoting accountability is another vital
element, and to that end the United Nations system
must continue to combat impunity for the perpetrators
of such violations, promote national capacity-building,
and work with regional actors to promote international
justice mechanisms and support the work of women’s
human rights organizations.
Uruguay considers the women and peace and
security agenda to be part and parcel of a broader agenda
closely linked to those on children in armed conflict
and the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We

S/PV.7160

therefore believe that it is vital to move forward in as
coordinated a way as possible to achieve synergy, avoid
duplication of efforts, and most effectively to avail
ourselves of the United Nations instruments in the
field. One of these — peacekeeping operations — is
certainly very significant, in which civilian protection
mandates have been incorporated in recent years, with
particular attention to women and children.
Significant progress has been made. However,
regular attacks on civilian populations, particularly
in zones of deployment of missions, highlight the
ongoing limitations to meeting the expectations of
locals populations and the international community.
Many of these limitations can be corrected by clear and
predictable strategies that are attuned to each mission;
better coordination among the various actors in the field,
particularly in relations with the host State, which bears
the primary responsibility for protection; and greater
resources, which are absolutely necessary, among
other measures. Particular attention must also be paid
to the need for full adherence to the code of conduct
on the part of all those in United Nations contingents
deployed in the field, on the basis of zero tolerance.
We are therefore concerned by the persistance of sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping missions.
The natural feedback between protection and
participation is probably the core concept emerging from
resolution 1325 (2000), in which the Council reaffirmed
the important role played by women in preventing and
resolving conflicts and in peacebuilding. In that regard,
we are concerned over the low representation of women
at various levels. Uruguay has been in the vanguard
of incorporating women into the armed forces, as
evidenced in the number of women deployed by the
armed forces and the national police in the Uruguayan
contingents of peacekeeping missions. In our capacity
as volunteers, we have developed and documented
very significant statistics revealing our commitment
to the goals of these missions. We therefore reiterate
the importance of continuing to promote the greater
participation of women in the various areas linked to the
peace processes, providing an undeniable qualitative
contribution.
In conclusion, we remain committed to the
development and implementation of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict agenda, with particular
attention to women and children. We do so by means
of our work here at Headquarters and through our Blue
Helmets in the field. We also reiterate the importance of

14-3104647/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

establishing the broadest possible basis for this agenda.
The participation of so many countries in today’s debate
bears witness to that commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal): First of all, I wish to
thank the Nigerian presidency for organizing this
important debate of the Security Council today. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and Ms. Rhoda Misaka of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
for their comprehensive briefings this morning.
For far too long, the role of gender in conflict has
remained the least studied, least understood and least
utilized in the realm of peace and security. I note the
progress made both in protecting women and girls
and in giving women the protection roles in United
Nations missions since the adoption of the landmark
resolution 1325 (2000). Yet, women and girls continue
to be the targets of choice of sexual and other violence
in conflict. It is only through concerted work that we
can succeed in eliminating all forms of violence against
women and girls during or after conflict.
Nepal believes that the United Nations system
should play the central role in dealing with sexual
violence in conflict. For this purpose, it should continue
to empower women by encouraging equality and by
implementing the human rights instruments already in
place. Women must be sent to the field as peacekeepers
and peacemakers in greater numbers. There must be
more women in the United Nations system, also at the
policy level. They must be the agents of positive change.
Only in developing a competitive edge by acquiring the
requisite skills will women be able to take advantage
of their opportunities and play their entrusted roles
effectively. At the end of the day, it is the quality that
sustains the gains of women to create a safer global
community.
Nepal has excellent experience with its national
plan of action to implement resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) — the first in South Asia. Encouraged by
positive results, the Government is now localizing them
at subnational levels. Our top priorities are increasing
the participation of women in decision-making
processes, protecting women and girls from sexual and
gender-based violence with a zero-tolerance policy and
ending impunity. Crucially, Nepal has also introduced

48/74

25/04/2014

policy measures to provide relief to the victims of
conflict.
Since the peace process started eight years ago,
Nepal has steadily moved forward in empowering
women, including those affected by conflict. The
interim Constitution requires that women constitute
33 per cent of candidates at all levels of election,
including the Constituent Assembly. Moreover, this
proportion must also hold in each district-level peace
committee, thus enabling women to address local
level post-conflict issues across the board. As an
active troop- and police-contributing country, Nepal is
increasing the number of women in its army and police
forces, who also serve in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. The peacekeeping training package includes
courses on the protection of women and girls from
sexual violence, during and after conflict.
While the new Constituent Assembly is engaged
in delivering a constitution as desired by the people of
Nepal, instruments for transitional justice are also in
the making. The Government’s total and unflinching
commitment to promoting and protecting human rights
has engendered mechanisms, from the centre to the
grass-roots level, designed to combat gender and sexual
violence.
Emerging from conflict, Nepal knows well that
even with the best of measures, the emotional and
physical turmoil victims suffer due to sexual violence
cannot be healed ex post facto. An enduring solution
necessitates the implementation of robust preventive
policies, which Nepal fully supports. Likewise, Nepal
stands ready to join hands in all efforts to ensure that
sexual violence in conflict is shunned everywhere and
at all times, that perpetrators are brought to justice, and
that the victims are protected and fully rehabilitated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I should like to thank the
Secretary General and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for their
insightful briefings, and commend the United Nations
Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict for their valuable work.
We welcome the increased attention being paid to
the issue of women and peace and security in conflict
and post-conflict situations by the Security Council
and beyond. However, stronger efforts are needed

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

to address the ongoing systematic and widespread
violations. Women and girls continue to be specifically
targeted in conflicts and sexual violence is often used
as a tactic of war. Women and girls are also vulnerable
in post-conflict situations, especially in contested
political processes, ceasefires and the early days of the
implementation of peace agreements.
Sadly, the tragedy unfolding every day right across
our border in Syria constitutes a vivid example of the
urgency of the issue, as mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report (S/2014/181). It is high time
to focus on the ways and means of implementation
by sharing best practices and talking about specific
measures. Needless to say, the elimination of the root
cause of conflicts is the best way to prevent sexual
violence and address impunity.
Secondly, every conflict resolution effort or peace
and mediation process has a gender dimension. As such,
ensuring and increasing women’s participation in all
aspects of decision-making and policy processes related
to the protection of international peace and security
is necessary. The importance of ensuring women’s
effective participation in peace processes and conflict
resolution, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, recovery
and mediation efforts was emphasized recently by the
Commission on the Status of Women. We hope that this
call will be reflected in other relevant texts as well.
Further emphasizing the particular vulnerabilities
and addressing the specific needs of women and girls
in the protection of civilians framework is a third way
forward. Three sets of efforts are of particular, practical
importance, namely: disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts; security sector reform; and
capacity-building in the judicial sector. We applaud
the strong will expressed by the Secretary-General to
continue and strengthen efforts to implement the policy
of zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In fact, all
international and regional operations should prioritize
this issue.
The Secretary-General’s report emphasizes violence
against women and girls, particularly sexual violence,
as a driving factor of displacement and the need to put
into place effective measures of protection regarding
displaced persons. Let me take this opportunity to
touch upon some measures and best practices that
Turkey has employed in the camps established for the
Syrians fleeing this crisis, as relevant to the women and
peace and security agenda.

S/PV.7160

Information sessions are provided to Syrian families
and women in the camps on issues such as maternal
health, child mortality, the human rights of women and
girls, and domestic violence. In addition, measures
to discourage early and family-forced marriages
are undertaken. Turkish personnel employed at the
camps are regularly trained on the legal framework of
international protection and gender-related issues, in
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Practical training is also
given on the prevention of gender-based violence to
camp staff at all levels, as well as to security personnel
attached to camp settings, including soldiers, police
and gendarmerie.
To prevent assaults within camps and to protect
vulnerable groups, public areas are continuously
lighted and under closed-circuit television surveillance.
Special security units are present. In order to facilitate
access to justice for survivors, law enforcement
facilities are located in the camp areas to deal with
potential complaints and protection requests. Outside
the camps, Turkey has established violence monitoring
and prevention centres in 14 provinces where significant
populations of Syrians live. We have more than 90
shelter houses, with a capacity of more than 2,400
beds, that may house Syrian women fleeing domestic
or sexual violence. Also, women security personnel
are deployed to respond to potential specific needs of
women.
In situations of displacement, although primary
health care is usually available, the capacity and
resources to provide reproductive health and
psychosocial support services are often lacking. We
have prioritized these services for victims who were
targeted before and during their flight. Finding solutions
in displacement contexts is a broad issue that requires
holistic solutions. Women must be better integrated into
decision-making structures, society and the economy.
In that respect, we prioritize women’s participation in
camps, with their inclusion in decision-making and
camp administration. Vocational training is available
in order to foster the economic empowerment of
women. Finally, the enrolment and continuation of girls
in school is prioritized as the best way to ensure longterm gender equality.
I am surprised by the baseless accusations of the
regime’s representative on organ transplant operations
in Turkey. Turkey is a democratic country and an open
society. What we do for the brotherly Syrian people in

14-3104649/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

Turkey does not need further explanation. It takes place
before the eyes of the international community and
in close cooperation with international organizations,
including the United Nations agencies. I therefore
entrust the evaluation of the remarks spoken before the
Council to the members of the Security Council and the
wider international community.
In conclusion, I thank the Nigerian presidency,
Member States and all relevant United Nations bodies,
in addition to the stakeholders at the local, national,
regional and global levels that prioritize the issue of
violence against women in conflict. Our special thanks
go to Special Representative Bangura, whose dedication
to fight against sexual violence in conflicts we strongly
support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this important meeting of the Security Council to
highlight one of the most serious challenges threatening
international peace and security. We also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2104/181), which
provides important information that reflects the
enormous challenges impeding the global containment
of this scourge.
Sexual violence in conflict is a crime that has
harmed far too many people for thousands of years. It
knows no borders or age limitations and is not related
to any specific culture or ethnic group. This crime is
perpetrated without punishment and is used as a tactic
of war to destroy the fabric of society and deprive it of
the ability to heal and rebuild.
The United Arab Emirates expresses its grave
concern over the continued use and spread of this
heinous crime, which targets not only women and
girls, but also men and boys, and stresses the need to
develop an international response within the context of
the relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue.
While we strongly commend the notable efforts made
by Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
Team of Experts Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict and the 13 United Nations
entities to build the resilience of countries to such
violence, we reiterate our support for the international
protocol, to be launched in the United Kingdom at the
forthcoming Global Summit to End Sexual Violence

50/74

25/04/2014

in Conflict, on the documentation and investigation of
sexual violence in conflict in a manner commensurate
with the practical measures that the United Kingdom has
taken to address this issue and which have received the
strong support of our Foreign Minister, His Highness
Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
Today we have the political will and a clear
international framework which allows us to move from
simply condemning this crime to confronting it within
the framework of three main pillars.
First, legal deterrence has been actualized in
the establishment of the tribunals of Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, as well as the Special Court for Sierra Leone,
as a practical and first international step towards
strengthening global compliance with international
criminal law and preventing impunity for those who
commit criminal behaviour during conflict. We
therefore call for strengthening the jurisprudence of
criminal law as well as existing international legal
and judicial mechanisms, including the role played by
the International Criminal Court, to identify gaps and
develop a robust legal framework for preventing sexual
violence during conflict.
Secondly, national authorities must be strengthened
in the areas of legislation and security sector reform, to
ensure their ability to meet the requirements necessary
for preventing a culture of impunity and the promotion
of the culture of deterrence, accountability and
achieving justice and the rule of law. That should lead
to a perception of women as agents in the campaign
against sexual violence, not only as victims.
In that contex, we call for increasing the resources
and capacities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to strengthen her mandate to provide
assistance and to build resilience, not only in countries
suffering from conflicts but also in neighbouring
countries and refugee camps to which conflict may
spread. We hope that the open meeting of the Security
Council to be held on Monday on security sector reform
will deliberate on this subject, and in particular on the
promulgation of military codes of conduct, including in
peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, there is a need to develop an international
mechanism for providing adequate protection and
support at all levels to the victims of this crime in order
to reintegrate them into their communities.

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns
the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war in Syria,
and declares its support for all efforts being made to
collect data on these crimes in the pursuit of justice at
a later stage. We will continue to provide financial and
psychological support to affected Syrians in refugee
camps in order to guarantee their reintegration and
rehabilitation.
In conclusion, we will support all efforts and
initiatives undertaken to strengthen international
debates about this dangerous phenomenon and in finding
practical solutions for preventing the recurrence of this
crime. To achieve this purpose, we must innovate and
work across borders to extract the price of justice. The
United Arab Emirates is committed to playing a key
role in that important endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
My delegation first would like to thank Nigeria for
convening this debate and for providing Belgium with
an opportunity to take part in it. Combating sexual
violence in conflict is indeed a priority for Belgium.
My country would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181) and Ms. Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for her unfailing commitment to
the cause.
My delegation fully supports the statement made by
the observer of the European Union. I would therefore
like to focus my statement on some points that are of
particular importance for Belgium.
First and foremost, combating impunity is a
priority for my country. Security Council resolution
2106 (2013), adopted last year, called for the pursuit
of efforts in combating the impunity of perpetrators
of sexual violence in conflict. Belgium is particularly
concerned about sexual violence committed by
members of the police, the army and some armed
groups, in particular in Afghanistan and in Côte
d’Ivoire. The climate of impunity, characterized by a
lack of disciplinary procedures, sanctions and criminal
prosecution, significantly contributes to creating a
high-risk environment for women and girls.
Belgium would also like to underscore the
importance of ensuring access to effective justice for
victims of sexual violence. My country is seriously

S/PV.7160

concerned by the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which is one of the three target countries
of the national Belgian action plan called “Women,
peace and security”. There is a great gulf between
the legislative framework and implementing that
framework. Numerous victims have limited access to
justice, in particular because of a lack of resources to file
a law suit and to get legal aid. Developing appropriate
mechanisms to assist victims and to facilitate access to
justice is crucial. Implementing a functioning judicial
system is also needed in the Central African Republic,
where the victims of sexual violence are very vulnerable
to being stigmatized and to reprisals.
Furthermore, Belgium shares the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns regarding the link between sexual
violence and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combattant programmes and
security sector reform (SSR) programmes. There is a
real need to pay particular and additional attention to
the gender dimension when planning, training for and
developing DDR and SSR programmes.
Belgium would also like to state its concerns about
the impact of conflicts on the rights of the child, in
particular regarding forced marriages, prostitution
and the exploitation of girls. The presence of armed
groups increases the rate of forced and early marriages
in a number of countries — for example, Syria
and Yemen — where conflict has had devastating
consequences for the poorest and most vulnerable girls.
Belgium would like to underscore, as the SecretaryGeneral did, that the end of a conflict does not mean an
end of sexual violence. Post-conflict situations create
high-risk environments. That must be borne in mind in
order to have a comprehensive, consistent approach to
combating sexual violence. Along those lines, Belgium
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation
regarding including the prevention of sexual violence
in all peace and cease-fire agreements. Furthermore,
as an ardent champion of resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, Belgium pays particular
importance to the participation of women in all stages
of the peace process. Women must have the possibility
to decide their own fate and to contribute to preventing
and resolving conflicts as well as to building peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mrs. Anđelić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this important

14-3104651/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

debate. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, and
Ms. Rhoda Misaka for their statements.

recognized as an element of genocide. The impact of
those two rulings was that hundreds of victims got the
courage to testify against perpetrators throughout the
world.

We take note of the report (S/2014/181) of
the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual
violence, submitted to the Security Council for the
information of its members, as well as the analysis and
recommendations contained therein.

Women’s
political,
social
and
economic
empowerment, gender equality and the mobilization
of men and boys in an effort to combat all forms of
violence against women are essential in long-term
efforts to prevent sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations. Therefore, we fully
support the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions on women and peace and
security. As a member of the Executive Board, we shall
continue to support all the efforts of UN-Women in this
area as well.

We recognize and welcome the fact that this
year the Security Council will be more focused on
consolidation efforts aimed at the implementation of
its resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013). That will
be a genuine contribution to the global commitment to
end sexual violence in conflict. We are fully committed
to addressing all forms of violence against women
and girls, including sexual violence in conflict. The
protection of women in conflict situations and ending
impunity remain our utmost priorities.
In our efforts to end impunity we acknowledge the
active advocacy efforts of the United Nations, inter
alia with Governments, in addressing sexual violence
in armed conflict, particularly of the mandates of
the Secretary-General’s Special Representatives for
Children and Armed Conflict and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We shall continue to cooperate closely with
them in the future as well.
We are also committed to the provisions of the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict adopted by the Foreign Ministers of the Group
of Eight in London on 11 April 2013.
We believe that the prosecution of sexual violence
crimes, as well as national ownership and responsibility
in addressing the root causes of sexual violence in
armed conflict, are central to the prevention of such
acts in the future. Sexual violence in armed conflict
cannot be accepted as a cultural phenomenon. It is not
an inevitable consequence of war or a lesser crime.
Therefore, we advocate the importance of the victim’s
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings.
In that context, we want to underline the
importance of rulings of the international
tribunals — the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda — which defined sexual violence
as an instrument of warfare and rape as a crime against
humanity. In the Akayesu case, sexual violence was

52/74

We are aware that States bear the primary
responsibility to respect and ensure the human rights
of all individuals within their territory. Addressing the
injustices of sexual violence in armed conflict is critical
on two levels. First, it provides support to persons
who are survivors of such atrocities; and, secondly, it
furthers the transformation from a State affected by
violence to one of lasting peace.
Sexual violence is a form of psychosocial torture
where the suffering of the victims extends to their
families, and through families reflects the entire
society, while the suffering does not cease after the act
of violence is committed. The victims very often have
to fight the outside factor — the stigma of society where
the victim is blamed and penalized but the perpetrator
is free to have a normal life. That is why we strongly
believe that an effective national strategy to end sexual
violence must include programmes to challenge the
existing culture of impunity for these crimes. It must
emphasize the role of all, men and women, as active
contributors to change.
We have a track record of definitive action in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security. We were the first country in SouthEast Europe to develop a comprehensive national action
plan for its implementation.
For example, our national action plan mandates that
the topics of gender equality and the prohibition of sexual
harassment, gender-based violence and discrimination
be incorporated into curriculums of policy academies.
It requires that a zero-tolerance approach be applied to
any form of illicit sexual behaviour of peacekeeping
mission personne. And it calls for the creation and

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

improvement of programmes to provide psychosocial
support and economic empowerment to women who are
survivors of trafficking or sexual violence.
With the aim of improving the overall situation of
women victims of rape, we are making efforts to finalize
the process of developing our second action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) for the
period 2014-2017, which contains important provisions
for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. We are
also working on a programme for improving the status
of women victims of wartime rape, sexual violence and
other forms of torture for the period 2013-2016.
Involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation and the deployment of women’s protection
advisers to United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions is crucial to building and reinforcing
peace. We have been working on additional efforts
to advance this issue and have adopted a policy that
one third of nominated candidates for peacekeeping
missions must be women.
This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina presented a
candidate for the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). If elected,
our candidate will place her priority on prevention
and raising awareness of these most important issues.
She will continue fighting against prejudice and
impunity. My country attaches great significance to
this candidature and thus hopes to advance the CEDAW
agenda.
With regard to the provisions of the report of
the Secretary-General and to the visit of Special
Representative Zainab Bangura to Bosnia and
Herzegovina in June 2013, our authorities provided
comments and additional remarks to the Office of the
Special Representative.
Finally, I should like to point out that the
international community must permanently work on
strengthening United Nations efforts to address sexual
violence in armed conflict. Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
In addition, I should like to inform the Council that
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the statement
delivered today by the delegation of the European
Union.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.

S/PV.7160

Mr. Milanović (Serbia): I should like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and Ms. Zaina
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Rhoda
Misaka for their comprehensive briefings.
Serbia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the delegation of the European Union. In my
statement, I shall add a few remarks on behalf of my
country.
Serbia supports the fight against all forms of
violence, especially against sexual and gender-based
violence in all circumstances. Sexual violence in
armed conflict presents one of the most serious forms
of violation and abuse of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. In recent years,
prevention and suppression and an adequate response
to sexual violence in conflict has been the subject of
intensive deliberations in the Security Council. We
welcome the efforts made to that end. We support the
activities undertaken by the Secretary-General and
have followed the actions of Ms. Bangura very closely.
Significant efforts have also been made by Member
States, civil society and non-governmental organizations
in preventing and fighting this crime. However, much
more must be done in order to fully eliminate sexual
violence in conflicts. My country believes that the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence is of the
utmost importance. We support the efforts invested
within the United Nations to engage with State and
non-State parties and obtain commitments to prevent
and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
We also support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to include the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violence in the mandates of peacekeeping
and special political missions, as well as to continue
with the deployment of women protection advisers in
peacekeeping missions and the training of all United
Nations peacekeeping personnel using the innovative
tools developed by United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence partners.
The victims of sexual violence in conflicts are by
and large non-combatants, in particular vulnerable
population groups such as women and children. We
are deeply concerned that refugees and internally
displaced persons are at increased risk of sexual
violence in conflicts. In some cases, that has led to
human trafficking and sexual slavery. All victims of
sexual violence must be provided with psychosocial,

14-3104653/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

economic and legal assistance and non-discriminatory
health care, including appropriate services for children
and male survivors.
We firmly believe that international activities
aimed at addressing sexual violence in conflicts must
be coordinated among Governments, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
based on valid information and measurable results.
Proceeding from resolution 1325 (2000), in 2010
Serbia adopted its national action plan for the 2010-2015
period concerning the implementation of the resolution.
In addition, Serbia also implements its national strategy
for the prevention and suppression of violence against
women in the family and intimate partner relationships,
adopted in May 2011.
By signing the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict in September last year,
144 States, including Serbia, pledged to do more on the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict and to better
support the victims. In that way, a strong message was
sent that sexual violence in conflict is unacceptable
and that those responsible will be brought to justice,
prosecuted and punished appropriately. We believe
that it is necessary to work towards preventing these
crimes precisely by raising awareness that they cannot
go unpunished. The role played by Governments and
by international criminal justice in that regard is very
important.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate
and for giving us the opportunity to participate. At the
outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2014/181).
My delegation acknowledges the significant gains
recorded in the past decade towards building political
momentum in the fight against the scourge of sexual
violence in conflict. Undoubtedly, that has contributed
to a more focused, coherent and integrated approach
across the United Nations system in addressing this
complex and persistent challenge.
The recent report of the Secretary-General warrants
serious consideration, given the overwhelming evidence
that sexual violence in situations of armed conflict
and post-conflict remains systemic and widespread
in many parts of the world. We are conscious that the

54/74

25/04/2014

consequences of those egregious crimes are devastating
for affected communities.
While the report of the Secretary-General
strongly underscores the need for a comprehensive,
multi-sectoral and multi-dimensional framework
approach to address the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict settings, we concur with
the Secretary-General’s observation that national
ownership, leadership and responsibility are key in
the prevention of sexual violence. Ultimately, Member
States bear the primary legal and moral responsibility
for preventing and addressing such crimes.
In the broader framework of prevention, we have
long advocated for the explicit referencing of sexual
violence in conflict in all the relevant country-specific
resolutions, as well as in the authorizations and
renewals of the mandates of peacekeeping and special
political missions.
We recognize the valuable contribution of the
five-point priority agenda of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict as a strategy to address sexual
violence in conflict. However, as highlighted in the
report of the Secretary-General, we believe that
priority must be given to fostering national ownership,
leadership and responsibility to ensure sustainability.
My delegation commends the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in enhancing the capacity-building of civilian
and military justice systems to address sexual violence.
We believe, however, that significantly more needs to
be done by Member States, the United Nations system
and the relevant entities in supporting national efforts
by States to increase women’s participation, leadership
and expertise in the rule of law and transitional justice,
as well as in advancing accountability measures for
serious offences committed against the victims of
sexual violence.
My delegation is of the view that civil society
and women’s organizations are important partners in
efforts aimed at preventing and responding to sexual
and gender-based violence and in providing victims
and survivors with information and support, towards
facilitating their access to health services, legal
assistance, basic services and livelihood assistance.
In that regard, Member States, and key United
Nations bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission,

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

UN-Women and the United Nations Development
Programme, working with United Nations country
teams and peace missions, have a critical role to play
in supporting and capacitating the development of
civil society and women’s organizations at community
and local levels. The value of engaging women from
different communities in identifying early conflict
warning signs, mediating community conflicts, and
leading campaigns to prevent sexual and gender-based
violence is well documented.
In conclusion, every effort must be made to end
impunity by perpetrators of sexual and gender-based
violence in conflict. My delegation therefore affirms
its support for the inclusion of sexual violence in the
definition of acts prohibited during ceasefires, including
the exclusion of perpetrators of sexual violence from
amnesty provisions.
The Security Council must also include measures
that bring pressure to bear on perpetrators of sexual
violence in conflict, especially on individuals and parties
through the adoption of specific measures, including
specific and time-bound protection commitments by all
the relevant actors to an armed conflict.
While there is value in developing monitoring
mechanisms by the Security Council to ensure the
implementation of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions, greater participation by women in
negotiation and peacemaking processes will allow
for greater inclusivity and incorporation of gender
perspectives reflective of the interests and concerns
of women, thereby contributing to the sustainability of
peace efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First, I should
like to convey my congratulations to you, Mr. President,
on having organized this open debate on this important
matter, namely, conflict-related sexual violence. I
should also like to congratulate you on your presidency
this month. Many important matters have been drawn
to the attention of the international community of late,
in particular regarding our continent, Africa.
I should like to reiterate the fact that among States
that are particularly involved in protecting women
in conflict and on the question of sexual violence in
conflict much progress has been made in our country
since 2005. The Sudan has implemented resolution

S/PV.7160

1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and
has established several specialized centres at the
community level to step up the role of women and to
hold women’s consultations on equality.
I should like to mention that special programmes
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have
been particularly important in highlighting women’s
roles. Those have been carried out in coordination with
the relevant bodies of the United Nations, including
UN-Women. Furthermore, we are combating sexual
violence, and have done so since 2005. To that end, we
have set up a special unit affiliated with the Ministry
of Justice to combat sexual violence against women and
girls.
In the legal and judicial spheres, the Office of the
Prosecutor-General for crimes in Darfur, which was set
up pursuant to the peace agreement, has established an
investigation of reports from victims and complaints
have been made. That is above and beyond the efforts
made by the advisory council on human rights, the
Ministry for Social Planning and the Ministry to combat
violence against women. Those are bodies linked to our
other main body.
This month, we have begun to implement our
10-year action plan to help promote human rights, in
particular women’s rights. That has been commended
by the independent expert, and we would have liked to
see that reflected in the report (S/2014/181), especially
our efforts in the area of sexual violence against women.
Despite the progress made, paragraph 50 of the
report under consideration refers to the situation in
Darfur and mentions an increase in reports of conflictrelated sexual violence. In these types of discussions,
we are used to the date of issuance and publication of
the report being mentioned. We want to know about
such reports. When we talk about different reports, we
want to know which reports we are talking about.
That is why we are asking for a clear procedure
to ensure the veracity of information and its sources.
In several passages, the report talks about constraints
imposed by the Government on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). That is a reference to some activities of the
security apparatus of UNAMID’s military component.
Apparently, UNAMID is being asked not to go to
certain areas. However, when it talks about UNAMID’s
civilian component, which has a unit for protecting
women against sexual violence in armed conflict, it

14-3104655/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

does have permission. Therefore, we did provide access.
In that regard, I think we are talking about erroneous
information in the report.
The report also states that armed men in military
uniforms attacked women and were responsible for
sexual violence. That is not true. I think that we should
ensure the veracity of the information and check
sources before it is put into the report. We did not
prevent the investigator from gaining access. We have a
clear procedure in place when it comes to impunity and
violence against women, which I have already talked
about.
We underscore the need to protect women against
violence, and against sexual violence in particular. My
Government would like to reiterate its readiness to
continue cooperating with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. We have sought to coordinate her visit but we
have not been able to do so. Despite that, the Special
Representative is very welcome. She can come see what
is taking place and check that the information is true.
This is a very sensitive matter. Once again, I would
like to underscore that the principle of protecting
women during armed conflict is a noble principle and it
should not be politicized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my
own country, Viet Nam.
We commend the Nigerian presidency for convening
today’s open debate on women and peace and security
with a focus on sexual violence in armed conflict. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/181)
and we thank him and his Special Representative for
their briefings to the Council.
Sexual violence in both armed conflict and postconflict situations continues to affect and threaten the
well-being of women and girls in many regions of the
world. Indeed, sexual violence in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations leaves lasting scars for nations,
communities and, above all, its victims, and may have

56/74

25/04/2014

a significant bearing on the durability of peace and
prospects for sustainable development.
ASEAN strongly condemns all forms of violence
against women and girls, in particular sexual violence.
We condemn the use of rape and other sexual violence
as a tactic of war to deliberately target civilian
populations. ASEAN therefore welcomes the important
actions taken by the Council to address that atrocious
crime, including its landmark resolutions 1325
(2000), as well as subsequent relevant resolutions and
presidential statements. Those actions, together with the
enormous efforts by the entire United Nations and the
international community, have helped raise awareness
about the catastrophic impact of sexual violence in
armed conflict and post conflict situations, which
needs to be addressed in a comprehensive manner.
In that connection, ASEAN is of the view that
the international community, with the United Nations
at the centre, must redouble its efforts to address
the three interrelated dimensions — namely, the
prevention of sexual violence, care for its victims and
the empowerment of women.
First, the prevention of armed conflict-related
sexual violence must be addressed at its root cause,
that is, the prevention of armed conflicts itself.
Mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution
must be implemented. States must promote the rule
of law, justice, good governance, democracy, poverty
eradication, sustainable development, gender equality
and respect for and protection of human rights at
national and international levels as the means of
tackling the root causes of conflicts.
Secondly, breaking the silence and raising awareness
are essential to the prevention of sexual violence and
the protection of victims. Political discussion and
initiatives at international and regional levels are of
crucial importance to send the message of intolerance
toward sexual violence, and that must combined with
measures aimed at raising awareness at the grass-roots
level. Therefore, eliminating sexual violence requires
not only sanctioning perpetrators, but transforming the
mindset of societies and the underlying economic and
social conditions that allow sexual violence to thrive.
Thirdly, victims of sexual violence must be
provided with multisectoral assistance and services
tailored to their specific needs. They must be protected
against stigmatization and exclusion, and given the

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7160

opportunity and capability to re-engage and reintegrate
with their communities.

of the relevant Council resolutions to end sexual
violence whenever and wherever it occurs.

Fourthly, the full and equal political, social and
economic participation of women is key to addressing
sexual violence at its roots. The inclusion of women
and their priorities in all aspects of a peace process is
crucial. Attention should also be paid to both civilian
women and those having served in the armed forces
or been involved in military activities during their
reintegration efforts.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.

Lastly, while States bear the primary responsibility
for preventing and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence, the United Nations system has a special role
to play, as mandated by its Member States. ASEAN
recognizes the constructive role of civil society, the
media and other stakeholders, many of whom are
working hard to protect the rights and interests of
women under difficult situations, and encourages them
to work closely with States and the United Nations
system in those common endeavours.
ASEAN represents a region where women have a
long tradition of playing an important role in national
economic and political life, during conflicts, in
conflict resolution, as well as in post-conflict national
reconstruction.
ASEAN is strongly committed to the prevention
and fight against sexual violence, particularly sexual
violence in armed conflict. All ASEAN member States
are parties to the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and have
supported all the relevant Security Council resolutions
and presidential statements related to women and peace
and security, including those on sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict.
At the regional level, ASEAN has established the
ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission of Human
Rights and the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children.
Initiatives like Stop Violence Against Women and
workshops on women, security and peace in ASEAN
are also important steps undertaken by ASEAN to raise
awareness on the issue.
Much remains to be done to address the challenges
faced by women and girls in armed conflicts, as well
as in post-conflict situations. ASEAN reaffirms our
strong support and commitment to the implementation

Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
wishes to express its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral, Special Representative Bangura and
Ms. Misaka for their statements. We also thank the
delegation of Nigeria for convening this debate today.
It is important that the Council continues to state, in
the clearest possible terms, that conflict-related sexual
violence will not be tolerated and that it makes all
efforts to give those words effect.
We have seen some significant steps forward since
the Council last convened an open debate to consider
this issue in 2013 (see S/PV.7044), including the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013). Over the past year,
we have also welcomed specific commitments made
by a number of countries to combat sexual violence in
armed conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/181) on
conflict-related sexual violence is sobering; it illustrates
the scale and severity of the challenges that remain. It
is clear that political commitments need to translate
into concrete actions on the ground. The international
community must address the use of sexual violence to
intimidate and maintain social control, reprisals against
those who report crimes, the targeting of children and
the lack of access to justice, as well as many other
difficult challenges.
In the face of those challenges, what can be done?
First and foremost, national Governments themselves
must show leadership. As an international community,
we must support efforts by national Governments and
by other actors, including civil society. The Security
Council must also continue to focus on the issue.
If lasting progress is to be made, then we must
focus on preventing conflict-related sexual violence
from occurring in the first place by dealing with root
causes. That requires national Governments, supported
by the United Nations, to emphasize better education at
all levels within communities — from schools to health
centres to the military — in order to help shift social
attitudes and improve understanding of sexual violence.
The Security Council must ensure that there is
an ongoing systematic focus on prevention, including
in all the relevant country-specific resolutions, in

14-3104657/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

peacekeeping mandate authorizations and renewals,
and in special political missions. Ensuring strong
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements will
help to identify situations of risk early so that they can
be addressed. That will also require coordination and
information-sharing across United Nations activities.

political will exists to tackle conflict-related sexual
violence. The upcoming Global Summit to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict, to be held in London in June,
provides an important opportunity to grow the political
will and identify practical actions while reflecting on
some of the concerns raised in the Council today.

We strongly encourage the ongoing training of
United Nations peacekeepers to protect populations
from sexual violence. Peacekeepers can provide a
strong line of prevention and response, both in terms
of recognizing early warning signs and reporting them,
as well as addressing appropriately instances where
sexual violence has occurred. Good quality training
that is comprehensive and contextual should ensure
that peacekeepers are able to recognize and respond
to those most vulnerable to sexual violence. That
includes, for example, persons with disabilities who
have a heightened risk of sexual violence but often face
challenges to both prevent and report sexual violence.

New Zealand strongly endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s and others’ call for all parties to conflict
responsible for acts of sexual violence to cease
that horrendous conduct and to make protection
commitments. We also call for the further strengthening
and implementation of the protection framework while
ensuring that protection is extended to those most
vulnerable to conflict-related sexual violence.

Women’s protection advisers play a critical role in
prevention and response, and New Zealand calls for
more advisers to be deployed to the relevant missions.
Consideration should also be given to ensuring adequate
deployment of child protection advisers, reflecting the
fact that young people are often victims.
Effective accountability is vital to hold perpetrators
to account, to ensure recognition for victims and to deter
future crimes. We acknowledge the important work
done by international tribunals and the International
Criminal Court in strengthening international law on
sexual violence. The focus the Council has paid to
accountability in resolution 2106 (2013) was welcome,
and we must continue that trend by ensuring that
accountability and access to justice are part of all our
conversations about conflict-related sexual violence.
At the national level, effective accountability
requires strong domestic laws, institutions and practical
mechanisms that actually enable access to justice.
We applaud the engagement so far of United Nations
actors, in particular the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, to support
national authorities to achieve accountability. New
Zealand encourages the continuation and deepening of
that support.
New Zealand is one of the 144 countries that
endorsed the Declaration of Commitment to End
Sexual Violence in Conflict, an initiative of the United
Kingdom. The Declaration demonstrated that the

58/74

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Tin (Myanmar): Allow me to express our
appreciation to the Nigerian presidency of the Council
for organizing this open debate.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam on
behalf of the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian States.
Let me join the preceding speakers in condemning
all forms of sexual violence against women and girls
in conflict and non-conflict areas. We also commend
the efforts of the United Nations in developing a broad
spectrum of norms on women and peace and security
for the prevention of sexual violence against vulnerable
groups of women and girls across the world.
My delegation also wishes to thank Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for soliciting
our views while preparing the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2014/181) on conflict-related sexual violence
and for incorporating some of our responses. We hardly
need to stress the importance of the accuracy and
objectivity of the information. We feel that reporting
could be more balanced if it highlighted not only the
problems but also the measures taken by the State
concerned in response to those problems.
In Myanmar, sexual violence is a crime strongly
abhorred by our traditional values and strictly forbidden
by law and by our culture. As such, severe legal action
is taken against the perpetrators of any reported case,
whether by civilians or the members of security forces.
The existing penal code strongly prescribes a severe

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

penalty for those who have committed acts of sexual
violence.
As conflict naturally breeds violence, we recognize
the importance of addressing the reported problems of
sexual violence that may occur in conflicts. However,
incidents committed by unruly individuals cannot be
construed as the policy of a given institution. The most
important point is to refuse to condone any act of sexual
violence.
In Myanmar, all criminal cases filed with authorities
were properly investigated and the perpetrators were
punished according to the law. There have been a
number of cases where military personnel have been
prosecuted for committing acts of sexual violence.
The accusations that have been made in some quarters
suggesting that the State Constitution grants immunity
from prosecution to military personnel who commit
criminal offences are therefore totally groundless and
appear to be politically motivated. With the reformist
Government now paying greater attention to promoting
democratic values than ever before, members of the
armed forces have been clearly instructed not to
commit any crimes, including those of sexual violence.
A series of capacity-building workshops has been held
to educate them on human rights, and the curriculums
in military training schools also include instruction on
the laws relating to the prevention of sexual violence.
As a State party to the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, Myanmar has taken steps to eliminate
discrimination and violence against women, in line
with the Convention’s provisions, and we are currently
implementing a 10-year national strategic plan for the
advancement of women. Myanmar’s three-year-old
democratic reforms have also created an environment
more conducive to the protection of women and girls.
Our new-found freedom of expression and of the media
has emboldened everyone to file complaints about any
wrongful acts without fear. Any abuse of rights can
be reported to our national human-rights commission.
The issue of the protection of women has also attracted
the attention of the legislative body, and a law banning
violence against women is being drafted with the
assistance of the United Nations. That important
legislation is expected to be finalized for enactment
very soon.
On 31 October 2013, Myanmar organized for the
first time an open day on women, peace and security,
commemorating resolution 1325 (2000) on women and

S/PV.7160

peace and security. The event, designed to promote
awareness of the issue, was attended by more than 200
participants, including senior Government and United
Nations officials, parliamentarians, development
cooperation partners and civil society. The Government
has also conducted surveys and research projects aimed
at obtaining reliable data for facilitating effective
measures against sexual violence. Seminars on
violence against women are being organized in various
towns across the country and counselling is also being
made available to women in need of such services.
In Myanmar, civil society and non-governmental
organizations are now actively engaged in activities
to raise awareness and prevent sexual violence. In that
regard, we are also working with UN-Women and the
United Nations Population Fund to implement projects
designed to protect women and girls from sexual
violence.
Myanmar is also making great progress in its
strenuous peacemaking efforts to end its 60-year-long
conflict, which have produced ceasefire agreements
with almost all ethnic groups. The expected forthcoming
signing of a nationwide ceasefire agreement will be a
watershed in our peacebuilding process as it helps to
create the conditions needed to end violence.
As much as we all condemn the use of sexual
violence as a weapon of war, we should also deplore
the exploitation of this sensitive issue by certain groups
as a tool for achieving their own political goals. The
problem of sexual violence cannot be solved by an
approach of naming and blaming. The international
community should rather take a constructive approach
by sharing information on violations and assisting
Member States in their efforts to address the issue. In
that regard, my delegation has noted with interest the
recommendations and framework elements presented
in the Secretary-General’s report. We also wish to
stress the importance of national ownership, leadership
and responsibility in preventing sexual violence in
conflict. In its exercise of that responsibility, Myanmar
would welcome assistance from the United Nations in
enhancing its efforts and capacity to protect women
and girls from sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia is grateful to
the Nigerian presidency for convening this important
meeting on an issue that Croatia considers very
significant.

14-3104659/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, and I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
We strongly advocate further support for the
agenda on women and peace and security at all levels,
national, regional and global, and today’s debate is a
good and valuable step in that direction. As indicated
in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2014/181),
sexual violence in conflict is one of the greatest and
most persistent injustices in the world today. It is also
one of the most neglected.
Viewed in the broader context, sexual violence
is one of the symptoms of a distorted social order
characterized by conflict, injustice and insecurity.
Sexual violence adds to ethnic and other divisions,
reinforcing insecurity and instability, and leaves
its victims with terrible physical and psychological
wounds, pain and humiliation. There is no doubt
whatever that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and perpetuates them long after
active hostilities are over. Crimes of sexual violence
in conflict inflict lasting scars on individuals, families
and societies, making reconciliation and peacebuilding
much more difficult. Peace and reconciliation require a
firm and consistent process and a lot of determination
and patience in order to ascertain the truth, something
that is particularly difficult when rape is used as a tool
of war against women, children and men.
Sexual violence has been used in all recent wars
and conflicts to pursue political and military aims,
including in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. It
has been used to dominate, to terrify and humiliate
opponents, to uproot communities and ethnic groups,
and thus to contribute to the collapse of entire societies
for generations to come. Based on our own tragic
experiences of the aggression to which Croatia was
exposed at the beginning of the ’90s, in which rape
was also used as a method of intimidation and terror,
we are convinced that the issue of sexual violence in
conflict can be adequately addressed only through a
comprehensive approach. The Croatian Government
has therefore proposed a new law for the protection
of victims of sexual violence in war, with the aim
of legislating the rights of such victims, together
with an accompanying system of compensation and
rehabilitation.
Through the extensive experience of war and postconflict management that Croatia unfortunately gained

60/74

25/04/2014

on its own territory, we may be able to make a significant
contribution to wider global efforts to prevent and
combat sexual violence in war and conflict. In that
regard, I am pleased to announce that an International
Conference on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict will
be held in Zagreb, the capital of Croatia, from 29 to
30 May, jointly organized by the Croatian Ministry of
Veterans’ Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme. The Conference will be titled “Delivering
Justice for the Past, Preventing Abuse in the Future”,
with its main purpose that of sharing lessons learned
in addressing the rights of victims of sexual violence in
Croatia and other countries of the former Yugoslavia,
and of disseminating those lessons around the world
through the United Nations and other systems. The
Conference can also be seen as a building block for the
upcoming Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict, to be held in London.
Croatia is of the opinion that more can and must be
done to combat the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
and particularly to address the prevailing culture of
impunity for such crimes. The non-reporting of sexual
violence in war and conflict is another key problem,
since it affects not only social perceptions of what is
in fact a widespread problem, but also the work of all
the relevant bodies and institutions. We fully recognize
the importance of breaking the silence surrounding
sexual violence in conflicts and changing the public
consciousness so that the shame and embarrassment
become that of the perpetrator. Civil society
organizations can play a very important and vital role
in that regard.
A book entitled Sunčica — which means “sunny”
in English —published in Croatia in 2011, contains the
testimonies of imprisoned women against whom the
crime of rape was committed during the war in Croatia.
Sunny has also become a strong civil movement in
Croatia during recent years, with courageous women
finally breaking the social and intimacy barriers that
occur in cases of war-time rape. Based on the book,
the movie Sunny was filmed, with the support of the
Croatian Ministry for Veterans Affairs, and was recently
premiered in Zagreb. It is the first documentary film in
which the victims of sexual violence in war, including
male victims, have come out to speak of their suffering.
At the global level, there is now increased
awareness on the part of the international community
about the problem of wartime sexual violence. We have
to build on that positive momentum and take concrete

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

action to address impunity and strengthen specific
goals — comprehensive reform of legislation on wartime
sexual violence and reparation for victims, speeding
up the processing of war crimes, implementing the
witness-protection programme, changing the societal
mentality, and severe punishment for perpetrators, not
victims.
Finally, we believe that the Declaration of
Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
provides a solid framework to step up our efforts in
preventing and responding to sexual violence and
bringing about justice for millions of victims of sexual
violence, not only in conflict but also in post-conflict
situations and beyond.
As a member of the group of global champions
of the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, Croatia
will spare no effort to take a more prominent role in
preventing and combating sexual violence in war and
conflict and to continue to give its firm support to all
areas of the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Nigerian presidency for convening the meeting and
organizing this timely discussion. My appreciation
goes also to the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Rhoda
Misaka of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security.
I also align myself with the statements delivered
by the observer of the European Union and by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network. Allow me to add a few thoughts
from our national perspective.
Slovenia traditionally pays special attention to
the empowerment of women and the protection and
promotion of their rights. As has been recalled many
times, the protection and advancement of women’s
rights is of key importance for stability, sustainable
peace and prosperity at all levels.
On the other hand, armed conflict and instability
often disproportionately affect women. In times of
instability, violence against women, including sexual
violence, increases. It is therefore important to include
women in conflict prevention and resolution efforts as
well as post-conflict recovery and reconciliation.

S/PV.7160

Furthermore, sexual violence is used in conflict as
a weapon of war to humiliate and injure victims, their
families and entire communities, and often continues
after the conflict has ended. Victims, not just women
and girls but also men and boys, are traumatized and
stigmatized forever. Those heinous acts remain vivid in
the recollections of whole communities for generations,
as we are reminded by the legacy of conflict in the
Western Balkans and Rwanda. Such acts should not
be repeated and must be stopped in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Syria, Mali and Somalia and in other situations of
concern at the present time.
We should not forget that sexual exploitation and
abuse in conflict and post-conflict situations is not only
committed by members of the parties to the conflict,
but also by United Nations personnel. Therefore, we
welcome the developments in applying the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy in certain situations on
the Council’s agenda. We call on the Council to include
all aspects of the policy in all resolutions renewing or
establishing peacekeeping mandates. It is important
that the United Nations set an example by practicing it
preaches.
Although the commitment to accountability and
the fight against impunity regarding sexual violence
in conflict has been reiterated many times — again
in today’s discussion — and enshrined in Council
resolution 2106 (2013), there are many obstacles to
ensuring perpetrators’ accountability and access to
justice for victims of sexual crimes in conflict.
All of the issues mentioned were also raised at
the third seminar of the Initiative on Mediation in the
Mediterranean Region, held in Slovenia last month
on the topic of promoting a culture of mediation and
prevention in the Mediterranean, where the need to put
the issue of sexual violence in conflict at the top of the
agenda was highlighted.
The Rome Statute and the International Criminal
Court play an important part in upholding accountability
for perpetrators and the fight against impunity.
Their role should be seen as an important element in
establishing peace and security and the rule of law. We
would also like to commend the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
Justice Rapid Response Initiative and the UN-Women
sexual and gender-based violence justice expert roster
in assisting the international community and affected

14-3104661/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

countries through their expertise in addressing conflictrelated sexual violence.
We believe that the primary responsibility for
the prosecution of conflict-related crimes, including
conflict-related sexual violence, lies with States. In that
regard, allow me to recall the initiative of Slovenia, the
Netherlands, Belgium and Argentina to consider the
possibility of adopting a new international instrument
on mutual legal assistance and extradition aimed at
effective investigation and prosecution, by domestic
jurisdictions, of the crimes that are of the most serious
concern internationally.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s open
debate on this important subject. We also thank the
Secretary-General and Ms. Zainab Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, for their briefings. We appreciate
the statement made by the representative of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
Ms. Rhoda Misaka.
Sexual violence, rape, molestation and different
forms of sexual abuse committed by individuals or
groups are egregious and reprehensible crimes. Sexual
violence has been systematically used as an instrument
of war in many parts of the world, as testimonies
this morning demonstrated. Sexual predators target
vulnerable women and girls, men and boys. Their
criminal acts inflict deep trauma, leave lasting scars,
cause serious moral harm and impose huge social
and economic costs on communities. Sexual violence
remains one of the major causes of people’s fleeing
from their homes and of the resultant displacement.
Those crimes constitute a threat to international peace
and security.
The United Nations has done a lot, but needs
to do more. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/181) notes, the situation has actually worsened
in certain parts of the world. Our collective efforts
should therefore focus on converting commitments
into concrete action-oriented preventive measures. We
should collectively create a culture of zero tolerance
for sexual violence. In that context, I would like to
highlight the following points.

62/74

25/04/2014

First, the Security Council should continue to
address the women and peace and security agenda
in accordance with its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
mandate pertains to sexual violence in armed conflict
and post-conflict situations. Those parameters should
be fully respected in order to preserve the strong
consensus that exists on the issue. We should guard
against the inclusion of peripheral issues that relate to
women’s rights in general, or which do not fall within
the Council’s mandate.
Secondly, ending impunity should continue to
remain the highest priority. Perpetrators should be
brought to justice and they should be removed from
their positions of authority. We strongly endorse the
appeal Special Representative Bangura made today to
shift the stigma from the victims to the perpetrators of
sexual crimes.
Thirdly, more human and financial resources should
be invested in security sector reform and disarmament
demobilization and reintegration efforts to erect barriers
against sexual violence. In post-conflict situations,
too, close attention should be given to punitive and
retributive justice. In that context, capacity-building of
the transitional criminal justice mechanisms, including
increased prosecutorial capacity, should be accorded
priority.
Fourthly, United Nations personnel operating in
areas of armed conflict should be properly trained
and equipped to provide services on the ground for
victims of sexual violence. The inter-agency network
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict is a useful
platform. The inclusion of women protection advisers
in peacekeeping operations is making a difference on
the ground.
Fifthly, multidimensional peacekeeping missions
with relevant mandates play a key role in combating
sexual violence. As a leading participant in
peacekeeping, Pakistan has contributed to that effort.
Gender sensitization has been a mandatory part of our
training for peacekeepers and is a core cultural value.
Pakistani women have also served as police officers,
doctors and nurses in various missions in Asia, Africa
and the Balkans. Our feedback about the work of police
officers is positive. Women police officers instinctively
and because of their training show empathy to women
trapped in conflict situations who in turn relate instantly
to those police officers.

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

S/PV.7160

Sixthly, women should participate in larger numbers
in the decision-making processes on ceasefires, peace
agreements and post-conflict peacebuilding.

it is crucial that evidence be professionally collected at
the earliest possible stage. That process may be assisted,
inter alia, by the Justice Rapid Response initiative.

Finally, the best way to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence is to prevent and resolve conflicts and
address the cross-cutting issues of governance, the rule
of law and economic development. The issues of sexual
violence and the overall objectives of protecting the
rights of women and children need to be pursued by
the Council and the United Nations system in a holistic
manner within their respective mandates. That requires
a comprehensive multisectoral and multidimensional
approach, as suggested by the Secretary-General.

Survivors of sexual violence also only rarely receive
reparations. In that context, we particularly commend
the work of the ICC Trust Fund for Victims, which
adopts a gender perspective across all its activities and
assists survivors of sexual and gender-based violence.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): The recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/181) once again
illustrates the alarming increase in sexual violence,
which is often used as a method of warfare. With the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013), the Council has
provided us with important tools to end that abominable
practice. Nevertheless, we continue to face a major
gap in the actual implementation of those measures.
A lack of prioritization, capacity, adequate training,
services — and ultimately resources — are the main
reasons.
Liechtenstein was therefore pleased to be among the
144 States that endorsed the Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict initiated by the
United Kingdom. The Declaration sends a clear message
that we all must redouble our efforts in that regard. We
sincerely hope that the upcoming summit in London in
June will help bring about increased impetus and better
implementation.
A major barrier to the effective protection of
women from sexual violence is the continuing culture of
impunity. We welcome the focus of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on the fight against
sexual violence in her work. Crimes of sexual violence
play a role in nearly every case under investigation.
That speaks both to the startling prevalence of conflictrelated sexual violence and to the ICC’s commitment to
holding perpetrators of those crimes accountable.
Nevertheless, justice for survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence continues to be the exception
to the rule, and holding perpetrators accountable has
proven to be exceedingly difficult. Generally speaking,

Protection issues are crucial, but we need the same
level of emphasis on participation. The SecretaryGeneral reports that sexual violence is also specifically
being used as a method of curtailing the participation of
women and girls in public life. That is a very worrisome
development. Indeed, the voices of survivors, especially
of sexual violence, are rarely heard. We must do more
to ensure that survivors and their representatives and
organizations are at the table when we work towards
ending sexual violence. We are convinced that such an
approach will have a strong impact on the willingness
of the relevant actors to bring about change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): Let me join
previous speakers in thanking the delegation of Nigeria
for convening today’s open debate. I would also like to
thank the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict for her statement.
In times of conflict and post-conflict situations,
attention should be paid to all forms of violence against
civilians, but especially to sexual violence. Conflict
often creates family dislocations, shattered livelihoods
and sole breadwinners, with the resulting negative
consequences. Single mothers are often the product of
conflict, and, in some cases, that increases vulnerability
to sexual harassment, exploitation and violence.
The Government of Sri Lanka has implemented a
firm policy on sexual violence and taken firm action
on reported cases of violence against women and girls
during the conflict and the post-conflict periods in my
country. Sri Lanka has deplored all violence against
women and has a well-established policy against
gender-based violence and all forms of sexual abuse.
During the conflict period, from January 2007 to May
2009, seven security forces personnel were reported to
have been involved in five incidents of sexual violence
in Northern Province. That is out of a total of 125
persons accused in 119 incidents for the entirety of

14-3104663/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

Northern Province. In the post-conflict period, from
May 2009 to May 2012, 10 security forces personnel
were reported to have been involved in six incidents
of sexual violence in Northern Province. That is out of
a total of 307 persons accused in 256 incidents for the
entire Northern Province. The involvement of security
forces personnel as a percentage of the total accused
stands at 5.6 per cent in the conflict period and 3.3 per
cent in the post-conflict period.
It is interesting to note that the involvement of
security forces personnel as a percentage of the total
incidents of sexual violence is quite low, both in the
conflict and post-conflict periods. In a majority of
the aforementioned cases, the perpetrators have been
close relatives or neighbours of the victim. Against
that backdrop, the Sri Lankan authorities reject the
inferences by certain organizations and reports that the
presence of the military contributes to the insecurity of
women and girls in the former conflict-affected areas.
Legal action has been taken by the Government in
all of the above-mentioned cases in which Sri Lankan
Security Forces personnel were involved. The military
has taken stringent action, including discharging
offenders or imposing other punishments in accordance
with the military and penal codes. Furthermore, charges
have also been filed in normal criminal courts. Along
with the application of the law to personnel in breach
of the law, the Sri Lankan military continues to provide
large-scale human rights training with the assistance of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Certain organizations are involved in propagating
false reports against the Sri Lankan military of sexual
violence. A recent report was authored by Ms. Yasmin
Sooka. That report made accusations, often with
disturbing details, without providing sufficient
details, such as to the time, place and the identity of
victims, to enable investigations and prosecutions.
Those accusations were subsequently repeated in
further publications of various organizations, thereby
contributing to forming an opinion that is propagated
without evidence. None of those allegations have been
substantiated by verifiable data in any of the documents.
Significantly, no credible evidence has been directly
brought to the attention of Government authorities
by any of the parties. The Government has not been
provided the evidence — which is claimed to be in the
possession of the authors of these reports — in order to
investigate and respond.

64/74

25/04/2014

I would like to also point out the other extensive
measures the Government has taken to cater to women
and girls to ensure that their well-being and security is
protected. The Government has established women and
children’s police desks staffed by female police officers
in police stations in the Northern and the Eastern
Provinces. Specially trained police officers function at
such desks which provide an enabling and protective
environment for children, women and girls and their
parents to report incidents of abuse and exploitation.
The Government has given special consideration
to uplifting the social and economic status of war
widows. Bilateral assistance has already been obtained
to initiate a self-employment programme for war
widows in Batticaloa in collaboration with the Self
Employed Women’s Association, based in India. A
local non-governmental organization, the Parents
of Servicemen Missing in Action and Association of
War-Affected Women, educates soldiers, youth and
community leaders about international standards
relating to war and promotes the economic and social
development of women across conflict lines.
We note that this year report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181) contains
references to the Human Rights Council resolution on
Sri Lanka (A/HRC/25/L.1/Rev.1), accountability and a
comprehensive truth and reconciliation commission.
We are disappointed that such issues, which have no
relevance to that before us, have been dragged into
this report. The contents of the Human Rights Council
resolution have been rejected and disputed by the
Government. We would like to respectfully point out
that the Government established an internal mechanism
for dealing with the causes of conflict and to make
recommendations. The report of that body — the Lessons
Learned and Reconciliation Commission — offers
detailed observations and recommendations based on
the principles of international humanitarian law. The
national action plan developed on the basis of the
recommendations of the Commission is now being
implemented.
My delegation hopes that international discussion of
issues of this nature will facilitate broader appreciation
of the inherent challenges and practical outcomes based
on realities on the ground. States should be consulted
on all aspects of international actions to combat sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations,
including the provision of assistance. In that process,
respect must be maintained for the fundamental

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Member States.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that Sri Lanka will
proactively continue with its efforts to enhance and
develop protection mechanisms with regard to the
protection of women and children.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes this debate on the important report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2014/181). The fact that the report covers incidents
of conflict-related sexual violence in over 20 countries
confirms the urgency of our meeting today.
We fully align ourselves with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. In the
interests of time, I will deliver a shortened version of
my speech; the full text is available.
In the view of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
conflict-related sexual violence is not a stand-alone
problem that can be solved in isolation. We need a
fully integrated approach that addresses deeply rooted
gender inequalities and works to empower women.
We pay tribute to the work of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab
Bangura. It is a privilege to sit next to her and an honour
to support her work. We agree with her that now is the
time to focus on progressing from principles, goals and
ambitions to concrete action, operational measures and
practical tools.
The Netherlands seeks to use such practical tools
in all domains of our foreign policy: the promotion
of peace, justice and development. When it comes to
peace and security, we contribute civilian and military
personnel to multilateral missions. Addressing gender
issues and sexual violence in conflict is an integral
part of our national preparation for such missions.
For instance, we currently have a contingent deployed
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. All of our police and
military officer have received predeployment training
on gender, human rights and international humanitarian
law.
We also offer regular training on gender issues
to military personnel, diplomats and police, as well
as to civilian experts and activists. We make civilian

S/PV.7160

expertise on gender and combating sexual violence
available to United Nations missions, for example to
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
With regard to justice, we welcome the focus
Ms. Bangura and United Nations Action have put on
issues of impunity and accountability around conflictrelated sexual violence. National legal systems in
conflict-affected countries can be weakened in the
course of the conflict and in the reconstruction
phase. The Netherlands therefore attaches great value
to legitimate and professional justice systems. We
therefore support rule of law programming in several
countries on a bilateral basis.
There is also the need for a clear role for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and other tribunals.
My country very much supports the broad jurisdiction
of the ICC on the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence. It has a very strong preventative effect.
The report of the Secretary-General also shows that
we need to do even more to optimize the protection of
women and girls, who are the primary victims of sexual
violence. Despite our collective efforts in that regard,
women and girls will face the long-term consequences
of such violence. They deserve and have the right to
sexual and reproductive health, including safe abortion
services. To recall what our French colleague said this
morning, to withhold such services to victims of sexual
violence is to add insult to injury.
Women and girls are never only victims, though. We
know about the resilience of many survivors. We also
know that empowered women make the difference: they
participate in decision-making and take up leadership
roles, particularly on issues of conflict prevention,
resolution, peacebuilding and reconstruction.
We believe in the power of women as agents of
peace and as representatives of communities living in
conflict. As women are empowered, sexual violence,
causes of gender inequality and accountability will
more likely be addressed as integral parts of peace and
reconstruction processes. For example, we are working
with UN-Women to support the Syrian Women’s
Initiative for Peace and Democracy to make their voices
heard. The initiative of the women of Syria inspired
many and offered a new window of hope for a political
solution to the horrific conflict in Syria.

14-3104665/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

We welcome further commitment of the Security
Council to the full agenda of resolution 1325 (2000) as
we try to do in the Netherlands. Our national Action Plan
1325 promotes civil society programming in support
of women’s political participation and leadership. We
support women’s rights organizations around the globe
and we contribute to several United Nations trust
funds, such as the United Nations Women’s Trust Fund
to Eliminate Violence against Women.
Together we must continue our common efforts to
combat the crime of sexual violence in conflict through
concrete and collective action. Rest assured that the
Netherlands will continue to be a partner of the United
Nations, the Special Representative and Member States
in this important endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
Security Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) more
than 13 years ago. Nevertheless, as my colleague
from Liechtenstein has just recalled, sexual violence,
especially rape, in countries in conflict and postconflict situations, remains a sad reality. We cannot
turn a blind eye on those human rights violations.
Switzerland therefore thanks your delegation,
Madame President, for convening this debate, and
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2014/181) on
conflict-related sexual violence, which emphasizes the
scope of the problem.
In the majority of the situations that have been
observed, sexual violence is perpetrated as much by
Government forces as by armed opposition groups.
Our response to that must be firm: there shall be no
impunity for the perpetrators of those crimes, and we
will not rest until justice is done. In that regard, we
would like to emphasize the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on the need for countries to foster
national ownership, leadership and responsibility and
to strengthen the capacity of their civilian and military
justice systems.
In that context, we would do well to recall the
complementary role of the International Criminal Court
when States are either unable or unwilling to render
justice to the victims of acts of serious sexual violence
insofar as they constitute crimes against humanity or
war crimes.

66/74

25/04/2014

We welcome the programmes for training and
consciousness-raising as well as the monitoring
measures such as those being pursued within the
framework of human rights due diligence policy of the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Regular reports on
sexual and gender-based violence along with a zerotolerance policy vis-à-vis the perpetrators of such
crimes are indispensable.
Last March, the Human Rights Council in Geneva
hosted a panel on sexual violence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which again brought to our
attention the massive character of violence against
women in that context. Armed conflicts and the
weakness of State institutions, especially the judiciary
and the security forces, are the primary destabilizing
factors. The high incidence of sexual violence,
especially rape, is a source of grave concern, all the
more so because systematic impunity creates a context
that encourages such violations.
Three months ago, just before the second Geneva
Conference, 50 women from across Syria shared with
us their priorities regarding the issue of sexual violence.
They stressed that rendering justice was essential. Over
a year ago, Switzerland, together with more than 60
other States, called on the Security Council to refer
the situation in Syria to the International Criminal
Court. That demand is more timely now than ever, and
in that regard we support France’s initiative to draft a
resolution to that end.
It is also crucial, in the early stages of a peace
process, to adopt gender-sensitive policies and measures
to protect women and girls from sexual exploitation,
early marriage, human trafficking and rape. What other
options do we have for action? While there may be no
ready-made solutions, I would like to explore three
areas that are addressed in the report.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to emphasize the decisive role of civil society, in
particular women’s organizations and community
leaders, in the many efforts to eliminate sexual violence
against women. We need to ensure that women’s
participation in peace negotiations and processes
is conducted on an equal footing with men and that
the resulting agreements take gender problems into
account.
We share the Secretary-General’s concerns about
the fate of displaced populations, whose majority
consists of women and girls. Their limited access to

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

resources makes them that much more vulnerable to
sexual violence and sexual exploitation. We welcome
the fact that his recommendations insist that prevention
be an integral part of all country-specific resolutions
by the Security Council. It is essential that prevention
and protection measures be tailored to the context of
displacement.
Finally, we share the Secretary-General’s concern
about the lack of official data on sexual violence. We
need reliable data to effectively combat violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law in situations of armed conflict and
internal disturbances. With the goal of improving
data collection, Switzerland supports the Harvard
University Program on Humanitarian Policy and
Conflict Research, which focuses on the development
of systematic methodological guidance that can be
applied to monitoring, reporting and fact-finding
efforts. We continue to believe that such instruments
are essential for improving the prevention of crimes of
sexual violence.
Finally, allow me to reiterate the importance of
linking our efforts to protect and strengthen women’s
rights with our commitment to promote women’s
participation. Men, too, have everything to gain from
such efforts. The development of a truly global society
will be achieved only by insuring the equal participation
of women and men in all aspects of the peacemaking,
peacebuilding and reconstruction processes. Equal
participation is a prerequisite for comprehensively
addressing gender-based violence, as well as its causes
and its consequences. Therefore, Switzerland would
like to stress the importance of the latest resolutions
on the issue, in particular resolution 2122 (2013).
Furthermore, we call upon all actors to continue their
efforts for the complete and cohesive implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
In conclusion, we commend Special Representative
Zainab Bangura, who has played an outstanding role
in drawing up joint strategies with Governments to
combat sexual violence. Switzerland congratulates
her for the progress made in the implementation of
the frameworks and looks forward to hosting the next
donor conference of the United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.

S/PV.7160

Mr. Naanda (Namibia): Namibia is pleased to
participate in this open debate on sexual violence in
conflict under the agenda item “Women and peace and
security”. I wish to congratulate you, Madam President,
and your country, Nigeria, on assuming the presidency
of the Council for the month of April 2014. I also wish to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and his Special
Representative Zainab Bangura for their informative
statements.
Sexual violence has increasingly become a grave
concern and has proliferated in conflict and postconflict situations. Women and girls are raped, forced
into prostitution and sexual slavery, and subjected to
various sexual acts that leave them with severe physical,
psychological and emotional trauma. Their lives are
shattered, their hopes are destroyed and they are left
with permanent stigma.
The report (S/2014/181) before us clearly indicates
that the prevalence of sexual violence during periods
of conflicts often leaves lasting legacies, with acute
consequences for the security of women and children in
the post-conflict era and beyond. That is demonstrated
by high levels of rape and other forms of sexual violence
perpetrated against women and children in some postconflict settings, which ultimately has a direct impact
on the durability of peace and prospects for sustainable
development.
The United Nations, and in particular this body,
have convened meetings to deliberate on mitigating
factors that can be employed to prevent and or curb
such a scourge. However, despite all efforts, the scourge
still persists and continues to terrorize communities,
thereby posing a serious security concern. That is
so because perpetrators are left unpunished and the
culture of impunity aggravates conflict cycles.
Fighting sexual violence in conflict is a shared
responsibility that requires a broad-based approach
that involves the international community, regional
and national Governments, civil societies and other
stakeholders. National Governments should foster
national programmes that take measures aimed at
preventing and stopping the occurrence of sexual
violence and prosecute perpetrators. In that regard,
national stakeholders should be fully engaged in
order to foster national ownership, leadership and
responsibility. While recognizing that Governments
bear the primary responsibility for the safety and
rights of women and the protection of all citizens in
their countries, the international community should

14-3104667/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

25/04/2014

support those efforts, while fully respecting national
sovereignty and focusing on capacity-building and
resolving funding and technical difficulties.

assisting the international community in investigating
those horrible crimes by bringing the perpetrators to
book.

Furthermore, it is important to ensure that sexual
violence considerations are explicitly and consistently
reflected in ceasefire and peace agreements, as
well as in all security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes that involve
the United Nations. In that regard, the adoption by the
General Assembly of the Arms Trade Treaty was of
critical importance, as it is the first international legal
instrument that explicitly includes a gender criterion in
arms transfers if there is a possibility that such transfers,
would be used to commit violence against women and
children. We celebrated the first anniversary of the
historic adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty on 2 April
and we look forward to its entry into force.

Namibia wishes to re-emphasize the importance
of the role of women in conflict prevention and postconflict peacebuilding. As such, we fully support the
inclusion of women in security systems, such as the
armed forces, the police and peacekeeping operations
and special political missions in support of various
United Nations resolutions that recognize that important
role. We remain convinced that for the achievement of
comprehensive and sustainable peace, all efforts should
be made to ensure the participation and contribution of
women to peace negotiations and during the execution
of post-conflict strategies and programmes.

The elimination of conflict-related sexual violence
would not be possible without addressing the root
causes of gender inequality and changing the mindset of
the perpetrators, victims and society at large. Victims
should be encouraged to speak out and report violence.
In most cases victims, especially women, prefer to
remain silent to avoid the stigma of being ostracized
from their communities, cast out by their husbands and
families, and left destitute with their children. Women’s
empowerment and mainstreaming gender equality
in peacekeeping processes and ceasefire agreements
are crucial in fighting the scourge. Furthermore,
survivors and their families should be provided with
sufficient medical, psychological and legal support and
rehabilitation programmes.
Capacity-building and technical support from the
international community are relevant in helping national
Governments deal with sexual violence matters.
Governments lack adequate national capacities to
investigate sexual violence cases and prosecute sexual
violence offenders, and that, regrettably, impedes on
accountability. Sufficient resources must be devoted
to women-led civil society organizations, particularly
those providing services to survivors and those that
enable women to access justice and participate in
decision-making.
We recognize the work of non-governmental
organizations in their role of training officials from
Member States, as investigators of gender-based
violence for rapid deployment to conflict areas. Namibia
supports such initiatives as they can go a long way in

68/74

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Namibia
condemns all forms of violence against women in
armed conflict and calls for the full implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions. We also urge
the parties to conflicts to abide by international legal
instruments to protect women and other disadvantaged
groups.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Allow me to begin by
commending you, Madam President, on convening
today’s debate on the very important subject of sexual
violence in the context of armed conflict. Indonesia
also wishes to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2014/181),
containing some valuable recommendations, the
implementation of which will strengthen the prevention
and elimination efforts against this deeply troubling
challenge.
Indonesia would also like to associate itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of Viet Nam
on behalf of the member countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations.
While we applaud the evolvement of a global
normative framework on sexual violence in armed
conflict, not least through the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, resolution 1325 (2000) and
others, it is a tragic fact that citizens, particularly
women, in large numbers continue to be victimized in
conflicts. Being softer targets, women and children are
particularly exploited as tactics in combat, becoming
casualties too many times with impunity. With its

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

multifold health, social, cultural and economic impact,
armed-conflict-related sexual violence not only affects
the victims, but imposes long-lasting disarray on their
families, communities and societies at large.
As a country that places high priority on providing
conditions for its citizens in which they can live
freely without fear and develop, Indonesia strongly
believes that the first endeavour should be to build
a culture of peace and tolerance and prevent armed
conflict itself. For us, that means that the international
community should also put a greater premium on the
peaceful resolution of disputes while enhancing and
sustaining support particularly to those countries
that lack capacities and resources. But if the conflict
erupts, there must be full adherence to the international
humanitarian and human rights laws relating to
citizens, and all vulnerable groups, including women
and children, must be safeguarded effectively.
Indonesia stands for zero tolerance of sexual
violence against all citizens — women, children and
men — in armed conflict. To that end, the effort should
not be limited to focusing on improving the prosecution
and elimination of impunity against cases of sexual
violence in conflict. It has to be a comprehensive
undertaking with the United Nations system entities
playing a more active and supporting role, coupled with
an equally meaningful participation and cooperation by
all Member States. Foremost in that respect is upholding
the rule of law at both international and national levels.
I reiterate the significance of the United Nations role in
that regard.
Since the primary responsibility falls on the nation
State itself, there should be appropriate domestic law
enforcement and justice mechanisms dealing with
sexual violence in conflict with well-resourced and
equipped institutions that can provide the needed care.
There must be vigorous and continuous wholesome
measures to build an environment and infrastructure in
societies that strengthen the respect and protection of
women and human life under all conditions.
We believe that the development of the United
Nations civilian capacities initiative, along with the
advancement of other relevant United Nations and
non-United Nations programmes, can enable greater
capacity-building in the area of safeguarding women
and their rights in conflict-affected countries. While
taking such steps, it is also vital that women be seen not
just as victims, but also as peace enablers in conflict.

S/PV.7160

History has proven their credentials in creating peace.
The policies of the United Nations system and outside it
should therefore promote extensive measures to ensure
the greater participation of women at all stages from
conflict prevention to resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Indonesia supports not only a larger
number of women in United Nations peacekeeping
missions, but a larger number of women in the leadership
of peacekeeping missions as well as related offices in
New York and elsewhere.
At this juncture, Indonesia has deployed female
peacekeepers in several missions, including the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and
it is committed to increasing the number of its female
peacekeepers. Our emphasis on preventing sexual
violence in conflict is also evident in our having an
adequate personnel capacity on the subject and in
our protection of civilians in implementing mission
mandates. We fully support the continuation of
mandatory training on addressing sexual violence for
all peacekeeping personnel. That is why the Indonesian
Peacekeeping Centre has included training on the
issue and will ensure the continuation of this exercise,
based on the standards and materials provided by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
In conclusion, I want to underline the importance of
the empowerment of women. Effective policies backed
by action to accord them their due rights and equal
opportunities will be critical to bolstering the overall
work on preventing sexual violence against women and
other citizens in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad
and Tobago welcomes yet another opportunity to
participate in this open debate on the important topic
of women and peace and security. We also commend
the Security Council for organizing this event, which is
very symbolic in being presided over by the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations in her
capacity as President of the Council for the month of
April.
Trinidad and Tobago also expresses its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the subject (S/2014/181). We also note with
appreciation the very informative briefings prepared by

14-3104669/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and by the representative
of the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and
Security.
Trinidad and Tobago is fully committed to the goal
of gender equality. For us, the empowerment of women
is an integral part of national development as well as
an essential pillar in the maintenance of sustainable
peace. Trinidad and Tobago is strongly supportive
of the need to enhance efforts to ensure that women
are equally represented in all spheres. These include
decision-making at all levels, as well as in the field
of peace and security. We also applaud the valuable
contributions that women have made and continue
to make to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
initiatives.
As a State that seeks to fully honour its
international obligations, we recognize the importance
of resolution 1325 (2000) — a landmark resolution that
not only acknowledges the contribution of women to
international peace and security, but also addresses
women’s participation in all aspects of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Trinidad and
Tobago subscribes to the rule of law as a fundamental
safeguard in the advancement and protection of the
rights of women. Consequently, we view as imperative
our continued adherence to obligations arising from a
number of international instruments that seek to protect
the rights of women and girls, including the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
Trinidad and Tobago holds firmly to the view that
the prosecution of perpetrators of acts of violence
against women and girls during armed conflict is a
necessary requirement for lasting and durable peace.
In that regard, we remain committed to our obligations
under the Geneva Convention of 1949 and its Additional
Protocols I and II of 1977. Similarly, as a founding
member of the International Criminal Court, Trinidad
and Tobago has given domestic legal effect to the Rome
Statute, which established the Court, and encourages
others to accede to that instrument.
Trinidad and Tobago is situated in a region that
continues to experience the scourge caused by the
diversion of small arms and light weapons from legal
markets to the illicit trade, which has led to an increase in
criminal activity in the Caribbean Community. It should
be noted that women and girls are disproportionately
70/74

25/04/2014

affected by that illicit trade. In addition, women and
girls also experience economic and psychological
burdens, abuse and sexual exploitation, which are
sometimes linked to other crimes associated with the
illegal arms trade.
Trinidad and Tobago hailed the adoption of the
Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which it has signed and
ratified, and would welcome its early entry into force.
We submit that the ATT represents a significant
achievement in the global fight to eliminate the
diversion of conventional arms to the illicit market, and
could contribute to a reduction if not an end to untold
human suffering, particularly to women and girls, as a
result of this pernicious arms trade.
Lasting peace can be achieved only if women are
more involved in decision-making processes relating
to peacebuilding and post-conflict development, which
are necessary for the sustainable development of our
societies. It was that conviction that led Trinidad and
Tobago to introduce resolution General Assembly
65/69, the first-ever on women, disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control, negotiated in
2010 and adopted by consensus by the Assembly. We
look forward to the continued support of delegations
in further strengthening the resolution during the
upcoming sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
Trinidad and Tobago commends and supports the
significant role of United Nations agencies and bodies,
such as UN-Women, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development
in Latin America and the Caribbean, in gendermainstreaming initiatives and in making available
to us information on the ways in which women
have contributed and continue to contribute to the
maintenance of peace in our societies.
In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago remains
committed to working with other Member States as
well as its partners at the regional, hemispheric and
global levels to promote the involvement of women as
equal partners in matters related to peace and security,
including at all levels of the decision-making processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself
with the statement made earlier today on behalf of the

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

European Union and that made on behalf of the Human
Security Network.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a particularly
heinous and barbaric crime. It is undoubtedly
underreported, yet even so the recent SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/181) presents an extensive
catalogue of crimes that are ongoing in 20 different
country situations in conflict and in post-conflict
settings. The victims — women and girls, men and
boys — are invariably among the most vulnerable in
their societies. Since last year’s annual open debate (see
S/PV.7044), we have seen further significant normative
progress. Resolution 2106 (2013), adopted last June,
addressed impunity and effective justice. Resolution
2122 (2013) of last October calls for more consistent
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, with special attention to enhancing women’s
participation and leadership.
Last September’s Declaration of Commitment
to End Sexual Violence in Conflict was endorsed by
145 countries, and the United Kingdom will continue
its leadership on the issue with a global summit to
be convened in June. The Secretary-General has
rightly concluded that at the global level there is
now unprecedented commitment and momentum for
decisively addressing the scourge of sexual violence
in combat. And yet the critical question remains as to
how we can translate that normative progress into more
widespread change on the ground.
The primary route to ending sexual violence in
conflict is for Governments to take national ownership
of this issue, national responsibility and national action.
The United Nations and the international community
make an important contribution, but transformative
change happens only when national political
leaders adopt this agenda as their own. The Special
Representative for Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab
Hawa Bangura, understands this better than anyone,
having added national ownership as a sixth priority
of her mission when she assumed her post. The Office
of the Special Representative engages in practical
conversations with the relevant parties, making clearer
and more consistent requests of national authorities and
in return offering ready support and capacity-building.
We hope that through this dialogue the reported cases
of modest gains can now be scaled up.
The United Nations generally seeks to be as
practical and operational as possible in its approach,

S/PV.7160

and we welcome that. For example, there is an
increasing focus on training national security-sector
actors in confronting sexual violence in conflict. There
is certainly room to improve the protection afforded
to women and girls from violence in humanitarian
emergencies. Irish Aid, the Irish Government’s
development cooperation programme, seeks to ensure
that the protection of women and girls in emergencies is
one of the key criteria in its decisions on humanitarian
funding. Over the next three years, we will progressively
increase the funding we provide for protection in
emergency and recovery contexts.
Along with the international community, civil
society actors in the countries concerned play a crucial
role. The Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for the
Great Lakes region, Mary Robinson, is reaching out to
women’s groups and civil society in that region. She is
building a sustainable constituency that will continue
to seek change, insist on the importance of ensuring
political participation by women and continue to hold
Governments accountable for the commitments they
have made.
Ireland was happy to be associated yesterday with
an event on Burma/Myanmar organized by the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security to look
at issues around sexual violence in conflict. The Special
Representative and a representative of Burmese civil
society, Ms. K’nyaw Paw, participated in the event. A
crucial part of Myanmar’s transition to democracy
will be addressing current and historical human rights
abuses, which include crimes of sexual violence. The
Secretary-General’s report calls for a comprehensive
protection and service response for survivors of sexual
violence, which we wholeheartedly support.
We must all strive to be as innovative as we can
in motivating national leaders to adopt the agenda of
women and peace and security as their own. We must
be more ambitious in addressing the root causes of
sexual violence in conflict — women’s second-class
status and the culture of impunity. And we must seek to
promote women’s political and economic empowerment
as crucial to the long-term prevention of sexual
violence. Only national political ownership in the
countries concerned can lead to decisive action to end
this scourge. We — the United Nations family, donors
and Member States, and civil society — must do all we
can to encourage such ownership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sao Tome and Principe.

14-3104671/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

Mr. Toriello (Sao Tome and Principe): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
country’s presidency of the Council this month.
While there is much to say on this subject, for the
sake of brevity I would like to start by pointing out that
at the present stage of its history, the human race has
enormously strengthened its physical, emotional and
intellectual capacities. That is not a bad thing unless
we give such strengths free rein to indulge in selfish
exploitation and consumption and to focus solely on
greed for self-enrichment in a way that enables a creed
of individualism and predatory behaviour to dominate.
This is an inborn tendency of humankind, from which
spring our separations, divisions, oppositions, conflicts
and so forth, resulting, inevitably, in wars.
To put a stop to such myopic, vicious selfdestructiveness, we need a strong and decisive force
capable of inserting itself into this physical, emotional
and intellectual contest. What we need today is to
be energized by a new force, that of spirituality and
conscience. It is no coincidence that many have called
this the era of the awakening of our conscience, although
clearly it is not something that will happen easily.
The reality is that this process is opposed by various
powerful lobbies that exert their political, financial,
economic and mass-communications influence to
control Governments, directly or indirectly. But despite
their opposition, the awakening of our collective
conscience is still a reality.
Let us consider some major changes that have
occurred in recent history — the rise of a culture of
ecology; the growth of a preservationist culture aimed
at protecting animal species at risk of extinction;
an increase in volunteering activities and human
generosity to others, rather than confining efforts to
family members and people we know in closed circles
or groups; personal inner growth, creating greater
awareness and thus greater feelings of responsibility
towards society at large; and, last but not least, the
embrace of a wider, more holistic culture and vision
of life. All of these are signs that the awakening of our
conscience exists and is a genuine movement.
What about women, then? Why, in spite of such
an awakening of our conscience, do women today still
continue to see their rights abused, whether as citizens
of the world or as people? It is shocking that in today’s
advanced world we still have to talk about the rights of
women and children as if it were a special concession.
Rather than commenting on such an absurdity, repeating
72/74

25/04/2014

once again words that have been said over and over
since time immemorial, or speculating intellectually
on this issue, I would like to give it more constructive
consideration.
Unfortunately, the system by which humankind
operates is based on a structure of contradiction, so that
whatever may be promoted on the one hand is nullified
on the other. We do not take this factor of inherent
contradiction into serious consideration, and because
it is underestimated, this virus is free to worm its way
into our human apparatus and to negatively affect the
logic of our behaviour, to the point of affecting the
social and intellectual frameworks on which we human
beings have constructed the rules for our coexistence.
In fact, society in general has based its standards on
corrupt values that while supposed to be genuine turn
out not to be genuine at all. That is why our society
stands for poverty, degradation, corruption, depravity,
perversion, the abuse of power, conspiracy, genocide
and thousands of other miseries. Since our whole social
system has been based on unnatural, subverted values,
it has become clear that the system on which we base
our way of life is consequently vicious and crushing.
What is needed is a new leadership, based on holistic
scientific and educational models that can encourage
leaders to observe both themselves and their actions,
something that is a precondition for establishing a
culture where conscience dominates. In that regard, I
should reiterate that it is vital that we find science-based
solutions to these issues, and thus that we ensure that
scientific programmes are part of the educational and
training systems whereby human beings can be taught
according to a holistic vision of life that can overturn
the sterile philosophies and frameworks that govern us.
As for the younger generation, rather than teaching
them only how to earn money, they should be supported
through good governance in understanding their innate
creative attitude with a view to self-realization. They
can be taught natural ways of living, and thereby learn
how emotions work and how to listen to each other. They
can be taught how, in situations of conflict, to evoke
calm in themselves and through their surroundings
while practicing good communication methods.
Turning to the subject of women, research has
shown that women have an advantage in negotiating
because of two skills more often related to them. One is
listening, which enables interest and awareness of the
importance of truly listening to another person’s point

14-31046

25/04/2014

Women and peace and security

of view and processing it in the context of one’s own
point of view, instead of always thinking that one’s
point of view is the only one that is correct.
The second quality and skill that women have
that is helpful in the context of negotiations is that
they tend to focus on cooperation more than on
competition or control. Research has shown that a
cooperation-oriented personality leads more often to
situations of tolerance that, in my view, are eventually
palliative and understanding that are crucial in reaching
an agreement.
Another point is that women having a voice in peace
and security fulfils a proposed focus area of the post2015 development agenda concerning gender equality
and women’s empowerment. It also overlaps the focus
area of sustainable society because when women
feel empowered due to a peaceful situation, they can
create a peaceful family setting, as they are crucial in
the raising of children. That peaceful family context
then sets the stage for a more peaceful and sustainable
society, and therefore a more peaceful world.
It is a well-respected fact that women, who comprise
more than half of the world’s population, help to keep
and protect peace and security through their strong
family ties and work in the home, as well as through
their influence on the work place and policy in their
professional and diplomatic lives. Just like that of the
men of honour throughout the world, women’s influence
is critical to making and preserving the global village
of peace and security that every family and community
needs and wants.
Fortunately, the United Nations — in its
wisdom — has recognized the importance that women
play in issues of peace and security by establishing
UN-Women. While necessary, UN-Women can also
be seen as the result of a distorted societal system and
evidence that women have made concessions denying
them certain rights.
That is why it is aberrant and offensive to see
vicious men, hateful of all society — despite anything
they may say — attacking women in public, especially
the most defenceless, in the name of some cause or as
an act of war, or aberrant pleasure in conflict.
Violence against women is merely violence,
without merit or cause. It is without justification and
demonstrates the abandonment of hope. And it is not
merely violence against women that is unacceptable

S/PV.7160

and tragic, but sexual violence in particular. Rape, as is
known, is not a crime of sex but of violence, not a show
of power but of immeasurable weakness. It demonstrates
the worst in men and in civilization. How is it that men
in conflict condone such degradation not only to the
women they harm, but ultimately to themselves and
all humankind, through acts of sexual violence against
women during wartime?
In the end, sexual violence against women in
conflict is not a sign of the strength of one power
over another —although militias may believe that
due to reasons that may date back to generations and
civilizations when women were the property of men
and their subjugation by opposing forces reflected back
on the parties to the conflict.
Our world now has evolved to where it is clear
and well-known that those terrible acts stand alone
and apart from war, expressing the rapists’ inabilities,
impotencies and wrongful thinking. Sexual violence
against women during conflict only reinforces in the
minds of the civilized world how wrong those guilty
warriors are and how bereft of merit their positions
must be to fall so low as to hurt the most vulnerable,
the most innocent and perhaps the least able to defend
themselves in those moments, against the senseless,
barbaric acts.
As our consciousness continues to grow and the
world evolves, we must take a united stand and say
“never more” to violence against women. We must hope
that those involved in conflict will one day understand
why they go to war and why half of the world does not
participate in their argument or in the spoils of war.
Yet that half always plays a part in the healing and the
return from conflict to peace and security once again.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a further
statement. I now give her the floor.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I apologize for taking the floor for a second
time during the meeting. However, I wish to respond to
the statement made by the representative of the Israeli
entity.
It is indeed unacceptable for the representative
of the Israeli occupation to speak of Israel’s respect
for human rights. She is proud that her country has
signed the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Accusations are meted out to

14-3104673/74

S/PV.7160

Women and peace and security

Arab countries and the countries of North Africa
concerning ways and means to eradicate sexual
violence, at a time when Israel continues to practice
all forms of violence against thousands of women and
young girls — Arabs and particularly Palestinians
under Israeli occupation — including acts of killing,
rape, violence, arbitrary detention and sexual abuse in
detention.
Perhaps the representative of the occupation
needs to be reminded that she represents an occupying
Power — a raping Power — one that has occupied
Arab territories for over 65 years and cannot be called
humanitarian, human or even credible. She ought to be
ashamed at the mere mention of one crime perpetrated
by her regime against a particular Palestinian woman
who was forced to give birth to her child at a checkpoint
and died without being allowed access to any medical
care.
The occupying Power respects none of the human
rights of the people under its occupation. Innocents

74/74

25/04/2014

are being killed, including women, children and the
elderly. Homes are being demolished on the heads of the
inhabitants, and acts of apartheid and ethnic cleansing
are carried out.
Let her keep her dispiriting thoughts to herself.
We need no sermons from the representative of that
discriminatory regime that violates the dozens of
resolutions that have condemned it and its abhorrent
practices against the Arab peoples, as well as aggression
against its neighbours.
I would advise her to cease shedding crocodile
tears for the men and women of Syria. Syria needs
no such poison. Rather, it awaits the liberation of the
Syrian Golan from the Israeli occupation.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

14-31046
