S/PV.7766

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7766th meeting

Wednesday, 31 August 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-27478 (E)
*1627478*

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Implementation of the note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/507)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): Let me begin by
congratulating Malaysia and your team, Mr. President,
for conducting the Security Council’s work so well
during this past month. We want to thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting and for providing a very
useful focus for our discussions, including on conflictprevention and on the Council’s working methods. In
our view, the Council’s capability to prevent conflict
is inherently linked to its methods of work and to the
way Council members relate with each other and with
the Secretariat. I want to make a couple of points on
two related subjects, namely, the importance of timely
information from the Secretariat and some observations
on confidentiality.
For the Council to act early, it is important that it
be aware of the potential threats and security. We need
to be well informed of developments where the Council
has a mandate to respond. In situations where there are
conflicting narratives of developments, the Secretariat
has a particularly important role in providing an
authoritative account. We saw that last week with the
briefing on Western Sahara, which was very useful
in providing a clear account of developments on a
contentious and sensitive issue. In situations that are
developing rapidly, it is vital that all Council members
be brought up to speed on the situation on the ground
quickly. Otherwise, elected members can be at a
significant disadvantage in such matters.
Council members also need to be informed of
broader emerging issues and potential crises where a
political impasse risks boiling over, or where regional
issues threaten to aggravate a fragile peace. We are
thankful for the efforts that the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs has been making in that
regard. As Council members, we need to continue to
apply political energy and creativity on this issue — one
2/15

31/08/2016

that we are going to take up next month in our presidency
of the Council.
The question of the timeliness of information also
relates to the reverse issue of confidentiality. During
our 20 months on the Council, we have championed
the importance of transparency in the Council’s
work as an important element of our responsibility
to the membership that elected us, and of our own
legitimacy, as the Security Council acts on their behalf.
But confidentiality is an important counterpoint to
transparency. The Secretariat cannot provide frank
assessments if they are immediately relayed outside
the Consultations Room. The members of the Council
cannot have meaningful political-level exchanges when
sensitive discussions are repeated verbatim. Ideas cannot
be tested and explored and instead become limited to
set-piece interventions, safe for public consumption,
not the frank exchange that is necessary when dealing
with complex and novel issues. In our view, we need
to do much better in ensuring that confidentiality is
respected as much as appropriate. If the Consultations
Room is not private, inevitably discussions will go
elsewhere, which is not in anyone’s interests.
We look forward to hearing further from the new
Council members on their reflections. I know that I can
count on members’ support in the month ahead.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I congratulate
you, Mr. President — Ramlan — and your team for
everything you have done in the successful month of
August. I think we have done a lot under your leadership.
We have reacted to a lot going on in the world, and so
I am glad that you have found time for this wrap-up
session. I will keep my remarks short and focused on
a couple of issues, as, you Sir, suggested in the helpful
concept note.
First, with regard to conflict prevention and,
secondly, the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, the link between
the two issues is transparency. I therefore very much
agree with what Gerard just said about that and, indeed,
with his other point about the flow of information from
the Secretariat. Just to take one example of conflict
prevention where we have failed as a Council, I would
mentin Syria. I thought we had a good meeting yesterday
on chemical weapons in Syria. But when we look at
the five-year history of the conflict, the Council has
failed to have any real impact on politically resolving
the conflict, and still less in preventing it in the first
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

place. A lot of the effort to try to do that has to take
place, inevitably, in private, but there are risks when we
do too much in private. Again, I very much agree with
what Gerard was saying about confidentiality about
things that need to remain confidential — but equally,
I think some things can be more transparent. I think we
would benefit from more confidentiality on some issues
and more transparency on others. Trying to hide the
scale and nature of the Syrian conflict from the wider
world is not something that benefits conflict prevention
or the search for peace.
If we take the situation in Aleppo as the most
extreme example, where the suffering of the Syrian
people is at its most extreme, it is a telling example
of a reality that, however bad we think it might be,
can always get worse. Our job here is to try to shine a
spotlight publicly on the situation there in order to try
to bring pressure to bear to encourage those responsible
for the situation to reform their ways and to bring peace
where there is currently war and tragedy and suffering.
Shedding light on issues on our agenda is therefore
extremely important, and is the flip side of the coin of
being confidential where we need to be confidential.
I am not talking about shedding light on an issue in
order to shock or horrify people, or to still less to score
political points. What is mean is that by focusing on a
deteriorating situation, we should show the world that
we are watching and that there is at least something
that we can do to try to prevent a bad situation from
getting even worse. If we do all of that in private, then
we are giving a free pass to those who are trying to
prosecute the savage, mindless war — by which I mean
the Syrian regime against its own people. Transparency
is therefore an important part of our toolkit when it
comes to trying to do a better job at conflict prevention
and conflict resolution.
The second, completely different, issue that I want
to focus on where there is the same tension between
confidentiality and transparency is the selection
process for the next Secretary-General. We have now
held three straw polls. Unsurprisingly, the full results
were available on Twitter within a few minutes of the
polling. I think that we are getting the worst of both
worlds. What we should be aiming for is confidentiality
as it relates to the candidates. Anything that we talk
to them about in the privacy of the Security Council
should remain absolutely confidential.

S/PV.7766

But then there are some other issues, including
the results, where I feel as though we could afford
to be much more transparent without damaging the
candidates’ dignity in any way. I would favour having
another look at what we do with the results of the straw
polls, while trying to be more transparent and building
up the relationship between the Security Council and
the General Assembly in the meantime. To refuse to
go in that direction reminds me of the English King
Canute, who tried to hold back the incoming tide.
We are not going to do so; we will just look foolish
by trying to keep those results private. I would be in
favour of more confidentiality on some issues but much
more transparency on others in order to maximize the
impact of our work.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President — Ramlan — and your entire team
for your work this month, as well as to congratulate
you on your presidency, which concludes today with
success. I also appreciate the concept note that you have
circulated in order to guide the discussion in this formal
wrap-up session. Spain is in favour of a sharper focus
in the debate on the issues in the wrap-up sessions,
and we underscore our desire for transparency and for
participation by all Member States. I will focus on two
areas that I think were the most important in work of
the Security Council this month. The first has to do
with non-proliferation issues, and the second with the
situation in Syria.
On the issue of non-proliferation, the month of
August has brought us both bad and good news. On the
subject of the bad news, we must once again lament
the fact that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continued to ignore Security Council resolutions. The
developing momentum in the situation in the Korean
peninsula is particularly concerning, given that ballistic
missile launches are taking place more often and with
greater success in reaching nearby coastal areas of
neighbouring States. This month, for the first time, we
have seen the successful launch of a ballistic missile
from a submarine, and the first one to fall within the
exclusive economic zone of another State. Despite
that disturbing situation, we also have to welcome the
fact that the Security Council has regained its unity
when it comes to the matter. On Friday, 26 August, we
unanimously condemned the launching of missiles by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, while also

16-274783/15

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

reiterating our determination to adopt new, meaningful
measures pursuant to resolution 2270 (2016).
Under the heading of good news, Spain is grateful to
the Malaysian presidency for convening the open debate
(see S/PV.7758) on non-proliferation, which took place
on 23 August. The presence of the Secretary-General
and of the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
and the participation of 61 delegations and international
organizations all served to highlight the great interest
that exists in the issue. During that debate, we noted, on
the one hand, that there existed shared concern about
new threats — in particular given the link between
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction and the
risks that have arisen due to technological and scientific
advances. On the other hand, however, there was also
a desire to strengthen preventive mechanisms and
instruments, such as resolution 1540 (2004), so as to
adapt them to the new context. The recent report of the
Joint Implementation Mechanism (JIM) shows that the
risks that resolution 1540 (2004) tries to prevent are not
illusory or amorphous. On the contrary, they are very
real risks, such as have already materialized in the case
of Syria. The terrible facts in the JIM report should to
serve as a stimulus for us to bolster the non-proliferation
regime within the scope of the United Nations.
On the second issue —Syria — the assessment
necessarily has to be a negative one, both from the
perspective of the evolution of the conflict as well
as from the vantage point of the Security Council’s
response. We began the month of August with a threat
that the distribution of assistance to Aleppo could be
blocked because of the fighting and the closure of the
Castello Road. Several Council meetings were held at
which we had an opportunity to discuss the issue in
depth — from the Arria Formula meeting on 8 August
to the open briefing on 22 August (see S/PV.7757).
However, we end the month in nearly the same
situation, with the United Nations calling for a 48-hour
humanitarian pause in order to enter the city, so far
without success.
All of us are aware of the dialogue between the
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group.
Spain is confident that the dialogue between the United
States and the Russian Federation can contribute to
renewing the cessation of hostilities — and even to
opening the door to a new round of talks in Geneva,
as has happened in the past. Nevertheless, the Security
Council has a responsibility to support the work being
done by the United Nations in Syria, in particular in
4/15

31/08/2016

the humanitarian area. That is why, in close contact
with all of the members of the Council — especially
Egypt and New Zealand — we will continue to follow
developments in the situation very closely. I take this
opportunity to congratulate New Zealand for the
priority attention it intends to accord the issue in the
programme of work for September.
Lastly, we are confident that the JIM report
presented yesterday to the Council will allow us
to ensure accountability with regard to the use of
chemical weapons in Syria. We thank you once again,
Mr. President, and we welcome New Zealand and
assure it of our full support during its presidency, which
begins tomorrow.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. We commend Malaysia’s presidency during
the month of August and its steady steering of the
Council’s work to a successful conclusion. With respect
to the Council’s work during the month, I would like to
emphasize the following three points.
First, on South Sudan, the Council held several
thorough briefings and adopted resolution 2304 (2016),
which adjusted the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. The situation is grave and
complex. The international community must make
concerted efforts to assist all parties in the country
to return to the track of a political settlement and to
implement the peace agreement in order to achieve peace
and stability as soon as possible. China supports the
resolution of African problems by Africans themselves,
using their own methods. We appreciate the efforts
and good offices on the part of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African
Union (AU) and States of the region on the question
of South Sudan. We support IGAD’s leading role on
the issue. It is our hope that the United Nations will
establish political synergies with IGAD and the AU
through communication and consultation to address
the problem of South Sudan. We welcome the recent
consultations held between the Chief of General Staff
of the national forces of IGAD and the Transitional
Government of National Unity of South Sudan on the
regional protection force. We hope that they will also
fully heed the views of the Transitional Government
of National Unity in reaching an agreement on the
specifics concerning the force.
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Secondly, on Syria, certain areas of the country
have recently experienced an escalation of conflict.
China is deeply concerned and believes that a political
solution is the only way out in addressing the question
of Syria. We support the efforts of the United States and
Russia, as co-Chairs of the International Syria Support
Group, with a view to intensifying coordination. The
international community should also take effective
measures aimed at easing the humanitarian situation
in the country, putting the ceasefire back on track and
creating conditions conducive to a political settlement
of the Syrian question. We welcome Russia’s agreement
on the United Nations initiative to call for weekly 48hour humanitarian pauses in Aleppo. The international
community should continue to support the leading role
of the United Nations towards a political settlement of
the Syrian question, including the work of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, as well as urge the parties to resume the Geneva
talks unconditionally. The parties in Syria should
abandon the mindset of a military settlement to the
Syrian question and commit themselves to dialogue and
negotiation with a view to gradually finding a solution
that is acceptable to all.
Thirdly, on counter-terrorism, on 30 August a
terrorist suicide-bomber attacked the Chinese Embassy
in Kyrgyzstan. China strongly condemns that serious
terrorist attack. Terrorism is a common enemy of
humankind. All forms of terrorism pose a threat to
international peace and security. The international
community should strengthen joint cooperation in order
to adopt universal standards aimed at firmly countering
any such activity, under any pretext or against any
country. The United Nations and the Security Council
should play the leading role in counter-terrorism
activities, which should be guided by the Charter of the
United Nations. The international community should
step up effective coordination to establish a united
front against terrorism and to ensure that terrorists
have nowhere to hide. As an important member of the
coalition against terrorism, China will continue actively
participating in bilateral and multilateral cooperation
against terrorism in order to contribute positively and
constructively to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
China also wishes New Zealand all the best during
its presidency during the month of September.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt): On behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, we wish to

S/PV.7766

congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency
and for a job well done during a very busy month with
many achievements. We also look forward to the New
Zealand presidency and to cooperating and supporting
it in ensuring a successful outcome.
On behalf of the African members of the Council, I
wish to highlight the following conclusions, with a focus
on key messages emanating from the two open debates
organized under the Malaysian presidency — namely,
on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7753) and on
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (see
S/PV.7758). Towards the end of the statement, I will
share a few thoughts on working methods, as requested
by you, Sir, in your very helpful concept paper.
The convening of the open debate on children
and armed conflict was both timely and important, at
a time when we are witnessing the plight of children
as they suffer the scourge of war and armed conflict.
We believe that the international community still lacks
appropriate tools for effective preventive action. There
are a number of messages we can draw from the debate
that we would like to highlight, and on which we call
for further action by the Council and its Working Group
chaired by Malaysia.
First, children are the most vulnerable and the
most affected by indiscriminate attacks during armed
conflict, in particular attacks on densely populated
areas — including schools, hospitals and medical
facilities — by military forces and armed and terrorist
groups. Such attacks represent criminal acts, and
therefore call for measures to hold the perpetrators to
account. We underscore the importance of resolution
2286 (2016), on medical care in armed conflict, as a
policy framework for the prevention of such attacks in
the future.
Secondly, concerning measures to protect children
in post-conflict situations, there is a need to reach
agreement on specific commitments related to child
protection throughout peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. Those should include requirements for
the rapid release of children from armed forces and
non-State armed groups.
Thirdly, the international community is called
upon to review the recommendations of the Graça
Machel report (see A/51/306), in particular those
relating to displaced and refugee children, given the
shortage of financial resources available to carry
out the recommendations relating to host States in

16-274785/15

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

particular. Moreover, much work remains to be done
with regard to sexual exploitation and gender-based
violence, as well as the effects of sanctions regimes on
the health, nutrition, psychological rehabilitation and
education of children in armed conflict. In addition,
greater emphasis is required on social reintegration of
children through psychological support, educational
programmes and professional training.
Fourthly, the mandates of the mechanisms
established to address the plight of children in armed
conflict continue to focus on information gathering
with regard to violations committed in hotbeds of
tension and conflict. Their reports are only a means of
monitoring, and fall short of providing the necessary
practical and realistic means of protecting children — a
task that falls under their mandate.
Fifthly, and finally, there is a need for a three-fold
action plan: guaranteeing the protection of children,
strengthening preventive measures, and ensuring
accountability for perpetrators of war crimes.
The convening of the debate on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction highlighted that the
world has become more complicated and dangerous in
the light of the evolving security challenges, including
the expansion of terrorist organizations worldwide.
The fact that such organizations have had access and
have been able to use chemical weapons in areas of
the Middle East is alarming and calls for determined
action. We can draw several conclusions from that
debate, as well as further points of potential progress to
be explored by the Council.
First, the international community currently faces
emerging security threats arising from newly developed
technologies, especially those with dual-use features,
such as 3-D printing, the Dark Web, cyberwarfare,
genetic editing, synthetic biology and unmanned
aerial vehicles.
Secondly, within the framework of the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), we have to focus on the
further enhancement of cooperation and coordination
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations by prioritizing technical support and
assistance, as well as the exchange of information,
knowledge and expertise in that domain. Accordingly,
technical assistance and capacity-building are vital for
developing countries.
6/15

31/08/2016

Thirdly, African States spare no effort, regionally
and internationally, to contribute to the promotion of
the implementation process of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the subsequent resolution 1977 (2011). There is a
need to strengthen the mechanism under the former in
order to keep pace with the rapid developments at the
political, technical, scientific and technological levels.
Fourthly, the three African members of the
Security Council would like to reiterate that the sole,
most effective path to prevent terrorism and to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
is the total elimination of those weapons in all regions
of the world.
With regard to the working methods, the three
African members of the Council stress the need for more
action-oriented discussions and more transparency
in the work of the Council. In that regard, they first
invite Council members to continue strengthening their
interaction with countries that are on the Council’s
agenda, as well as with countries of the region, by
holding more frequent informal interactive dialogues,
particularly before renewing the mandate of peace
missions deployed by the Council, in order to allow
more discussion on the political and operational aspects
of the conflicts. The interactive dialogue held on Mali
last month was a case in point and was very helpful.
Secondly, the three African members of the Council
welcome the field visits made this year to several African
countries, which provided the Council opportunities to
interact with the main political stakeholders, such as
national authorities, and with regional and international
partners with respect to issues pertaining to efforts
aimed at fostering peace processes in those countries.
Finally, the three African members of the Council
would like to stress the importance of strengthening the
Council’s cooperation with the African Union Peace
and Security Council. The annual consultations in that
regard, as well as country-specific informal dialogues,
such as the one about to happen later this week in
Addis Ababa, on South Sudan and the question of
financing peace operations authorized by the Security
Council and launched by the African Union or regional
organizations, are of vital importance.
Once again, I would like to thank you and
congratulate you, Mr. President. We look forward to
working with the next President, the Ambassador of
New Zealand.
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): First and foremost, we would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this session
to review the work of the Security Council during the
month of August. We would also like to congratulate
you and your entire delegation for the outstanding work
carried out this month. We are grateful for the concept
note you prepared, Sir, to guide our discussion today.
Turning to your point, Mr. President, about
potential areas of convergence between the Security
Council and the General Assembly in the area of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, we believe
that, rather than viewing it as a matter of convergences,
the Assembly and the Council could employ a division
of labour based on the competencies enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
The Security Council is charged with addressing
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction from the perspective of the fight
against terrorism, particularly as it relates to adopting
measures to prevent non-State actors, including terrorist
groups, from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
There is no doubt that the globalization of commercial,
logistical and economic transactions has made the task
of controlling proliferation more complex, and has
made it easier for non-State actors and terrorists to
take advantage of transnational criminal networks in
their attempt to obtain weapons of mass destruction.
It is also true that terrorism has expanded its violent
methods and terrorists are more determined than ever
to obtain weapons of mass destruction and to use them
on civilians, as has occurred in Syria and Iraq.
In that connection, the Security Council plays
a fundamental role through resolution 1540 (2004),
and in fact has made strides in efforts to prevent,
investigate and respond to the threats and risks linked
to nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. Resolution
1540 (2004) has made it possible for the international
community to make headway in tackling the issue of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. That has been accomplished, inter
alia, by improving reports, bolstering or adopting
new legislation, providing assistance, cooperating at
the regional level and drawing up national plans of
action. We are concerned that the Security Council is
not yet ready to assert that the only way to avoid the
destruction of the environment or of humankind by
way of such weapons, especially nuclear weapons, is
through their total elimination. That being the case,

S/PV.7766

we believe that the Security Council, as an organ,
finds itself constrained in spearheading the process of
nuclear disarmament.
It falls to the General Assembly — whose very first
resolution focused on disarmament — to work towards
the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty and the negotiation and adoption of an
internationally verifiable treaty banning the production
of fissionable material, as well as a comprehensive
treaty prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons, among others.
We also believe there to be another urgent,
pending issue, namely, the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. In that connection,
we urge Israel and other countries to unblock action on
the issue and to take concrete steps towards signing an
agreement to that effect.
The permanent members of the Security Council,
as nuclear-weapon States, have a fundamental role to
play in that process. Achieving a world free of nuclear
weapons necessarily entails a broad discussion on
all issues related to disarmament and international
security, based on the principles of preserving the
security of the individual parties and not allowing any
State to gain an advantage over any other, always with
a view to ensuring military stability without affecting
security and without weapons of mass destruction. That
discussion process should be open, broad and inclusive,
as set out in the proposal for the convening of the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament.
Turning to the second part of your concept note,
Sir, in connection with lessons learned and possible
ways to improve the future performance of the Security
Council in terms of conflict prevention — including,
for example, with regard to South Sudan, Syria and
Western Sahara — we believe that a critical area that has
been overlooked when in comes to conflict prevention
in the Security Council is the mobilizing of resources
for sustaining peace, which is essential for generating
peace dividends, including creating jobs, providing
public services, establishing solid political institutions
and providing justice.
We believe that preventing conflicts requires
more diplomacy and dialogue, and fewer threats and
sanctions. There appears to be a tendency among some
members of the Security Council to apply Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations, instead of the

16-274787/15

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

mechanisms aimed at preventing conflict as provided
under Chapter VI of the Charter — in practice, turning
to the various regional and subregional organizations
around the world. Resolving conflicts is always a
political undertaking, and there is therefore a need for
political will to prevent and resolve them.
We also want to highlight the damage done to the
Organization, and the world in general by, the double
standards by which the Council often operates. We have
spoken here about working methods, confidentiality and
transparency, but I would like to talk about silence. There
are issues that are subject to an absolutely untransparent
silence on the part of the Council. When members of
this organ work actively to prevent the dissemination of
information about conflict situations in certain parts of
the world, all members of the international community
are kept in the dark about key aspects that ought to
be addressed in order to prevent conflicts. That is the
case in Palestine and Western Sahara, for instance,
where silence and the untransparent manner in which
those issues are addressed call into question the entire
international security and peacekeeping apparatus that
serves to underpin relations among States.
I would mention, for example, the incident on
11 August in the vicinity of Al-Guerguerat, where
Moroccan military forces several times crossed the
berm, in violation of the ceasefire agreement, into
the Bir Gandouz sector, next to the first Sahrawicontrolled military region. We believe that such events
do not receive adequate attention from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. By not being provided
with timely information on such developments, it was
not until 26 August that members of the Council were
informed — in closed consultations requested by my
country — about what had occurred. Such practices are
inacceptable. For we cannot overlook, for the sake of
political expediency, protracted conflict situations that
have an impact on international peace and security.
Furthermore, the situation in the occupied
territories of the State of Palestine has continued
to worsen, without the Council being able to send a
clear message demanding Israel to end its settlement
policy — the consequence of its prolonged military
occupation for nearly half a century. We have insisted
that the Israeli occupation is the main cause of human
rights and international humanitarian law violations
in the occupied territories. More than five years have
elapsed since the adoption of a Security Council
resolution on the Palestinian question.
8/15

31/08/2016

To conclude, we would like to mention the open
debate (see S/PV.7753) on children and armed conflict,
during which a considerable number of countries
supported the agenda of the Security Council on the
subject. It is necessary to highlight that the issues of
accountability and protecting children in armed conflict
must be addressed in a non-selective and impartial
manner, while respecting the respective mandates of the
mechanisms established to that end in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of United
Nations, applicable international law and the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
I reiterate our congratulations to you, Mr. President,
and to your delegation for the outstanding way in
which you have led the work of the Council during the
month of August. Once again, we extend our hand in
cooperation with New Zealand in what we are certain
will be a successful piloting of the Council’s business
in the month of September.
Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): Please accept our sincere
congratulations, Sir, on having successfully steered the
Security Council’s work during the month of August.
We also would like to commend the highly professional
work of the entire Malaysian delegation, which allowed
the Council to conduct its daily business in an effective
and efficient manner. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Malaysia on its National
Day of Independence, which falls on today’s date.
Because the Council’s formal wrap-up sessions are not
held regularly, which is regrettable in our opinion, we
appreciate the holding of today’s meeting.
At the outset of Malaysia’s presidency, the Council
held an open debate (see S/PV.7753) on the subject
of children and armed conflict. The debate vividly
demonstrated that, even though, on a fundamental
level, United Nations States Members appreciate the
gravity of the problem, they have different views and
approaches on how to address the subject. Regardless of
divergent views on some aspects of the issue, the crux
of the matter is that, without eliminating conflicts, or
at least reducing their intensity, children will continue
to bear the brunt of suffering in war zones, and the
international community will continue to grapple with
the challenge of how to help affected children. In that
regard, it is absolutely crucial that the Council redouble
its efforts to prevent potential conflicts and contribute
to the settlement of ongoing ones, thereby removing
the core cause of threats to the lives and well-being of
children and other vulnerable groups.
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

The other open debate (see S/PV.7758), on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs), was also very pertinent to the current state
of affairs on the world stage. The integrity of the
global non-proliferation regime has been severely
compromised by the irresponsible actions of some
actors. In a world in which established norms and
international instruments can be blatantly violated
without accountability and where might makes right,
it is particularly disturbing that some exploit existing
gaps in the system and feel free to pursue WMD
programmes of their own. In fact, in some cases, like
that of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, we
are witnessing a worrying trend of complete disregard
for international obligations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Rogue non-State actors similarly
are attempting to acquire WMDs, and the most recent
conclusions of the Joint Investigative Mechanism on the
use of mustard gas by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant looks almost banal in the current environment.
It is anything but banal. The violations committed by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must not be
treated as a routine item on the Council’s agenda, and
law and order in the international arena must be upheld
if global non-proliferation efforts are not to be wasted.
Another hallmark activity of the Council during
the month of August was the selection process of the
next Secretary-General. So far, we have held three
straw polls. While the results of the polls are no secret
to anyone even remotely interested in the subject, the
Council as an organ persists in maintaining its old
ways while rejecting any attempt to reform its work. In
the light of the recent changes made to the process for
the selection of the Secretary-General, characterized
by the unprecedented openness and transparency
introduced by the General Assembly, the Council’s
fascination with so-called “established practice’ is
truly incomprehensible. The steadfast refusal by some
Council members to consider the possibility of formally
making the results of the straw polls public does no good
either to the Council or the candidates. As we all have
learned, the results are leaked almost immediately, and
the Council subsequently finds itself in a situation in
which it is unable to provide transparency as to its work
or to ensure confidentiality to the candidates. On that
matter, I would like to underline that our delegation,
together with many others, advocates for a more
transparent process, including properly informing the
general United Nations membership of the outcomes of
the straw polls. The selection process is far from being

S/PV.7766

over, and nothing bars the Council from introducing
long-awaited changes in its work.
The Council is usually preoccupied with grave and
sombre issues. Against that background, the signing of
a final peace agreement by the Government of Colombia
and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia was
a much welcome reprieve. We welcome the successful
completion of efforts to end the 50-year-old conflict.
We are ready to engage constructively in efforts to
consider the Council’s next steps to support the peace
process in Colombia.
In conclusion, I once again congratulate you, Sir,
on the successful completion of Malaysia’s presidency,
and I would like to convey a message of our full support
to the incoming presidency of New Zealand in the
difficult month of September.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation): We would like
to thank you personally, Sir, and the delegation of
Malaysia for effectively presiding over the Security
Council in August. That always demands intensive
efforts. Your presidency was characterized by a very
busy agenda. We note the timeliness of holding a
meeting (see S/PV.7758) on the issue of non-proliferation
and resolution 1540 (2004) . As we all know, the
global non-proliferation architecture is based on three
components — the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention. The
Russian Federation takes an active part in all of them.
Resolution 1540 (2004) provides another basis for
non-proliferation efforts. It is a reliable shield against
the eventuality of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of non-State actors. We are sure that the
implementation of the resolution by all countries and in
full is an urgent task facing the international community.
Information that non-State actors have gained access to
chemical weapons requires detailed investigation and
a response from the Council. It is unacceptable that
non-State actors be given any form of support allowing
them access to weapons of mass destruction.
As always, the African cluster was at the centre of
the Council’s attention. On several occasions this past
month, the Security Council discussed the situation
in the Sudan and South Sudan. We abstained in the
voting on resolution 2304 (2016). As is often the case
in dealing with South Sudan, during the drafting stage
the American sponsors of the resolution ignored the
legitimate concerns of our and many other delegations

16-274789/15

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

on important issues affecting the sovereignty of the
host country, including the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and a possible arms embargo. The fact
that the modalities of those forces require substantive
fine-tuning is shown by the fact that there are ongoing
discussions on that issue by delegations of South
Sudan and key regional players. We welcome those
discussions and hope that there will be a constructive
exchange of information on a whole range of issues
relating to the settlement of the South Sudan issue
during the meeting scheduled for 5 September in Addis
Ababa. That will be a meeting between members of the
Security Council, representatives of the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
plus format.
It must be noted, unfortunately, that some
delegations periodically use their status as members of
the Security Council to politicize issues for propaganda
purposes in order to shed light on certain subjects,
rather than make quiet, painstaking efforts to maintain
international peace and security in the framework
of the statutory powers of the Security Council. An
illustration of that trend was the holding of an Arria
Formula on 8 August on the situation in Aleppo. The
holding of that event was announced just the day
before, and the meeting itself was another propaganda
show presenting tried and tested political standard fare.
Its organizers were not guided by the goal of settling
the Syrian problem, but rather sought to advance their
own personal agendas, which was far more important
to them.
We were also surprised at the Secretariat’s
organization of that meeting. There was a live broadcast
of the meeting, although earlier — for example, with
regard to the organization of the Arria Formula meeting
on Palestine — representatives of the Secretariat
made reference to established practice and said that
a broadcast of such events was not possible. We were
therefore very puzzled by the change in approach. We
expect the Secretariat to provide a detailed explanation
of the issues raised. We believe that the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions should consider
that problem when it prepares the updated version of
presidential note S/2010/507. I would like to remind
colleagues in the Council that Arria Formula meetings
were conceived as informal, confidential meetings for
frank exchanges of private views on issues covered by
the Security Council’s mandate. We cannot agree with
10/15

31/08/2016

the practice followed by members of the Council to
abuse that format and use it for advertising their own
private initiatives.
Turning to Syria, we must refer to the inhumane
actions on the part of the Syrian radical opposition,
which interrupted the United Nations humanitarian
operation in Aleppo, which had already been prepared.
After agreeing to allow convoys of trucks with
humanitarian aid for the civilian population to go
through, at the last minute those jihadist-oppositionists
began to set obviously unacceptable and unrealistic
preconditions. Such a clearly defiant step obviously
reveals the true face of those pseudo-fighters for the
Syrian people. They are not ashamed to exploit the
difficult humanitarian situation so as to achieve their
own destructive goals.
For our part, we will continue to work in a
constructive manner and in cooperation with the United
Nations in preparing the humanitarian operation in
Aleppo along the lines of what we are already doing
in that area. We also confirm our readiness to hold the
48-hour humanitarian pause so as to deliver aid to those
areas that can be reached. However, we would like once
again to remind Council members that the Russian side
has responded promptly to the appropriate proposal from
the United Nations and joined in the work to address
the issues relating to the secure passage of convoys
along the Castello Road and reach an agreement with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regarding
the modalities for humanitarian operations.
In conclusion, I would like to wish every success
to the delegation of New Zealand, which will lead
the Council in September. The month of September
is usually a very busy one, and we want to assure our
colleagues of our full support.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
First, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, and your
entire delegation for the excellent work carried out
during the month of August. In addition, I also take
this opportunity to wish New Zealand a successful
presidency during the month of September and to assure
it of our readiness to collaborate to ensure its success.
I would like to begin by thanking you, Sir,
for convening this formal wrap-up session and for
circulating the concept note yesterday. In line with that
note, I promise that I will not exceed the 5-minute limit.
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

As my delegation has said on past occasions, this
is a format that enables us to make a formal statement
during the meeting, and it is also an opportunity for
anyone who would like to hear our statement but is
unable to attend to do so through our website, regardless
of where they are. this is therefore an exercise in
transparency, which I must highlight. My delegation
has pointed out on more than one occasion that it would
represent a step towards transparency if, whenever
we have a format that includes a briefing followed by
consultations, delegations could make their statements
here in the Chamber. I must admit that, to some degree,
we have already begun to do that in dealing with the
Syrian humanitarian track. We must therefore highlight
that as a notable development during August. However,
we hope that in the near future that practice can also be
extended to many other issues.
August was not a productive month when it comes
to humanitarian issues. The situations in Syria, Yemen,
South Sudan and other areas have been showing us
that we have not yet been able to find the necessary
solutions to alleviate the suffering of the people who
are victims of armed conflicts. I would like to pause for
a moment to reflect on what the Council was not able to
do — or, rather, failed to do.
Although there is clear awareness in the Council
of the serious humanitarian crises — or rather
catastrophes — in Syria and Yemen, we were unable
to agree on the text of a press release following
consultations on Yemen on 3 August, nor were we able to
do so on Syria on 9 and 22 August. It is hard to imagine
what civilians in a besieged area in Syria might think
if one of us were to try to explain to them the reasons
why we were unable to issue a statement condemning
the situation, or what a child who has nothing to eat
and no medicines to treat their ailments might think of
us; or if that child cannot go to school because of the
conflict, or was recruited by the terrorists or suffered
sexual violence at their hands.
Unfortunately, the month of August once again saw
a blockage in the Security Council’s ability in the face
of issues for which it bears inescapable responsibility.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency during the month of August,
during which you presided over two open debates (see
S/PV.7753 and S/PV.7758) and two straw polls, two
straw polls. The straw polls showed that the Council’s

S/PV.7766

procedures, which you, Sir, very effectively managed,
indeed work. The best proof of that lies in the fact that
the Council was able methodically to move forward
in a unified manner on the very demanding work of
selecting the individual who will lead the Organization
as of next year. At the appropriate time, the Council
willl have to make its recommendation to the General
Assembly, pursuant to Article 97 of the Charter of the
United Nations, in such a way as to enable the man or
woman who will become the next Secretary-General to
prepare for that difficult task.
I would also like to say a few words on Syria,
which calls for the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities. The consultations that took place
yesterday following the submission of the report of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism served to bring us
face-to-face with our responsibilities. That is not vague
wording, but a reality. The use of chemical weapons
by the Syrian regime and by Da’esh, as the report
clearly established, constitutes a step backward that
we cannot allow to go without a response, or there will
be serious consequences. Those who committed those
crimes — who are now known to us — must face up to
their weighty responsibility.
The month of August also saw the Council closely
following the very worrying humanitarian situation
in Syria. The Security Council held an important and
disturbing Arria Formula meeting on 8 August. I hope
that it will contribute to raising greater awareness about
the disaster in Aleppo. I would like to thank all the
delegations that took part, even if some of them felt
that they were implicated. The Council moved to act
on the situation in Aleppo owing to the humanitarian
crisis. In the consultations that took place on 9 August,
Mr. Stephen O’Brien and Mr. Staffan de Mistura
expressed their deep concern and called upon the two
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group
to find a solution during their discussions in Geneva.
On 22 August (see S/PV.7756), Mr. O’Brien spoke
here of his great concern about the failure to deliver
humanitarian aid to all the besieged towns in the
country. He also expressed his hope that that would
be the last time he had to ask for humanitarian access,
which is an obligation guaranteed under international
humanitarian law. Unfortunately, we are very far from
that. On this issue too, the Council must show itself to
be up to its responsibilities.
I just mentioned the chemical weapons in Syria.
In fact, the issue of non-proliferation issue was also

16-2747811/15

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

at the centre of the Council’s work this month. You,
Mr. President, convened an open debate (see S/PV.7758)
on the isue. However, the Council also dealt with the
situation in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Fortunately, we regained our unity this month,
following a further, irresponsible provocation by the
authorities in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The Council condemned in no uncertain terms
the ballistic missile tests undertaken by Pyongyang,
which constitute a direct threat to its neighbours.
I recall that a missile landed this past month in the
territorial waters of Japan, a Member of the United
Nations and of the Security Council. It was also a threat
to the non-proliferation regime, on which our collective
security is based. We must reinforce our message and
specify new listings so that the authorities in Pyongyang
have no misunderstanding as to our determination to
prevent them from continuing to advance their illegal
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.
By way of conclusion, on the issue of South
Sudan, the month of August included follow-up by the
Council with regard to the worsening of the situation
in that country since July with the outbreak of violence
in Juba. It was important for the Council to remind
everyone of the importance it gives to the protection of
civilians. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
is operating in a particularly difficult environment and
is encountering a number of obstacles in implementing
its mandate. It was therefore important for the Council
to reiterate its full support for the Mission. The Council
also reminded the parties that they should recommit
themselves to peace. Along with its regional partners,
such as Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union, the Council must continue to
assume its responsibilities, as it will do in the coming
days by undertaking a visit to South Sudan. It is high
time for the Council to finally put in place an essential
arms embargo for that beleaguered country — a
common sense decision that we should have taken a
long time ago.
I should like to conclude by mentioning Lebanon
and pointing out that we adopted a strong presidential
statement at the end of July (S/PRST/2016/10) to deplore
the vacancy in the presidency. During the consultations
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on
24 August, we pointed to the situation in southern
Lebanon 10 years after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006). We reiterated our collective support for the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
12/15

31/08/2016

in carrying out its mandate to safeguard the cessation
of hostilities. On 30 August, we unanimously adopted
resolution 2305 (2016) to extend the mission’s mandate
for another year. We welcome the Council’s support for
UNIFIL and for the stability of southern Lebanon — in
a region, the Middle East, that does not deserve another
crisis.
The month of August has therefore been one of
great substance, and I would like to thank you, Sir, for
your work during your presidency. I also welcome the
presidency of New Zealand for the month of September,
which will be equally busy.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, for guiding the Security Council through
the month of August, which turned out to be quite a full
month of developments, good and bad — but mostly
bad, unfortunately. Today, I would like to focus on just
a few points, as suggested in the concept note. I would
like to concentrate on North Korea and South Sudan.
In doing so, I would like to stress the importance of the
unity, action and effectiveness of the Security Council.
On North Korea, my delegation stresses the
importance of the united message sent by the Council
in the press statement (SC/12494) to strongly condemn
the submarine-launched ballistic missile launched
on 23 August and the series of preceding launches
by North Korea, which were in flagrant violation of
obligations under Security Council resolutions. Those
launches contribute to North Korea’s development of
nuclear-weapon-delivery systems and increase tensions
in the region and beyond. The launches, including one
impacting in Japans air defence identification zone,
pose an increasing threat to Japan’s national security.
We welcome the fact that the Council demonstrated
unity in condemning acts of provocation by North
Korea through its press statement on 26 August, but that
is not enough. We must not let those violent acts pass
without consequence. In the light of the seriousness
of the situation, the Council should consider taking
further measures in response to North Korea’s clear
and continuing threats to international peace and
security, bearing in mind the determination that we
expressed in resolution 2270 (2016) to take further
significant measures in the event of a further nuclear
test or launch. I would also like to repeat the call of
my Government to urge all Member States to redouble
their efforts to fully implement and enforce the relevant
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Council resolutions, including by submitting national
implementation reports.
On South Sudan, Japan has contributed to
nation-building in that country through various
forms of assistance and by contributing troops to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Japan supports the strengthening of UNMISS
through resolution 2304 (2016). In addition to the
full implementation by the parties of the agreement
on a resolution to the conflict, the establishment of
a regional protection force under the basic principles
of peacekeeping, including the consent of the parties,
represents the most effective response to address the
situation on the ground. The upcoming Council visit to
South Sudan will be an important opportunity for the
Council to convey a clear message to the Transitional
Government of National Unity.
Before concluding, I would like to stress the
importance that Japan attaches to improving the
working methods of the Council. In that context, allow
me to briefly touch upon the new and inclusive process
for selecting the chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Council for 2017. We are in the implementation phase of
the new note S/2016/619 by the President of the Security
Council, of 15 July. From the beginning of August, as
co-facilitators of the process, the United Kingdom and
Japan have been consulting informally with the newly
elected and the incumbent members of the Council.
We will undertake further consultations in accordance
with the text and spirit of the presidential note.
I would again like to thank the Malaysian
representative and his delegation for all of the good
work they have done during the month of August. I
wish the representative of New Zealand a successful
presidency in the month of September. We would like
to assure him that we will provide all of the support he
will need.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): As we
head into September and a new General Assembly
high season, it is appropriate for us to take a moment
to consider some of the Security Council priorities we
have addressed during the busy month of August, which
we will need to continue to address moving forward.
In particular, I would like to focus on the Council’s
work on Syria and South Sudan and to briefly touch
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
our ongoing deliberations on the selection of the next
Secretary-General.

S/PV.7766

As we have for so many months, in August the
Council focussed on the political, humanitarian and
security situations in Syria, as other colleagues have
noted. I, too, would like to take a moment to recall the
very moving Arria Forumula meeting that the United
Kingdom, France, New Zealand and Ukraine hosted
with us, where we heard directly from those who
witnessed the siege in Aleppo. They were individuals
who had worked so hard to try to relieve some of the
terrible suffering there, including medical doctors
and first-responder White Helmets. The scenes they
described and images they shared showed clearly a
humanitarian catastrophe of searing scale. Cutting off
food and medicine to hundreds of thousands of innocent
civilians undermines the cessation of hostilities and
plays into the hands of violent extremist groups. The
next day, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs Stephen O’Brien and Special Envoy Staffan
de Mistura met with the Council and called for an
immediate renewal of the cessation of hostilities and a
pause to enable humanitarian access.
Incredibly, largely because of the Syrian regime’s
obstruction, no inter-agency United Nations convoys
were able to deliver assistance from 1 to 23 August,
and from 23 to 29 August just four United Nations
inter-agency convoys delivered assistance to besieged
or hard-to-reach areas in Syria. We simply must see
improvements in humanitarian access. As I said in the
Chamber a little more than one week ago, while the
United States condemns all parties to the conflict that
use siege tactics, we must be clear that the Al-Assad
regime and its international backers are responsible for
the suffering of the overwhelming majority of Syrians
living under siege.
That leads me to a point I would like to make
regarding the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Just
yesterday, we received a disturbing but important
briefing from High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Kim Won-soo and Joint Investigative
Mechanism Head Virginia Gamba. We are reviewing
the findings of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and United Nations. But, based on what we
have heard, the case is strong and clear that a robust
Council response is warranted. It is essential that we
come together to ensure consequences for those who
have used chemical weapons in Syria.
Another country where the status quo is unbearable
is South Sudan. The Security Council took important

16-2747813/15

S/PV.7766

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

action this month to respond to calls from key regional
partners to establish a regional protection force within
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Resolution 2304 (2016) sets out three priorities for the
4,000-strong regional protection force: first, facilitaing
safe and free movement in Juba; secondly, protecting
key facilities; and, thirdly, preventing attacks against
civilians, the United Nations and humanitarian actors.
The force will have the authority to use all the necessary
means to carry out those responsibilities. Those efforts
will support the broader mission of UNMISS to protect
civilians, monitor human rights, facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and support the implementation
of the peace agreement. We look forward to the Council
mission that Senegal and the United States will lead to
South Sudan starting tomorrow.
Another challenge on the Council’s docket that
requires resolve involves the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Again, and more than once, the
Council was required to meet urgently to address a new
provocation by North Korea. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s actions, and the advancements in
its ballistic-missile capabilities in particular, cannot
be ignored.
I would also like to mention our work on the
selection of the next Secretary-General. The Council
held its second and third straw polls in August, and we
feel that the process is moving in the right direction.
But we must stay focussed on our deliberations, despite
the busy month ahead. Even as we plan for the arrival
of many of our countries’ leaders in just a few weeks,
we look forward to continuing our efforts in September
to identify the best qualified candidate to lead the
Organization into the next decade.
Finally, I would like to thank Malaysia for its superb
leadership of the Council this month, and to offer our
support to New Zealand as it takes up the gavel in the
busy month of September.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.
I wish to thank my colleagues for the many kind
words extended to me and my delegation. We are
truly appreciative of the support extended and for the
constructiveness demonstrated by all Security Council
members throughout the month of August, during
which Malaysia had the honour and privilege to preside
over the Council. I also wish to thank all delegations for
participating in the wrap-up session today.
14/15

31/08/2016

The joint statement delivered by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the three African members of the
Council —Angola, Egypt and Senegal — highlighted
the flexibility of this meeting’s format, as envisioned
in the note by the President S/2010/507. Malaysia
continues to believe that formal wrap-ups such as these
provide an excellent opportunity for the Council’s selfreflection in an open and transparent manner. While
acknowledging that interactivity, especially with
non-Council members, is an issue, we continue to
believe that alternating between formal and informal,
or Toledo-style wrap-ups, as has been the practice
for most of the year, at least provides a good mix and
balances the need for accountability and interactivity.
As a final word on working methods, my delegation
would strongly encourage Japan, in its capacity as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and other Procedural Questions, and in the context of
the upcoming comprehensive review of note 507, to
thoroughly consider the need for the Council to better
manage the expectations of the wider membership,
especially with regard to transparency in the Council’s
work.
From the vantage point afforded by the President’s
seat, I am pleased to note that, despite the expectation
that August would be somewhat less eventful, that was
hardly the case. That is by no means to suggest that we had
expected or anticipated the many situations that broke
out or flared up. Rather, the programme of work that we
adopted provided sufficient flexibility to accommodate
a range of issues. For the record, the Council adopted a
total of nine products throughout August. Two of them
were key resolutions, namely, resolution 2304 (2016), on
South Sudan, and resolution 2305 (2016), on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which we adopted
yesterday. We also adopted an important presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/13) in support of the ongoing
political and election processes in Somalia. Five press
statements were adopted. Two of them expressed the
Council’s strong condemnation of terrorist attacks in
Turkey and in Kabul. Other situations on which the
Council pronounced itself included denouncing the
killings of civilians in North Kivu province in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the Sudan
and South Sudan, particularly our support for the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel road
map agreement. Finally, a press statement was adopted
that expressed the Council’s collective concern about
developments in the Korean peninsula.
16-27478

31/08/2016

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)

Beyond those outcomes, significant discussions
were held on a range of other issues and situations.
As mentioned by earlier speakers, the Council’s early
action to support the peace process in Colombia is
noteworthy. In that regard, we look forward to working
closely with other Council members to ensure that the
gains made can be consolidated through the United
Nations coordinated support and facilitation, with
the assistance of the guarantor and accompanying
countries, including fellow Council member Venezuela.
I also wish to express my delegation’s deepest
sympathy and condolences to the Chinese delegation
on the suicide car-bomb attack against the Chinese
Embassy in Bishkek yesterday. We strongly condemn
the attack against premises that are inviolable under
international law.
Malaysia strongly believes that there remains
much scope for the Council to improve its record
and practices with regard to conflict prevention. To
that end, the initiative of improving the Council’s
situational awareness, spearheaded by New Zealand,
is important and should benefit from thorough and
positive consideration by all Council members.
Malaysia is also pleased to have convened the
Council’s annual open debate (see S/PV.7753) on
children and armed conflict this month. We continue
to believe that the mechanism on children and armed
conflict remains one of the most effective instruments
at Council’s disposal to advocate for the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict around the
world. That important role and mandate must continue
to command the Council’s undivided support.
The high-level open debate (see S/PV.7758) on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) was another initiative that Malaysia undertook
this month. The debate was convened primarily to
support the ongoing comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
led by Spain. At the same time, the debate also sought
to highlight the importance of continued international
focus on the threat posed by the possible proliferation
of WMDs and related materials and technologies to
non-State actors and violent extremist groups. We

S/PV.7766

believe that the debate successfully highlighted the
linkages between ongoing conflicts and the possible risk
of the proliferation of WMD material and technologies.
Finally, Malaysia is also honoured and deeply
privileged to have been twice entrusted with facilitating
the appointment process for the next Secretary-General
this month. We continue to believe that the appointment
process could benefit from greater transparency. After
all, we are in the process of selecting an individual who
will lead the United Nations at a time when it is beset by
significant challenges that require strength and tenacity
of will to overcome. As such, our decision as a Council
must not depart from the expectations of the full range
of partners and stakeholders, namely, the international
community at large.
I wish to conclude by expressing once again,
on behalf of the Malaysian delegation, our deepest
appreciation to all Council members for the support and
constructive cooperation rendered to us throughout the
month. We sincerely hope that the spirit of flexibility,
compromise and goodwill that is a hallmark of the
Council and its members will continue to prevail.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
August, I would like again to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Malaysia to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives and their respective staffs,
as well as to the secretariat of the Council, for all the
support they have given us. It has been a busy month
indeed, and one in which we rallied to consensus on
several important issues within our purview. We could
not have done it alone without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and of
the representatives of the secretariat, includinig all the
relevant Conference Officers and interpreters. As we
end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf of the
Council in wishing the delegation of New Zealand good
luck in the month of September.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

16-2747815/15
