284

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

1. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for the completion of
the analytical study on the progressive development of the
principles and norms of international law relating to the
new international economic order; 2
2. Urges Member States to submit, not later than 30
June 1985, their views and comments on the study, inclu­
ding proposals concerning further action and procedures to
be adopted within the framework of the Sixth Committee
with regard to the consideration of the analytical study;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Progressive develop­
ment of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order".

99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984

39/76. Observer status of national liberation move­
ments recognized by the Organization of
African Unity and/or by the League of Arab
States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/167 of 15 December I 980

and 37/104 of 16 December 1982,
Recalling also its resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22
November 1974, 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 and

31/152 of 20 December 1976,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 3
Bearing in mind the resolution of the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their Rela­
tions with International Organizations relating to the
observer status of national liberation movements recog­
nized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by the
League of Arab States,4
Noting that the Vienna Convention on the Representa­
tion of States in Their Relations with International Organ­
izations of a Universal Character, of 14 March 1975, 5 reg­
ulates only the representation of States in their relations
with international organizations,
Taking into account the continued and uninterrupted
current practice of inviting the above-mentioned national
liberation movements to participate as observers in the
sessions of the General Assembly, specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system and in
the work of the conferences held under the auspices of
such international organizations,
Convinced that the participation of the national libera­
tion movements referred to above in the work of inter­
national organizations helps to strengthen international
peace and co-operation,
Desirous of ensuring the effective participation of the
above-mentioned national liberation movements as obser­
vers in the work of international organizations and of regu­
lating, to that end, their status and the facilities, privileges
and immunities necessary for the performance of their

functions,
l . Urges all States that have not done so, in particular
those which are hosts to international organizations or to
conferences convened by, or held under the auspices of,

2N39/504/Add.l, anne, 111.
3 N39/437.
4 See Official Records of zhe Uniled Nations Conference on the Representa­
tion of States in Their Relations with International Organizations, Vienna, 4
February-14 March 1975, vol. II (United Nations publication, Sales No
E.75.V.12), document NC'ONF.67115, anne,.

international organizations of a universal character, to
consider as soon as possible the question of ratifying, or
acceding to, the Vienna Convention on the Representation
of States in Their Relations with International Organiza­
tions of a Universal Character;
2. Calls once more upon the States concerned to accord
to the delegations of the national liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or by
the League of Arab States, and accorded observer status by
international organizations, the facilities, privileges and
immunities necessary for the performance of their func­
tions in accordance with the provisions of the Vienna Con­
vention on the Representation of States in Their Relations
with International Organizations of a Universal Character;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session on the imple­
mentation of the present resolution.

99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984

39/77. Status of the Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to
the protection of victims of armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/44 of 8 December 1977, 34/

51 of 23 November 1979 and 37/116 of 16 December
1982,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General6
on the status of the Protocols AdditionaF to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of vic­
tims of armed conflicts,
Convinced of the continuing value of established
humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts and the
need to respect and ensure respect for these rules in all cir­
cumstances within the scope of the relevant international
instruments pending the earliest possible termination of
such conflicts,
Mindful of the need for continued improvement of the
implementation, and for further expansion, of the body of
humanitarian rules relating to armed conflicts,
Particularly mindful of the importance of the protection
of the civilian population, especially women and children,
against the effects of hostilities,
Noting the virtually universal acceptance of the four
Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19498 concerning the
protection of victims of armed conflicts, and their binding
character for all parties,
Aware, however, of the fact that so far only a limited
number of States have signed, ratified or acceded to the
two Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions,
Noting at the same time with appreciation the continuing
efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross to
promote and to disseminate knowledge of the two addi­
tional Protocols,
I. Reiterates its call, contained in resolutions 34/51
and 37/116, to all States to consider at the earliest possible
date the matter of ratifying or acceding to the two Proto­
cols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts;
5 Ibid., vol. 11, p 207.
6 A/39/465.
7 A/32/144, annexes I and II.
8 United Nations. Treat"v Series. vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

285

IX. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

2. Calls upon all States becoming parties to Protocol I
to consider the matter of making the declaration provided
for under article 90 of that Protocol;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the
status of the Protocols based on information received from
Member States;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Status of the Protocols
Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts:
report of the Secretary-General".

99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984
39/78. Development and strengthening of good­
neighbourliness between States
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the determination of the peoples of the
United Nations, as expressed in the Charter of the United
Nations, to practise tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, approved by its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24
October 1970 ,
Recalling its resolutions 1236 (XII) of 14 December
1957 , 1301 (XIII) of10 December1958 , 2129 (XX) of21
December1965 , 34/99 of14 December1979 , 36/101 of9
December1981 ,37/117 of16 December1982 and38/126
of 19 December 1983 ,
Bearing in mind that, owing to geographic proximity
and to other relevant reasons, there are particularly
favourable opportunities for co-operation and mutual
advantage between neighbouring countries, in many fields
and various forms, and that the development of such co­
operation may have a positive influence on international
relations as a whole,
Considering that the great changes of a political, econo­
mic and social nature, as well as the scientific and techno­
logical progress which has taken place in the world and led
to unprecedented interdependence of nations, have given
new dimensions to good-neighbourliness in the conduct of
States and increased the need to develop and strengthen it,
Taking into account the working paper concerning the
development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness
between States,9 as well as the written replies sent by States
and international organizations on the content of good­
neighbourliness and on ways and means to enhance it 10
and the views expressed by States on this subject in the
General Assembly,
Recalling its opinion that it is necessary to continue to
examine the question of good-neighbourliness in order to
strengthen and develop its content, as well as ways and
modalities to enhance its effectiveness, and that the results
of this examination could be included, at an appropriate
time, in a suitable international document,
I. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness fully conforms
with the purposes of the United Nations and shall be
founded upon the strict observance of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Rela­
tions and Co-operation among States in accordance with
9 A/38/440, annex.

the Charter of the United Nations, and so presupposes the
rejection of any acts seeking to establish zones of influence
or domination;
2. Calls once again upon States, in the interest of the
maintenance of international peace and security, to devel­
op good-neighbourly relations, acting on the basis of these
principles;
3. Reaffirms that the generalization of the long practice
of good-neighbourliness and of principles and rules per­
taining to it is likely to strengthen friendly relations and
co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter;
4. Deems it appropriate, on the basis of the working
paper concerning the development and strengthening of
good-neighbourliness between States mentioned above. as
well as of other proposals and ideas which have been or
will be submitted by States, and the replies and views of
States and international organizations, to start clarifying
and formulating the elements of good-neighbourliness as
part of a process of elaboration of a suitable international
document on the subject;
5. Decides to proceed with the task of identifying and
clarifying the elements of good-neighbourliness within the
framework of a working group or other appropriate organ
of the Sixth Committee as may be decided upon by the
Committee when organizing its work at the fortieth session
of the General Assembly;
6. Invites once again Governments, United Nations
bodies and programmes and the specialized agencies.
within their respective fields of competence, to communi­
cate to the Secretary-General their views and suggestions
or, if they deem it appropriate, to update the replies
already given by them, on the content of good-neighbour­
liness and ways and means to strengthen it;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session a report contain­
ing the replies received in accordance with paragraph 6
above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".

99th plenary meeting
13 December I 984
39/79. Peaceful settlement of disputes between
States
The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Peaceful settlement
of disputes between States",
Recalling its resolution37/ I0 of15 November1982, by
which it approved the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful
Settlement of I nternational Disputes, annexed thereto,
Recalling also its resolution 38/131 of 19 December
1983,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of conflict situa­
tions and the emergence of new sources of disputes and
tension in international life, and especially at the growing
tendency to resort to force or the threat of force and to
intervention in internal affairs, and at the escalation of the
arms race, which gravely endanger the independence and
security of States as well as international peace and
security,
Taking into account the need to exert the utmost effort
in order to settle any situations and disputes between
IO See A/36/376 and Add I, A/37/476 and A/38/336 and Add. I.
