S/PV.8495

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8495th meeting

Wednesday, 27 March 2019, 5.35 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Sabelo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (S/2019/248)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-08834 (E)
*1908834*

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 5.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (S/2019/248)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs; and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/248, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: During the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, the
Syrian Arab Army crossed the 1967 ceasefire line on
the Golan, known as the Purple Line, initially gaining
territory. In a swift counter-attack, the Israel Defense
Forces recaptured the lost ground and advanced further,
crossing the 1967 ceasefire line and occupying a
salient portion of Syrian territory. The conflict quickly
reached an unstable stalemate, with tensions remaining
high for months.
Following United States-led diplomatic efforts, on
31 May 1974 Israel and Syria signed the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement between Israel and Syria. On
the same day, the Security Council welcomed the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and, through
resolution 350 (1974), in accordance with the protocol
to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, established
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force.
The situation in the Golan remained generally calm
until 2011, when fighting between the Syrian armed
2/20

27/03/2019

forces and armed opposition groups began. In 2018, the
Syrian Government re-established full control of the
area known as the Bravo side, thereby re-establishing
a status quo ante. Throughout this period, Israel has
periodically stressed the critical importance of the
Golan to its security.
On 25 March, United States President Donald
Trump signed an official proclamation recognizing
Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied Syrian
Golan. The Secretary-General has taken note of this
development, including Member States’ reactions to the
United States decision. Let me reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s statement that the United Nations position on
the Golan is known and clear. That position is reflected
in the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, notably Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 497 (1981).
We hope that the recent developments will not be
used as an excuse by anyone to pursue actions that
could undermine the relative stability of the situation
on Golan and beyond. We will continue to closely
monitor developments on the ground and will keep the
Council informed, as appropriate.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I wish to thank you, Madam, for
this opportunity to brief the Council on the situation
in the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) area of operation and on the activities of the
Force and Observer Group Golan over the past three
months, following the publication of the report of the
Secretary-General on UNDOF (S/2019/248).
As noted in the report, the ceasefire between
Israel and Syria has been maintained, notwithstanding
a number of violations observed by UNDOF of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement of 1974. They
included the crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians
from the Bravo side, the presence of unauthorized
equipment and personnel in the areas of separation and
limitation, and the firing into the area of separation
and across the ceasefire line. UNDOF protested to the
parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it observed.
The incidents of missile, rocket and other heavy
weapons fire on 29 November, 20 January and
11 February, details of which the Secretary-General
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

outlines in his report, illustrate the continued risk
of escalation of the situation in the UNDOF area of
operation. It is critical that the parties at all times
respect the Disengagement of Forces Agreement so as
to maintain stability on the Golan. The importance of
the parties maintaining their liaison with UNDOF in
the first instance cannot be overemphasized. We count
on members of the Security Council to support efforts
to sensitize both parties and regional stakeholders to
the risks of escalation and the need to preserve the
long-standing ceasefire between Israel and Syria.
Allow me to turn the Council’s attention to
UNDOF’s incremental return and full resumption of
operations on the Bravo side. Since I last briefed the
Council in December (see S/PV.8432), the Mission has
continued to conduct operational patrols on routes in
the northern and central parts of the areas of separation
and limitation. In addition, UNDOF continues to carry
out assessment visits and protected patrols to vacated
United Nations positions and observation posts,
including position 85 and observation post 57, in the
southern part of the area of separation. UNDOF has
also conducted, for the first time, route reconnaissance
patrols to United Nations observation post 52 through
the area of separation.
UNDOF also continues to make progress in
the refurbishment and reoccupation of its vacated
positions. The refurbishment and reoccupation
of United Nations position 32 was completed on
30 December 2018 through the deployment of 35
UNDOF military personnel. On 28 January, UNDOF
commenced a limited reoccupation of position 37 to
support engineering work related to the refurbishment
of the facilities and the security infrastructure at the
position. It is expected to be completed by the end of
April. Following the reoccupation of position 37 we are
planning for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
position 27 in the central part of the area of separation.
During the reporting period, Observer Group Golan
continued to maintain temporary observation posts in
the central and northern parts of the area of separation.
Allow me, however, to underline that Observer Group
Golan will not be deployed at observation posts in the
area of separation on a permanent basis until such a
time as conditions permit.
UNDOF continues to regularly utilize the Quneitra
crossing, which was reopened on 15 October 2018,
to move equipment and personnel between the Alpha
and Bravo sides. Pending the completion of the

S/PV. 8495

refurbishment of United Nations position at the Charlie
gate and its reoccupation, UNDOF military police
continued to deploy at the crossing point during the
limited opening hours only to liaise with the respective
sides on UNDOF personnel crossings. As Council
members will be aware, the Quneitra crossing is
important in facilitating efficient and effective UNDOF
mandate implementation.
The completion of the redeployment and resumption
of full operations in UNDOF’s southern area of
operation will be facilitated by the deployment to the
Mission of a new mechanized company in July of this
year, which is planned to occupy positions 85 and 68.
I can reassure Council members and troopcontributing countries that in the implementation of
the Mission’s plan to gradually return to the Bravo
side, the safety and security of UNDOF and Observer
Group Golan personnel remain paramount. There
is a continued significant threat to United Nations
personnel in the UNDOF area of operation from
explosive remnants of war and from the possible
presence of sleeper cells of armed groups, including
listed terrorist groups, particularly in the southern
part of the area of separation. UNDOF, in consultation
with both parties, continues to review the situation
in the area separation in order to assess whether the
conditions on the ground would permit the return to
vacated positions in the area of separation. We remain
committed to supporting UNDOF in the implementation
of the necessary mitigation measures, including force
protection measures, at both United Nations positions
and observation posts, as well as at Camp Ziouani and
Camp Faouar.
The importance of the continued support to and
cooperation of the parties with UNDOF is of critical
importance. It remains critical that the deployment of
the necessary technology and equipment to UNDOF be
seamless and expeditious. The support and cooperation
of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic remains
essential in this regard. Such support and cooperation are
also critical to ensuring the full freedom of movement
and access to United Nations positions in the area of
operations, and to reducing the delays and challenges
that United Nations personnel experience in crossing
the technical fence to United Nations observation posts
and positions. In addition, the full utilization of the
Quneitra crossing by UNDOF, in line with established
procedures and without any administrative obstacles,
is important, in particular as UNDOF increases its

19-088343/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

operations on the Bravo side to facilitate effective and
efficient mandate implementation.
In conclusion, I wish to acknowledge and appreciate
the continued dedication of UNDOF personnel and
Observer Group Golan military observers serving
under the leadership of Major General Francis VibSanziri. I am also grateful for the continued support of
UNDOF troop-contributing countries.
I also would like to thank members of the Council
for their continued and steadfast support. The presence
of UNDOF on the Golan remains essential in our shared
efforts to prevent regional escalation. We continue to
rely on the Council’s support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and UnderSecretary-General Lacroix for their briefings today.
The United States is concerned by the SecretaryGeneral’s reports of the continued military activities
and presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area
of separation. The mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)is crystal
clear. There should be no military activity of any kind
in the area of separation, including military operations
by the Syrian armed forces. The daily presence of
the Syrian armed forces in the area of separation
diminishes the buffer zone that is essential for reducing
tensions between the parties and keeping the peace. It is
a violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement
and threatens the 1973 ceasefire.
The United States and the Council cannot accept
Syria’s efforts to establish its presence in the area of
separation as a new norm. Therefore, the United States
calls on the Russian Federation to use its influence
with the Al-Assad regime to compel the Syrian forces
to uphold their commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement and immediately withdraw from
the area of separation. Syrian military activities in
and around the area of separation have triggered
misunderstandings and hostilities with Israel that have
put UNDOF peacekeepers in harm’s way. The freedom
of movement and safety of UNDOF personnel are of
the utmost importance and must be ensured by the
Syrian authorities.
4/20

27/03/2019

The United States is also alarmed by reports of
Hizbullah’s presence in the area of separation, which
further heightens the potential for hostilities. There
is no chance for peace between Syria and Israel if
Hizbullah is present in the area of separation. Hizbullah
has demonstrated that it is willing to risk its fellow
Lebanese people in attacking Israel, and we believe
that it has no qualms in risking the lives of the Syrian
people as well. As we have said before, the United
States strongly supports and affirms Israel’s sovereign
right to self-defence.
The United States welcomes the mission’s progress
in returning to its Bravo side operations. Recent
events make clear that Syrian armed forces activities
on the Bravo side go beyond those agreed to in the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The United
States encourages UNDOF and Observer Group Golan
to resume inspections in the area of limitation on the
Bravo side as soon as practical given conditions on
the ground.
Turning to the Golan specifically, we briefed the
Council yesterday that on 25 March, President Trump
signed a proclamation affirming that the United States
recognizes that the Golan Heights are part of the
State of Israel. That announcement does not affect the
1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, nor do we
believe that it undermines the UNDOF mandate in any
way. UNDOF continues to have a vital role to play in
preserving stability between Israel and Syria, most
importantly by ensuring that the area of separation is a
buffer zone free from any military presence or activities
other than those of UNDOF.
This decision is of critical strategic and security
importance to the State of Israel, and the United States
believes it can contribute to stability. As we said
yesterday, to allow the Golan Heights to be controlled
by the likes of the Syrian and Iranian regimes would
be to turn a blind eye to the threats emanating from a
Syrian regime that engages in atrocities and from Iran
and terrorist actors, including Hizbullah, seeking to use
the Golan Heights as a launching ground for attacks
on Israel.
For decades, the residents of the Golan Heights have
been subject to the same administration and governed
by the same laws as the rest of Israel. The President’s
statement on the Golan reflects a recognition of the
unique circumstances that led us to deem it appropriate
to recognize Israeli sovereignty at this time.
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

To be clear, the United States supports the goal of
a secure and lasting peace between Israel and all its
neighbours, including Syria. Such a peace should be
achieved through direct discussions. Israel does not
currently have a partner for peace in Syria.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing and for
reaffirming the international community and United
Nations positions, which are in line with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Those
positions state that the Golan is Syrian Arab land
occupied by Israel. We also commend the briefing by
Mr. Jean-Pierre LaCroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, on the work of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).
Whether at meetings of the Security Council
or by way of official statements, the State of Kuwait
has repeatedly stressed over the past two days that
the Golan is Syrian Arab land occupied by Israel, the
occupying Power. Occupation and annexation of land
by force is a matter that is rejected and violates the
Charter, principles of international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The decision by Israel,
the occupying Power, to impose its laws, authority and
administration on the occupied Syrian Golan is null
and void and has no legal effect at the international
level. What I have just stated is not only the position
of the State of Kuwait or that of the League of Arab
States, it is also the position of the Security Council, as
set out in resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously
on 17 December 1981.
We have all seen the international rejection of any
effort to illegitimately acquire territory by force, as
well the rejection of any illegal measure that escalates
tensions in the Middle East. We regret the decision by
the United States to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over
the Golan. We underscore our support for Syria’s just
demand and right to recover the entirety of the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan. We recall that the Security Council
always stresses its commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
With regard to UNDOF, I would like to commend
the Force for its efforts and work in such a critical
security situation, given the risks of landmines and
improvised explosive devices, as well as the threat of
sleeper terrorist cells in its area of operation. We fully

S/PV. 8495

believe that the Force is among the very few remaining
sources of stability in the region. It is therefore important
to maintain its presence and for the Council to support
its work so that it can undertake its responsibilities. We
reiterate the need to free the area of separation of any
military presence except UNDOF troops, as provided
for in resolution 2450 (2018). We call upon all parties to
exercise self-restraint and avoid escalation in order to
maintain security in the region.
In conclusion, the Security Council has always
stressed the need to address the root causes of conflicts.
We therefore emphasize once again that the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian
Arab Golan for more than 50 years, is the root cause
behind this conflict. We reaffirm that the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories poses a continuing threat
to peace and security in the region and the world. The
solution to establishing stability in the region would not
be through entrenching occupation or imposing a fait
accompli. It would be through Israel’s withdrawal from
all occupied Arab lands, and the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the two
Under-Secretaries-General for their helpful briefings. I
would like to structure my remarks under six headings,
namely, the United Kingdom’s position on the Golan;
Security Council resolutions; what this means for
the international order; Israel’s right to security; the
Middle East peace process; and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).
On the first point, the United Kingdom’s position
has not changed: the Golan Heights is territory occupied
by Israel. The turbulent history of the region is of course
well known. Following the 1967 Six Day War, Israel
took control of the Golan, including the disputed Shaba’a
farmlands, deciding to annex the territory in 1981. The
United Kingdom did not recognize that annexation
then. We do not recognize it today. The annexation
of territory by force is prohibited under international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations. In
addition, under the law of State responsibility, States
are obliged not to recognize the annexation of territory
as a result of the use of force.
Turning to Security Council resolutions, it is
important that we uphold the relevant resolutions.
Resolution 242 (1967), which the British delegation
at the time had the honour to pen, was adopted

19-088345/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

unanimously by the Council on 22 November 1967.
British sponsored, it called on all parties to end territorial
claims, acknowledge the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of every State in
the area, and, in paragraph 1, called for “withdrawal
of Israel armed forces from territories occupied in the
recent conflict”. We recall that resolution 497 (1981),
adopted unanimously on 17 December 1981, decided,
in paragraph 1, that the Israeli Golan Heights Law,
which effectively annexed the Golan Heights, is “null
and void and without international legal effect”. It
further demanded that Israel rescind its action. The
decision by the United States to recognize Israeli
sovereignty over the Golan heights is in contravention
of resolution 497 (1981).
In terms of the international order, the United
Kingdom firmly believes that the rules-based
international system has increased States’ ability to
resolve their differences peacefully and provided a
framework for the greatest sustained rise in prosperity
that humankind has seen. That is why the United
Kingdom thinks we should work hard with our
international partners to nurture and protect those rules.
The right to self-defence is inherent. Israel has a
right to defend itself. It has a right to security. And its
people have a right to live in safety. We do not wish
to diminish Israel’s genuine security concerns. We
fully support its right to defend itself. We urge the
Al-Assad regime, Iran and Hizbullah to refrain from
actions that will only lead to increased instability in
the region, as well as put civilians at risk. As the United
States representative noted, Syria has allowed the use
of its territory to launch missiles at Israel and Israeli
civilians. That is not acceptable. But, at the same time,
we emphasize the importance of adhering to the rulesbased international system and abiding by Security
Council resolutions that are designed to protect that
system. That is true irrespective of the importance of
the Golan to Israel’s security, or the lack of progress in
peace talks.
Turning to the peace talks, resolution 242 (1967)
enshrined the concept of land for peace. That has proved
successful in ending the conflict between Israel, Jordan
and Egypt. We believe it remains a basic principle for
achieving peace between Israel, the Palestinians and
other neighbours. I want to emphasize that we strongly
welcome the United States efforts on the Middle
East peace process. We encourage the United States
Administration to put forward detailed proposals for
6/20

27/03/2019

a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement that
addresses the legitimate concerns of both parties. We
continue to believe that the best way to achieve that
is through substantive peace talks between the parties,
leading to a two-State solution.
Finally, turning to UNDOF, the United Kingdom
strongly supports that mission. It should be the only
armed force active in the area of separation. The
presence and activity of any other armed forces, armed
personnel or military equipment of any kind in the
area of separation contravenes the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement of resolution 2394 (2017). The
United Kingdom remains committed to supporting
UNDOF’s mandate, and we look forward to engaging
in discussions regarding its renewal in June.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and
Lacroix for their comprehensive briefings.
Poland aligns itself with the position of the
European Union with regard to the status of the
Golan Heights. We consider the Golan Heights to be a
territory occupied by Israel. The annexation of territory
by force is illegal under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as resolution 497
(1981) of 17 December 1981. That resolution, which was
unanimously adopted, states that
“all the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, continue to apply
to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since
June 1967”.
Poland believes that a settlement of the question of
the Golan Heights should occur only as a result of
negotiations between the parties to the conflict, in line
with international law.
I would like to express Poland’s full support for
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) in fulfilling its mandate and to underscore
its critical role in ensuring long-term stability in the
region. I want to focus my intervention on two issues,
which are violations of the ceasefire and the need to
enhance the mission’s capabilities.
We are deeply concerned about the continued
military activity in the area of separation, including the
presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment, firing
into and across the area of separation and the crossing
of the ceasefire line. We are particularly alarmed by the
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

repeated instances of firing of anti-aircraft missiles,
surface-to-air missiles, rockets and heavy machine guns
on the Bravo side, as well as by the increased presence
of Syrian armed forces within the area of separation.
All of those activities constitute clear violations of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, pose a threat to
the maintenance of the ceasefire and affect the security
of UNDOF personnel. I would like to stress once again
that the parties must respect the terms of the Agreement
and refrain from maintaining a military presence in the
area of separation or taking other actions that could
endanger the ceasefire. It is vital that they cooperate
closely with UNDOF and maintain their liaison with
the mission in order to prevent any escalation.
We commend the mission’s efforts to intensify its
operations in the area of separation and the actions
undertaken to ensure a limited return to operations
on the Bravo side, despite the challenging security
conditions. As we await the re-establishment of the
mission’s presence across the whole area of separation,
it will be crucial to ensure that the parties facilitate
the enhancement of the mission’s capabilities and
enable it to conduct its operations without any
administrative restrictions.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
appreciation for the work of all the civilian and military
personnel of UNDOF and the Observer Group Golan,
carried out under very challenging circumstances, and
to underscore the primary importance of assuring the
safety and security of United Nations personnel.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for their informative briefings on the situation in the
Syrian Golan. We believe it is essential to highlight the
following points.
In the summer of 2018, as a result of measures
taken by the Syrian Government with assistance
from Russia and in coordination with regional and
international partners, the situation in the Syrian Golan
underwent major changes and was stabilized. The
main obstacle to the full implementation by the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) of
its mandate, in the form of the presence in the area of
separation of various armed groups, including terrorist
groups, was removed. That also eliminated one of
the security challenges for Israel and United Nations
personnel. The success of this effort was made possible

S/PV. 8495

only thanks to cooperation on the part of key players.
In our communications with the parties to the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, we help to ensure
the necessary conditions for the full functioning of the
United Nations operation. Russian military police units
play an important role in that process. Thanks to efforts
on the Syrian side, work on the Quneitra crossing point
between the Alpha and Bravo sectors has been resumed.
That is another important element in normalizing
the situation and restoring it to its pre-crisis state.
Demining work is continuing in order to accelerate the
mission’s full deployment in the Golan.
UNDOF has historically continued to be an effective
mechanism for reducing tension, preventing incidents
and escalation and resolving claims between Syria and
Israel. In the long term, this kind of mechanism has
the potential to restore trust between the parties. We
cannot allow the positive momentum I have outlined
to be undermined by unilateral steps that not only
complicate efforts to improve the situation in Syria
and establish a political process, but also create serious
obstacles to the normalization of relations between
Israel and Arab States.
Despite opinions and warnings that have been
expressed at the international and regional levels, the
United States has formalized its recognition of Israel’s
sovereignty over part of the occupied Syrian Golan.
We assert that such steps not only violate norms of
international law, they are a violation of Security
Council resolutions, run counter to the principle of
land for peace, developed at the Madrid Conference
under the sponsorship of the Russian Federation and
the United States, and represent a total disregard for
the Arab Peace Initiative, which was approved at the
League of Arab States Summit in 2002 and has historic
significance for the work of opening the prospects for
achieving a comprehensive, fair and lasting settlement
in the Middle East.
Russia’s position remains unchanged. The Golan
Heights are a territory of the Syrian Arab Republic,
occupied by Israel as a result of the 1967 war and then
illegally annexed. We adhere strictly to resolution
497 (1981), according to which unilateral decisions to
establish other laws, jurisdictions or administrations
in that part of Syria’s territory are null and void and
have no legal effect. An overwhelming majority of the
international community supports a similar approach.
The General Assembly affirms that through its annual
adoption of a resolution entitled “The occupied Syrian

19-088347/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2019

Golan”. The question of ending the occupation should
be resolved in the framework of the Middle East
settlement process through direct negotiations, based
on the existing internationally recognized foundations.
It is hard to deny that politics is at work here.

international players will be able to make a significant
contribution to achieving a Palestinian-Israeli and ArabIsraeli settlement through direct negotiations between
the parties on a basis of the relevant international legal
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We are concerned about the possibility that these
unilateral decisions could not only complicate the
prospects for finding a comprehensive settlement
in the Middle East, but could also lead to worsening
instability in the region. The negative reaction from the
Arab world confirms this kind of worrying prognosis. It
is alarming to have to conclude that the decision on the
Golan is the latest addition to the sad list of unilateral
steps that the United States has taken recently. They
include its withdrawal from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action for Iran, in violation of resolution 2231
(2015), which has inflamed the international situation;
the move of the United States Embassy to Jerusalem,
flying in the face of international legal resolutions on
the city’s status, which has fundamental and sensitive
significance for representatives of the monotheistic
religions; and its assistance in establishing a Kosovo
army, circumventing resolution 1244 (1999), which
permits the presence there of multinational forces
alone. We urge the United States and anyone who might
be tempted to follow its poor example to refrain from
aggressive revisions of international law, which, like
the Charter of the United Nations, will always remain
the sole framework for States’ civilized conduct within
the system of international relations.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of today’s meeting and the
informative briefings by Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix.

The world’s response to this series of unilateral steps
and unlawful decisions confirms our conclusion that
the so-called rules-based order arbitrarily established
by certain States is doomed to failure and has no future.
We urge them to reject this immoral and artificial
concept, which is insulting to other States. Taking all of
this into account, we want to emphasize that whatever
the United States’ reasons may be for its unilateral
decisions, they do not change the international legal
decisions on all the issues pertaining to a settlement
in the Middle East. We fully agree with the SecretaryGeneral that the status of the Syrian Golan may not be
changed, because it is enshrined in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
A return to respect for international law would
also assume fundamental significance in affirming the
status of the United States as an objective and impartial
mediator, an honest broker and an even-handed
partner that through its cooperation with regional and
8/20

Peru deplores and notes with concern the continued
military activity in the ceasefire zone and the escalation
of tensions that the Secretary-General describes in
his most recent report (S/2019/248), especially in
the incidents of 29 November 2018, 20 January and
11 February. We reiterate our call to the parties and those
who have influence on them to refrain from actions
that violate the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
We welcome recent progress in the gradual return to
the Bravo side, which should continue to be a priority
for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). We are pleased that the mission has been
able to consolidate its presence in Camp Faouar and
increase patrols in the area. We would also like to
highlight the positive effects of the gradual opening
of the Quneitra crossing point in terms of increasing
the mobility of personnel and equipment between the
Alpha and Bravo zones. We hope that completing the
refurbishing of the position known as the Charlie gate
will contribute to this momentum and go a long way to
facilitating the mission’s work.
We also commend the selfless work being carried
out by the UNDOF contingent against a backdrop of
obvious tension, and emphasize the importance of
ensuring their security and physical integrity, which
requires strengthening their capabilities with new
technologies, vehicles and physical facilities. In that
regard, and with regard to the Golan Heights, Peru
reaffirms its historic position on the inadmissibility
of acquiring territory by force, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of
international law and in strict compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize Peru’s great
appreciation for the presence and stabilizing role of
UNDOF and reiterate our full commitment to this
important mission.
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix for
their informative briefings.
First and foremost, we want to emphasize the crucial
importance for regional stability of maintaining the
existing ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic, particularly in the light of the increase in
tensions between the parties over the past three months,
with frequent military activity, including firing into
the area of separation, and crossings over the ceasefire
line on both the Alpha and Bravo sides, with the risk
that this represents for the civilian population and
United Nations personnel. We join the calls to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid any breach of the ceasefire
and the area of separation and ensure compliance
with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. We
emphasize this in view of the renewed attention being
given to non-compliance with the relevant resolutions
of the Council and the General Assembly where the
occupied Syrian Golan is concerned. We also want
to recognize the essential work of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), particularly
as a liaison between the parties in order to maintain
an atmosphere conducive to peace. It is therefore
essential to emphasize to the parties the importance
for UNDOF of providing guarantees, facilities, access
and freedom of movement so that it can perform its
functions effectively.
My delegation would like to express the Dominican
Republic’s firm foreign policy position based on the
fundamental principles of respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, non-intervention,
respect for human rights, international law and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts as a means of ensuring
the maintenance of world peace. Those fundamental
principles are consistent with the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territories by force, in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The issue of the Golan Heights, considered occupied
territory under Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 497 (1981) and General Assembly resolution 72/16,
is a key and sensitive element in the set of issues
pertaining to the achievement of a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East.
We call for multilateralism and adherence to
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations to prevail. The same is especially relevant in the
current context, in which the Syrian people desperately

S/PV. 8495

await a secure and stable environment. The recent
developments that we have addressed in the Council
allow no hope of progress to achieve lasting peace in
the region. We should also not forget that the ultimate
goal of all these processes are the human beings who
live in our countries — in the case of Syria the almost
13 million people who currently have serious and urgent
humanitarian needs.
Finally, we believe that unilateral positions in
flagrant violation of international law — and especially
of the resolutions of the Council — should be avoided.
We call on those who want peace to prevail in the region
to act accordingly.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would first like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for their briefings.
The Belgian position in relation to the Golan Heights
remains unchanged. In accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
242 (1967) and 497 (1981), we do not recognize Israel’s
sovereignty over the territories occupied by Israel since
June 1967, including the Golan Heights, and we do
not consider them part of the territory of the State of
Israel. The acquisition of territory by force is illegal
under international law. Any unilateral declaration
of a change in the border is contrary to a rules-based
international order and the Charter of the United
Nations. We reiterate our deep concern about the wider
consequences of the recognition of illegal annexation,
particularly in the region.
Turning to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF), I would like to commend the
quality of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/248)
and to express our support for his observations and
recommendations. UNDOF plays an indispensable
role in preserving regional stability. The parties
have an obligation to comply with the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, according to
which there should be no military presence in the area
of separation other than UNDOF.
We are concerned about ceasefire violations, which
only increase tensions and further undermine stability
in a part of the world where it is already sorely lacking.
We therefore call on the parties to the conflict and
UNDOF to improve their communication in order to

19-088349/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

create more trust and prevent any deterioration of the
situation. The parties must exercise the utmost restraint
at all times.
We share the Secretary-General’s deep concern
about the significant threat posed by the presence of
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and
mines to United Nations personnel in the Force’s area of
operation, particularly in the southern part of the area
of separation. It is essential that the parties support all
UNDOF efforts in that regard in order to ensure that the
mission has the security it needs to carry out its work.
In conclusion, the Security Council plays a key role
as the ultimate guarantor of compliance by all States
with their international obligations in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
With that in mind, we cannot accept situations in which
the law is imposed by force. It is up to the Council
to oppose unilateral acts that undermine not only the
international legal order but also any prospect of peace.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The position of the
German Government with regard to the occupied Golan
Heights is clear. I refer to my statement yesterday (see
S/PV.8489) and to the common European position.
Security interests, as urgent as they may be, do not
justify annexation. However, the presence of troops of
the Syrian regime and of Iranian-backed militias close
to the border violates the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement and constitutes a threat to Israel. Those
presences should end.
Today’s meeting was scheduled partly in response
to a request by the Syrian regime, which called for this
meeting
“in order to discuss the situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan and the recent flagrant violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions by a
permanent member State”.
That request is deeply cynical. The Syrian Government
has grossly violated the international laws of war for
the past eight years and is responsible for grave war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In response
to peaceful protests, the Syrian regime has reacted
with brutal violence against its own population. It
has bombed protected facilities, including hospitals,
schools, markets and civilian homes. It has used
indiscriminate and illegal weapons, including cluster
bombs and internationally banned barrel bombs, to kill
and terrorize civilians.
10/20

27/03/2019

The Syrian regime has repeatedly used chemical
weapons against its own population — a flagrant
violation of international law — and continues to refuse
to fulfil its obligation to the Council to account for
discrepancies in its declarations on chemical weapons.
The regime has arrested, disappeared, tortured and
killed tens of thousands of dissenters, activists,
journalists, students, professors, medical workers,
lawyers and others, including minors.
There are horrific reports and accounts of sexual
violence. We have seen the Caesar photos displayed in
the halls of the United Nations Building in New York.
They provide horrifying evidence of the crimes that are
happening behind bars in Al-Assad’s hell-hole prisons
and detention facilities. Tens of thousands are dead,
killed by that ruthless regime out of sight of cameras.
Those detention atrocities, testimonies by incredibly
brave torture survivors, the Caesar photos and regime
documents all form the basis of the criminal cases now
being investigated by the German Federal Prosecutor,
the international arrest warrants issued by Germany
and actual arrests being carried out in Germany. It is
profoundly cynical for a regime known for its atrocious
crimes and for its ruthless brutality against Syrians to
come to the Security Council and criticize others for
violating international law.
Ms. Sabelo (South Africa): We thank you, Madam
President, for calling this meeting at this important
juncture, especially given the recent developments
regarding the Syrian Golan Heights. I would also like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for their briefings on
this matter.
My delegation supports the work of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
in the region and acknowledges the important role it
plays in stabilizing the region, including through its
continued engagement with all parties concerned.
South Africa is deeply concerned about the recent
decision by a member of the Security Council to
recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the Syrian Golan
Heights. That unilateral action does nothing to assist in
finding a long-term peaceful solution to the conflict in
the Middle East.
The Security Council has adopted numerous
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967) and 497
(1981), calling for Israel to relinquish its occupation of
the Syrian Golan Heights and other occupied territory.
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Yet, in 2019, we are still discussing Israel’s violations of
the Council’s decisions in the Chamber of the Security
Council. Resolution 497 (1981) declares that the Israeli
annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights is null and void
and without international legal effect. Israel’s continued
occupation of the Syrian Golan Heights is therefore
evidence of its continued violation of international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
The recent decision by a member of the Council
to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over the Syrian Golan
Heights is a blatant violation of international law and
the resolutions I mentioned. South Africa, along with
other members of the international community, rejects
that unilateral decision. That decision marks the failure
of the Council to take action against the continued
violations of its resolutions and the inability of the
international community to resolve that protracted
conflict. Israel has continued to defy international law
in its attempt to alter the facts on the ground by the
construction of settlements, appropriation of water
resources and expulsion of Arab occupants from
their land.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to note
that, if the Council were dealing with another country
on its agenda and such flagrant violations occurred,
there would be no hesitation to act. Yet on this matter
we allow the violations to persist with impunity and
thereby undermine the Council’s credibility, which
highlights its double standards. We support the call for
all parties to work towards a just and durable peace.
Only through a comprehensive peace settlement in the
Middle East that addresses the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks as well would that just and durable peace prevail.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre
Lacroix for their briefings.
Recently, the ceasefire between Israel and Syria
has, by and large, held; however, there continue to be
violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement
in the area of operation of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). The
Secretary-General has articulated his deep concern
over the escalation of tensions. The parties concerned
should implement the relevant resolutions and the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement in earnest,
exercise restraint and cease and desist from any action
that might exacerbate tensions along the ceasefire line.

S/PV. 8495

It is particularly important to safeguard the safety
and security of UNDOF personnel and facilities so that
they can implement their mandate with assured freedom
of movement, safety and security. China commends
the constructive role of UNDOF in maintaining
the ceasefire between Syria and Israel, as well as in
maintaining regional security and stability. We support
UNDOF’s full return to its mission area, conditions
permitting, to continue the effective implementation
of its mandate. We call upon all parties concerned to
continue providing support and cooperating to that end.
The Golan Heights is recognized by the international
community as occupied territory. The Security Council
has adopted a raft of resolutions that urge Israel to
withdraw from the Golan Heights. China is opposed
to any unilateral action or attempts to alter that fact.
China does not wish to see any further escalation of
tensions in the region.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
their detailed briefings on the activities of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF).
My delegation remains concerned about the
escalation of tensions caused by numerous violations of
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, despite
the ceasefire being upheld. The continuation of military
activities, the ongoing presence of armed forces in the
area of separation on the Bravo side, the shots fired
over the ceasefire line, as well as the ongoing presence
of unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of
limitation on the Alpha side are acts that undermine
the fragile calm and undermine efforts to stabilize
the region.
In that context, Côte d’ Ivoire calls on all parties to
uphold the spirit and letter of resolution 2450 (2018) and
urges them therefore to cease their operations in the
area of separation and withdraw all military equipment
and armed personnel. We remain convinced that all
the issues emanating from the underlying tensions in
the region could be resolved through comprehensive
negotiations, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Côte d’Ivoire also underscores the importance
of stakeholders maintaining close collaboration with
UNDOF in order to avoid an exacerbation of the

19-0883411/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

situation along the ceasefire line and to create the
conditions for the return of the Force to the positions
it abandoned in 2014, so as to better carry out its
mandate. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
support of all parties for UNDOF’s efforts to return
gradually to the Bravo side, thereby enabling it to
intensify its operations in the area of separation. Côte
d’ Ivoire encourages the various parties to enhance
their collaboration to ensure that UNDOF has all the
necessary means and resources to carry out its mandate.
It urges them to uphold their commitments by working
to lift the restrictions imposed on the Force’s movement
and promoting immediate and unhindered access for
United Nations personnel to the area of separation.
We stress the need for UNDOF to carry out its
mandate in a secure environment. Accordingly country
remains concerned about the security threat posed by the
presence of unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants
of war and mines in its area of operation. We therefore
urge the parties involved to closely cooperate with the
United Nations mission in carrying out demining and
clearance operations in the area concerned in complete
safety and security.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to all UNDOF military and civilian personnel
for their deep sense of responsibility, courage and
dedication to their task, despite a difficult security
environment. We also acknowledge the fundamental
and crucial role played by UNDOF in promoting peace
and stability in the Golan Heights. We call on the
Council and the international community to support
those efforts.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to once again thank the UnderSecretaries-General, Mr. Lacroix and Ms. DiCarlo, for
their detailed briefings.
With regard to the sovereignty of the Golan
Heights, I believe many members of the Security
Council have clearly expressed their positions, in line
with the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly, which is that Israel
does not have sovereignty over the territories that it has
occupied since 1967. That position fully aligns with
the Government of Equatorial Guinea’s, which is longstanding and unwavering. It is furthermore in line with
the position of the African Union.
We must be aware that changing the status of
that territory would constitute a direct violation of
12/20

27/03/2019

resolution 242 (1967). The international community
recognizes that the Golan Heights is occupied territory,
as recognized by the General Assembly and the
Security Council in the various resolutions they have
adopted, which stipulate that Israel must withdraw
from that territory.
On the other hand, Equatorial Guinea deeply values
the high-profile work being done by the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in its 44
years of existence. Its role and mandate in maintaining
stability in the area of separation is most appreciated.
The regional context remains delicate and fragile
due to the internal conflict in Syria, a part of which is
taking place near the area of separation and the border
between Israel and Syria, which sometimes leads to
crossfire between the two sides, with UNDOF often
being caught in-between the offensives.
We note that UNDOF’s operational environment
has undergone some changes in recent months owing to
the fact that the Syrian Government has retaken control
of areas that had previously been occupied by various
armed groups. There is no doubt that this will have an
impact on and implications for UNDOF’s capacity to
implement its mandate, including its full operationality
on the Bravo side. To that end, the Council must urge
parties to stress the need for UNDOF to continue
using the Qunaytirah crossing, without impediment of
any sort.
Along these lines, we would recall here that as
military offensives in the area of operations undermine
the full implementation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, the Security Council must continue
resolutely to call on the parties involved to exercise
greater moderation and show greater prudence in
all their activities around the border so as to prevent
any deterioration of the situation, which is already
quite volatile.
In that context, it is important not only that the
Syrian Government and the armed groups operating
in the areas of separation refrain from any action
that could have a cross-border impact, but also that
the Israeli Government refrain from any violation
of the Disengagement Agreement and do everything
in its power not to further fuel tensions in the area.
The goal here is to prevent a fresh escalation of
tensions — voluntary or involuntary — in the area.
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

We should also recall here that in keeping with
resolution 2450 (2018), there should be no non-UNDOF
military forces in the area of separation. In that
regard, I wish to underscore the need for the parties
to withdraw all of their military equipment and armed
personnel from the area of separation in order to avert
the possibility of an increase in hostilities.
Finally, we recognize that UNDOF operations have
been limited in recent years by the Syrian conflict and
cannot function regularly or normally on the Bravo
side. This underscores once again the importance of
reaching a lasting political solution in Syria and thus
relaunch peace negotiations between Israel and Syria.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo and Lacroix for
their briefings.
Allow me to make three important points.
First, we take note of the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) (S/2019/248) and share his
grave concern at the escalation of tensions between the
parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In
that regard, we urge all parties to abide by the terms
of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement and
maintain the ceasefire. The ongoing tensions in the
area of separation could potentially pose a threat to
civilians and United Nations personnel on the ground.
Full cooperation with UNDOF is critical to preventing
any escalation.

S/PV. 8495

in the region, but also jeopardize the credibility of the
Council as well as multilateralism.
Indonesia recognizes the Golan Heights, occupied
by Israel in 1967, as an inalienable part of the territory of
the Syrian Arab Republic. This position is in accordance
with the principles of sovereignty and territorial
integrity as enshrined in the United Nations Charter
as well as the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981), which underline that the acquisition of territory
by force is prohibited under the United Nations Charter
and international law. They also call for the withdrawal
of Israeli armed forces from the territory of the Golan
Heights and state that Israel’s decision to impose its
laws, jurisdiction and administration in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights is null and void and without
international legal effect.
We urge all parties to maintain their commitment
to respecting international law and the United Nations
Charter and to work together to create an environment
that is conducive to the ongoing peace process in
the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I, too, wish to thank Rosemary DiCarlo and JeanPierre Lacroix for their enlightening briefings. I
thank in particular Mr. Lacroix for the information he
provided on his mission to the region.

Secondly, we would like to underline the importance
of the safety and security of UNDOF peacekeepers as
well as that of other United Nations personnel on the
ground. We support the mission’s priority regarding the
return of UNDOF to full operationality on the Bravo
side. We deem it important to allocate immediately
the resources necessary to support the mission’s full
operationality on the Bravo side.

At the outset, I wish to reiterate France’s full support
for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), which is carrying out a difficult mission in
a deteriorating and volatile security context and in a
country, Syria, that has been devastated by a war whose
atrocities France has consistently denounced.

Thirdly, I wish to reiterate Indonesia’s position in
strongly rejecting the recognition by the United States
of the Golan Heights as part of Israel, as clearly stated
by the Indonesian Vice-Minister yesterday. This action
could be provocative and disrupt the ongoing efforts
to create peace and stability in the region, and also
undermine the long-standing ceasefire between both
parties. Unilateral recognition by the United States
would not only complicate the already complex situation

First, France’s position on the American decision
to recognize Israeli sovereignty over the Golan is clear.
All of the 28 States members of the European Union
(EU) clearly stated today that their joint position is
unchanged. The EU, in line with international law and
resolutions 242 (1967) and 497 (1981), does not recognize
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied territory of the
Golan. That statement reflects the one we made along
with our European partners in the Council yesterday.

I shall focus on three main points.

19-0883413/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

France does not recognize the Israeli annexation
of 1981, which was recognized as null and void by
several Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 497 (1981), adopted unanimously. Under
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the Golan is
and remains an occupied territory. The recognition
of Israeli sovereignty over the Golan runs contrary to
international law, in particular the obligation of States
not to recognize an illegal situation.
Any attempt to move away from international law
and the Council’s resolutions and to replace them with
unilateral decisions is doomed to failure. Not only will
this approach not lead to peace in the region, in Syria or
between Israel or Palestine, but it will also significantly
weaken the order based on international law, which all
of us here support.
As we indicated yesterday regarding the IsraeliPalestinian conflict: any unilateral initiative that
contravenes international law and the resolutions of
the Council is doomed to failure. The Council must
ensure respect for these fundamental principles, which
underpin international peace and security. To that end,
I regret that the American decision undermines our
collective action.
Secondly, in a tense context, at a time when
the threat of regional escalation is high, the role of
UNDOF is crucial. The deteriorating security situation
makes its role in ensuring respect for the ceasefire
both more difficult and more necessary than ever
for regional stability. The report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/248) notes that there have been several
worrisome developments in that respect. First, there
has been firing from both sides of the ceasefire line
since the Syrian regime retook control of the southern
part of the country last summer. The exchanges of fire,
rockets and missiles of 29 November, 20 January and
11 February are of particular concern in this respect.
Military activities are continuing, in violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, in the areas
of separation and limitation. This continues to pose
the threat of an escalation between Israel and Syria,
in particular through the increased, unauthorized
presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area of
separation. The report notes also that there were several
crossings of the ceasefire line, also in violation of the
Disengagement Agreement.
In addition, reports of the presence and activity
of pro-Iranian armed groups, including Hizbullah, in
14/20

27/03/2019

the area of separation and beyond are of concern. They
raise fears of increased instability in the area. The
situation in the Golan must be prevented from fuelling
further conflicts. In that particularly difficult context,
I commend UNDOF’s efforts to gradually redeploy
to the east of the ceasefire line. We therefore reiterate
our support for the Secretary-General’s request to
provide UNDOF with the appropriate technological
means to carry out its mission. It is also important
that UNDOF be appropriately staffed. The parties,
who have consistently reaffirmed their commitment to
UNDOF, must allow the deployment of the equipment
necessary for ensuring the security of the Force and the
personnel needed to carry out its mandate. I reiterate
the commitment of France to ensuring the Force’s
freedom of movement and the safety of its personnel.
Movement restrictions imposed on UNDOF on both
sides of the area of separation prevent it from fulfilling
its mandate. The security situation poses a direct threat
to its personnel, which is why the plan to redeploy
UNDOF to the east of the ceasefire line must consider
that risk of increased exposure.
Thirdly, it is the responsibility of the Council,
first of all, to avoid that recent developments lead to
uncertainty about the future of UNDOF. Council
members must therefore unambiguously reiterate their
commitment to its mandate. We call on the parties to
respect all their commitments under the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of
1974 and — I repeat — to allow the deployment of the
required equipment and personnel. It would be useful
for countries exercising influence over the parties to
call on them to do so. In addition, the role of the Force in
maintaining the ceasefire and preventing an escalation
of tensions must be upheld and strengthened. That is the
goal of the Force Commander’s liaison efforts between
the two parties. In that regard, in consideration of the
latest developments in the situation in the Golan, we
could collectively consider ways to strengthen the role
that UNDOF plays in deconfliction as a liaison between
the two parties.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that France’s commitment
to fostering the return of lasting peace in Syria and
the region, based on international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, will not waver,
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for convening
this meeting following the urgent request of the
Government of my country to consider the consequences
of the unilateral decision taken by the President of the
United States concerning the occupied Syrian Arab
Golan. Before I read out my statement, I would like to
make several comments.
First, I will send a detailed letter tomorrow to
the delegations of the members of Security Council
reflecting my Government’s position on the reality of the
situation concerning the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) in the occupied Syrian
Golan. We revisit that position every six months.
Members will therefore receive detailed information on
the renewal of the mandate of UNDOF in the Golan. I
am raising this issue as today’s topic does not concern
UNDOF, but rather the consequences of a thoughtless
step taken by the United States Administration against
an occupied territory, based on what we have heard
from the majority of Council members.
Secondly, I would like to make a correction
concerning a term that some, but not all, of my
colleagues used. The “occupied Syrian Golan” is the
official term that we find in the records of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
not the “Golan Heights”. The latter is an Israeli term
created by Israel after 1967 and dates back to medieval
times, when armies occupied hills, mountains and
strategic sites. At the time, the Israelis meant that the
Golan was a strategic plateau, or strategic heights, that
needed to be controlled so that Israel could conduct
manoeuvres at the Syrian front. Therefore, the Golan
is not Heights. It has rivers, valleys, mountains, plains
and cities.
Thirdly, since the very moment we started our
meeting — at around 5 p.m. — Israel has been
conducting aerial aggression on the Sheikh Najjar area
in Aleppo city, 500 kilometres away from the Golan.
Material damage has been incurred, and the Syrian
air defence forces were able to intercept some of the
missiles that were launched by the Israeli planes.
Those were the three comments with which I
wanted to begin my statement.

S/PV. 8495

I should now like to read out part of a message that
I received a little while ago this afternoon, addressed to
the members and the presidency of the Security Council
written by a little Syrian girl from the Golan. This
is her photograph. I will show it to my United States
colleague in case he cannot clearly see it. Herewith is
the message of the little Syrian girl from the Golan,
whose photo I just showed the Council:
“My name is Dimashq Imad Al-Marai. I am
10 years old. I am from the town of Majdal Shams
in the occupied Syrian Golan. I was born under
the Israeli occupation. I say to the world that, as
children of the occupied Syrian Golan, our future
will not be determined by Trump or the occupying
Israeli entity, but by our history and our present as
well as our innocent dreams to live in the occupied
Syrian Golan — the land of our fathers and our
grandfathers. We will always dream of freedom
and of returning to our dear fatherland, Syria”.
My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, condemns
the illegal announcement by the President of the United
States of America, on 25 March, concerning the legal
status of the occupied Syrian Arab Golan. My country’s
Government considers the piece of paper signed by
President Trump and offered as a gift to the Prime
Minister of the Israeli occupying Power as a mere
unilateral measure by a party that enjoys neither the
political, legal or moral authority to decide the destinies
of the peoples of the world or dispose of territories that
constitute an integral part of my country, the Syrian
Arab Republic. Such United States practices are
dangerous because they represent the current American
Administration’s reckless and unprecedented tendency
to undermine international law, humiliate the United
Nations and ignore all terms of reference, legal heritage
and the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict, as well as the
unavoidable need to end the Israeli occupation of Arab
lands and Israel’s return to the 4 June 1967 borders.
In resolution 497 (1981), to which all members
referred in their statements, the Security Council
recognized that the Golan is an occupied Syrian
territory and that any measures taken by the Israeli
occupying Power concerning that occupied territory
are null and void and have no legal validity.
Everyone on the Council, including the
representative of the United States, acknowledges that
the peace process in the Middle East was launched at

19-0883415/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

the Madrid Peace Conference in 1991 on the basis of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), all
of which stipulate the illegality of seizing land by force
and do not recognize Israel’s authority or sovereignty,
as an occupying Power, over any of the lands occupied
since 5 June 1967. Those resolutions also mention the
need to put an end to the Israeli occupation of those
lands as a sine qua non condition for establishing a just
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
That is a legal issue that no United States
Administration in the past has denied, I repeat, that no
American Administration in the past has denied until
the current Administration. As I just said, a piece of
paper signed by the United States President and offered
with a pen to Benjamin Netanyahu before the eyes of
the world is merely a unilateral conduct that has no
legal or political validity. However, that unilateral
conduct clearly demonstrates that the United States
Administration does not respect the United Nations
and that it withdrew its recognition of the international
resolutions. Today the Administration underscored its
rejection and opposition to all efforts to achieve just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and the world.
That means that the United States Administration has
ended its role as a mediator for any peace process in
the Middle East and is making that known, thereby
increasing escalation and confrontation in the region
and the world.
That official proclamation by the United States puts
the United Nations and the international community at
a crucial crossroads. It is either an affront to the entire
world or a real historic challenge to the United Nations
and the Security Council, since the Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, defending international legitimacy
and the Charter of the United Nations, as well as for
defending the terms of reference and international legal
legacy accumulated over decades based on the refusal
to recognize the Israeli occupation of the Golan and the
condemnation of that occupation, as well as calling to
put an end to it once and for all.
My country highly appreciates the international
and United Nations positions following the unjust
proclamation of the United States Administration. My
country would also like to thank all the countries that
supported the holding of this important meeting. We see
in the positions taken and the statements made by the
majority of Governments in the world, as well as most
members of the Council, a serious and significant step
16/20

27/03/2019

in the right direction, showing that world public opinion
is isolating the United States and Israel, that they are
operating outside international law and that they are a
direct threat to international peace and security.
Let me be clear and direct. Through the illegal
proclamation made by its President, the United States is
violating its obligations under the Charter, the principles
of international law and Security Council resolutions
given that the United States is a permanent member of
the Council. Since the United States delegation likes to
always talk in its statements about accountability for
violations of international law, the crucial question that
we ask today is the following: who is going to ask for
the United States to be held accountable for violating
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981)? Is not
the United Nations supposed to deal with such flagrant
violation of its resolutions and terms of reference by
reassuming its role and legal mandate, which were taken
away by the United States, with a view to implementing
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981)?
In the eyes of the people of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the United States is a country that is now
an enemy. It is an outlaw country that occupies part of
our land following its direct involvement in the killing
of thousands of Syrians and the destruction of our
economy, our natural resources, our bridges and silos,
as well as our infrastructure. It did so by supporting
terrorism or imposing an economic embargo or
through direct military aggression against our country.
The United States has led the so-called international
coalition to combat Da’esh. The Syrian people see the
piece of paper signed by President Trump as a threat
to international peace and security. That was a failed
attempt to manipulate history and geography, as the
deceased former President Charles de Gaulle used to
say. The United States President and the extremist of
the new conservatives believed mistakenly that the
terrorist war against Syria would be enough to break the
will of the people of our country or that eight years of
fighting against extremism and terrorism would change
the priorities of Syria and those of its Government, its
people and its army.
The questions I pose to the very conscience of
humankind, States Members of the United Nations
and those that look to 2030 for achieving sustainable
development that leaves nobody behind is the following:
have they closely considered the real consequences of
the acknowledgement of the occupation by the United
States, a permanent member of the Council and a host
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

country to the United Nations, which was established
by signing the Charter in San Francisco? Have they
considered the real reasons behind the violations by
President Trump’s Administration of international
treaties and conventions that aim to uphold international
stability? Who was behind its withdrawal from
international councils and bodies, such as the Human
Rights Council and UNESCO? Who was behind ending
funds to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East? All these
questions are posed to the members of the Council.
The United States Administration is trying to
protect the Israeli occupying Power by diverting
attention away from the real threats to international
peace and security due to the Israeli occupation and by
fabricating conflicts based on unfounded, dangerous
religious and sectarian lies and falsehoods. That could
further undermine the stability of the region, or cause
wars and chaos, which would lead to a complete lack of
control in the region?
Today we are describing indisputable facts.
Members know that the one that fabricates and fuels
wars and conflicts in the world is a party that does not
respect international law and to which we cannot trust
responsibility for international peace and security. If
the Security Council had dealt with the invasion and
destruction of Iraq in 2003 from the very beginning,
we would not be in the current unprecedented situation
of contempt for international law and for United
Nations resolutions relating to international peace and
security. Ultimately, the inaction of the United Nations
in response to that dangerous United States position
will leave the countries and people under occupation
with only one choice, that is, the principle of “what was
taken by force can only be restored by force”.
The message of the Syrian Arab Republic, its
people and its leadership to the American and Israeli
sides is that the Syrian Arab Golan is ours. It will return
to us. Do not be misguided by thinking that someday
our land will be part of a hypocritical deal or a pawn
in an electoral game, in which those two sides support
each other so that the extremists in Israel can succeed
in the elections and the American Administration can
gain the support of the Israeli lobbying groups in the
United States. The United States Administration may
want to show some generosity towards the Israelis. If
they wish to do so, we would invite them to not put
their hands on what does not belong to them. The
United States is endowed with lands that extend far and

S/PV. 8495

wide. It can give a couple of states — North and South
Carolina, for example — to the Israelis if it needs to
win their satisfaction. Why not? South Carolina is a
great piece of land. In fact, it is the state of Senator
Graham Lindsey, who encouraged President Trump to
issue his proclamation.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation rejects all
attempts by the representative of Germany — and I
say Germany instead of the German regime, because
it would be shameful to use the term regime under the
dome of the international legitimacy — to steer this
meeting away from its objective. I will not respond to
his non-diplomatic way of addressing the subject of my
country, especially in light of the fact that Germany is
a non-permanent member of the Council. My country
is a founding Member of the United Nations, meaning
that we were victorious against the Nazis. The United
Nations arose from the ashes of the Second World War,
which caused the death of 80 million people, due to a
wrong political reading by his country at the time. That
is similar to my German colleague’s incorrect political
reading of what is going on in my country today and the
purpose of this meeting.
I will not extend my remarks, but simply wish to
say that my German colleague has brought shame on
his own country. This is my advice to him. I have spent
scores of years in the Organization and it is shameful that
we cannot communicate with each other based on the
established legal rules and proper way of communication
under the dome of international legitimacy.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I thank Ms. DiCarlo and
Mr. Lacroix for their briefings.
Two days ago, the United States recognized what
has been true for the past 52 years — the Golan Heights
is and will always be Israel’s sovereign territory.
We thank the United States for its just and historic
proclamation. This step, like the many others it has
taken before, shows the willingness of the United States
to honour reality on the ground. It reflects once again
the sincere commitment of the United States to ensuring
Israel’s security and right to self-defence. We implore
Member States to join the United States in recognizing
that the Golan Heights is Israel’s sovereign land.
From the moment Israel was founded, the Syrian
regime has maintained a policy of aggression with the

19-0883417/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

goal of wiping Israel off the map. The Syrian army
joined four other Arab armies in attacking our newly
born Jewish State in 1948. For the next two decades, the
Syrian army rained deadly fire from the Golan Heights
into Israeli civilian areas and filled the territory with
bunkers, barbed-wire fences and minefields.
In 1967, Israel, as nations around the world
recognized, was forced to engage in a war of selfdefence. Israel must ensure that this territory will never
again be used to target our people. Since 1967, the Golan
Heights has proven critical to our very survival. Just six
years later, in a most vile act of war, Syria launched
a surprise attack against Israel on Yom Kippur, the
holiest day for the Jewish people. In that decisive
moment in Israeli history, it was the Golan Heights that
proved invaluable to Israel’s fate. With the high ground
under our control, Israel was able to observe Syria’s
initial act of war and successfully launch a counterattack. The State of Israel’s sovereignty over the Golan
Heights is vital, both for preventing future Syrian acts
of aggression against Israel and for ensuring the safety,
security and stability of our region.
Addressing the Council today is the representative
of a regime responsible for one of the most horrific
humanitarian crises of the present day — a representative
who is complicit in the murder of hundreds of thousands
of his own people. The Syrian Ambassador comes here
to talk about the Golan Heights. Shame on him. Where
was he when his Government was gassing children?
Shame on him for dropping barrel bombs on his people.
Shame on him for inviting the Iranians into his country.
I ask the Council today — to whom exactly does the
United Nations want to give the Golan? To the thousands
of fighters directed by Iran? To the Shia foreign militias?
To the jihadi factions? To whom? Their fighting has
repeatedly spilled over into Israel’s sovereign territory,
and sniper fire and mortar shells have frequently fallen
into Israel. As Israel opened its doors to treated injured
Syrians in the Golan Heights, President Al-Assad made
clear that Hizbullah, operating in Syria, should use the
Golan Heights to attack Israel.
At Iran’s command, Hizbullah has seized the
opportunity to establish a Syrian terror front from
which to attack Israel. Hizbullah’s Syrian terror
network ranges from the town of Hadar, at the northern
end of the Golan Heights, to the towns of Arnah,
Khan Arnabah and Quneitra. The terror network is
18/20

27/03/2019

currently focused on intelligence gathering. We have
that information. We are watching.
But those efforts are just the backdrop for a larger
and more dangerous Hizbullah terror operation to attack
Israel. Hizbullah’s Syrian terror network is exploiting
the civilian population living near the Israeli border and
using Syrian observation points in the area as outposts
for that terror operation. The Syrian Government has
given the Iranian regime freedom of movement and
operation in its own sovereign land. It has recklessly
given up its territory for the Iranian regime to establish
military entrenchment and expand its control from
Tehran all the way to the Mediterranean.
In February 2018, an Iranian unmanned aircraft
armed with explosives was launched into Israel from
Syria with the intention of attacking Israelis. In January
this year, the Iranian regime committed a grave act of
aggression against Israel by firing a medium-range
surface-to-surface missile into northern Israel from
Syria. The situation today, here in the Chamber, is
that the Syrian regime is not even representing its
own people anymore. It is serving its puppet master
in Tehran.
No nation in the world would give up strategic
land to its most dangerous enemy. Without the Golan
Heights, Israel would find Quds Force soldiers on the
tip of the Sea of Galilee. We will never let that happen.
For years, the Al-Assad regime has slaughtered
its people. It has allowed Iran to entrench itself inside
Syria. Does the international community honestly think
Israel would give the Golan Heights to a war criminal?
The war crimes of the dictator from Damascus will
someday be stopped.
Israel’s sovereignty over the Golan Heights is
forever. The Jewish people’s roots in the Golan Heights
go back thousands of years. The Golan is mentioned
in the Tanakh — the Bible — multiple times. It is
home today to tens of thousands of Israelis. As Prime
Minister Menachem Begin said in 1981:
“There can be, in our country or beyond its borders,
no serious person who has studied the history of
the land of Israel who would attempt to deny that
for many generations the Golan Heights were an
integral part of the land of Israel.”
International recognition of the Israeli Golan
Heights ensures the security and stability of our region.
Those States that pay lip service to Israel’s inherent
19-08834

27/03/2019

The situation in the Middle East

right to self-defence now have the opportunity prove
the weight of their words.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I want to respond
to the unwarranted and intemperate comments of the
Syrian Permanent Representative against Germany and
the German Ambassador. I want to stress that Germany
is our partner and our ally in Europe, the European
Union and NATO, at the United Nations and throughout
the world. Germany makes a major contribution to the
work of the United Nations. It is the second-largest
contributor to the United Nations and it upholds the
values of the Charter of the United Nations.
We all know that the United Nations was founded
out of the ashes of the Second World War and we all
know what events led up to that war and its outcome.
It is true that Syria was a founding Member of the
United Nations, and that is a matter for all countries to
be proud of. But as many millions of ordinary citizens
in Syria know to their cost, Syrian authorities do not
uphold the values of the Charter of the United Nations,
they do not uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention,
and they have tortured and starved their own people.
If there is any threat to the values of the Charter of the
United Nations, it comes from Syria and not from any
member of the Security Council today.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic) I would like to clarify first that I spoke about
Nazi Germany during the Second World War. I did not
talk about Germany today. I spoke about Nazi Germany
during the Second World War. I addressed my colleague,
the representative of Germany, and spoke about his
comments. I did not speak about Germany. I spoke
about the comments of my colleague, the representative
of Germany. That is what I would like to clarify to Her
Excellency the representative of Britain.
With regard to the statement of the representative
of Israel, first, the majority of representatives in this
Chamber, with the exception of the United States
representative, did not absolutely acknowledge the
United States action, which proves that this action
violates resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and

S/PV. 8495

497 (1981). That is an important lesson which the
representative of Israel must understand. He should
grasp the lessons learned and the wisdom of what
happened today. Fourteen out of fifteen members told
him and all those who protect him that this thoughtless
behaviour is wrong. Annexing land by force is wrong
and illegal and violates the Charter of the United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. We are not
reinventing the wheel in that regard. The Israelis would
like to reinvent the wheel. That is my first point.
Secondly, there has never been and will never
be a Member of the United Nations that makes
the Organization work as hard as Israel makes it
work because of the occupation. It would take a
mathematician or a computer specialist to calculate
how many millions of hours have been spent by this
international Organization and by tens of thousands of
diplomats from all over the world working on the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories since 1948? How many
millions of hours of work and how many billions of
dollars have been spent on that issue? Israeli politicians,
prime ministers, ministers, ambassadors and military
officers continue to deny the great truth that there
is an Israeli occupation of Arab territories and that
occupation should not be there. It is very simple. That
is the law. There should be no occupation.
Thirdly, every time Israelis are cornered,
Americans come to save them, and when Americans
find themselves cornered, just like the Israelis, a
Hollywood spectacle begins. Israelis are well known
for that. Council members have heard and seen the
cheap show that the Israeli Ambassador performed. He
strangely used the word “shame”, as if he, his country,
his authorities and his politicians know what shame even
means. The majority of the United Nations Member
States have been saying “Shame on you, Israel”, since
1948. Out of 193 Members, at least 150 have said,
(spoke in English)
“Shame on you, Israel” and “Shame on you, Israeli
Ambassador”, at least 100 times at each session of
the General Assembly. They do not get it.
(spoke in Arabic)
Fourthly, Syria has been participating in a peace
process. Today, the Israeli Ambassador is saying that
the annexation and occupation of the Golan are a
security necessity for Israel, as if he does not know the
history of the political talks between Syria and Israel.

19-0883419/20

S/PV.8495

The situation in the Middle East

His former Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin sent us a
written letter in which he acknowledged that the Golan
is a Syrian territory across the borders of 4 June 1967.
Warren Christopher, the former United States Secretary
of State, acknowledged it, because he received the letter
and transferred it to us. Of course, a Jewish Israeli
extremist assassinated former Prime Minister Rabin in
Tel Aviv. Israel is governed by extremists. Israel does
not seek peace. If Israel genuinely sought peace, we
would have achieved peace back in the days of former
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and former
President Bill Clinton. Back then, the time was right
for peace.
Sixthly, it is not in Israel’s interest to avoid peace,
because in the absence of law the only alternative is
reclaiming the Golan by force. I say that here and now
in the Council and to the Representative of Israel in
order to convey the message to his Government. There
must be law in the world or everyone will adhere to
the law of the jungle. The Golan is a Syrian territory,
whether Israel likes it or not and whether or not it is
protected by the United States. The United States can
protect it for 5, 10 or 15 years, but what then? Things
will change. Not acknowledging our right will lead to
war. If Israelis want to live in peace they must do so
within recognized borders based on justice, the land for
peace principle and the return of occupied territories
to the Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese people. Not
acknowledging our right will lead to war. That is not in
the best interest of Israel.
There are those today who try to weaken and hurt
Syria but that phase will end — be it tomorrow or the
day after, it will end. Only then will Israel see how we
will liberate and recover the Golan if it does not heed
the international law. Israel’s American partner issued
a licence to Genie Energy, a company owned by Dick
Cheney, the former Vice-President of the United States,
to start oil exploration in the Golan. A United States
company is exploring for oil in the Golan. There is also
another project under way using giant fans for solar
energy. Israel has seized tens of thousands of acres
from Syrian farmers in the Golan to launch its solar
power project.

20/20

27/03/2019

Despite all of those violations, we hear that
Germany has provided Israel with Dolphin-class
submarines capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
Why? Does Israel need submarines to carry nuclear
weapons? Who is threatening Israel with nuclear
weapons? Who has nuclear weapons to threaten Israel?
Israel is the only State that is not a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It
refuses to subject its nuclear facilities to the IAEA. All
Council members know that. Israel is being supplied
with submarines, F-35 and F-16 aircraft and advanced
maritime weapons. Who is threatening Israel? It is
Israel that threatens its neighbours. Israel poses a threat
to international peace and security.
I apologize for taking up so much time.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has requested the floor to make
a further statement.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I never thought that I would
agree with the Syrian Ambassador. I agree with him
only on one issue today. The United Nations is obsessed
with Israel, considering the number of resolutions,
debates and statements on the issue. I regret that
because I really believe that if the United Nations had
focused on what happened in Syria in the past few
years, perhaps we would have been able to prevent the
massacres, the use of chemical weapons, the rapes and
what Syria did to its own people.
Today, we feel for the Syrian people, whom the
Ambassador represents. We feel for them because they
have to deal with such a regime. I would like to say
directly to the Syrian people that the day will come
when they will have a real representative, who will
represent their needs and make their voices heard.
There will be someone else in Damascus and someone
else sitting in the Chamber, who will be recognized by
the international community. We are thinking about
and praying for them.
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

19-08834
