S/PV.8407

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8407th meeting

Tuesday, 20 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu/Mr. Wu Haitao . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Adom
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa
Letter dated 9 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/1004)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-39074 (E)
*1839074*

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/1004, which contains a letter dated
9 November 2018 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa
Letter dated 9 November 2018 from the
Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1004)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Fiji, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Mexico,
Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, the
Sudan, Switzerland, Turkey, Uganda and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Chergui is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Addis Ababa.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in this meeting: Mr. Gustavo Martin
Prada, Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and
Mr. Robert Mardini, Head of Delegation and Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/68

begin

20/11/2018

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: Peacekeeping is a
remarkable exercise in global solidarity. United Nations
peacekeepers are ready to pay the ultimate price for
peace, and we are all in their debt. Last week, eight
of our peacekeepers — all from the African countries
Malawi and Tanzania — were killed in the line of duty.
Most were trying to prevent an attack on the town of
Beni in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
create a safe environment for those working to end the
Ebola outbreak there. I send my deepest condolences
to their families and to the families of all peacekeepers
killed in the line of duty. Let us stand and observe a
moment of silence for the fallen.
The members of the Council observed a minute
of silence.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Chinese
presidency for convening this open debate on
strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa, and for
China’s contributions to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa and around the world. Some 2,500
uniformed Chinese personnel, including well-trained
and equipped individual and formed police units,
are making an important contribution to multilateral
efforts for peace.
I welcome President Xi’s pledge to establish a
peacekeeping standby force and hope to build on the
13 units that have already been registered. The African
continent hosts seven of the fourteen United Nations
peacekeeping missions and more than 80 per cent
of United Nations peacekeepers. African countries
provide nearly half of United Nations Blue Helmets
deployed around the world, including almost two-thirds
of all women peacekeepers, and the majority of United
Nations police officers.
(spoke in French)
Our peacekeeping missions on the African
continent have made encouraging progress in recent
years. Our mandates were completed in Côte d’Ivoire
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

and Liberia and our missions were able to withdraw.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, the
Central African Republic and Darfur, the African
Union and the United Nations have worked closely
together to support the political processes, national
dialogues and mediation efforts in the region, which
has defused tensions and paved the way for peace
agreements and elections.
In South Sudan, we worked with the African
Union in support of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development to bring about the signing of the
revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. Over the past 10 years,
the African Peace and Security Architecture has
been considerably bolstered, and one of its essential
pillars — the Peace Fund — is currently being
implemented. To date, States members of the African
Union have contributed $60 million of the $400 million
required by the end of 2021. This is very encouraging,
and I congratulate the Chairperson of the African
Union, President Kagame, as well as the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat,
on all their efforts.
(spoke in English)
Peacekeeping in Africa continues to present
some of our greatest challenges. United Nations
missions are carrying out complex operations with
multidimensional mandates in extremely dangerous
environments. Transnational crime, non-State armed
groups and terrorist groups pose serious challenges,
sometimes targeting our peacekeepers directly. Against
this backdrop, our partnership with the African Union
and African Member States is vital to our collective
efforts for peace, and we must continue working to
strengthen it.
There is excellent cooperation at the highest levels.
African Union Commission Chairperson Moussa Faki
Mahamat and I have signed two Joint United NationsAfrican Union Frameworks: the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, and the Joint Framework for the
Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. These Frameworks
are already promoting coherence, efficiency and
effectiveness in our common action.
The Deputy Secretary-General and senior officials
of the African Union have undertaken several joint
visits to the continent. The Under-Secretary-General

S/PV. 8407

for Peacekeeping Operations and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, who is here with
us today, have conducted joint visits to the Central
African Republic, the Sudan and South Sudan. The role
of women in peace and security was at the heart of their
recent visit to South Sudan.
I am also encouraged by African support for
my Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which aims
to mobilize all partners and stakeholders to, first,
refocus peacekeeping around more realistic mandates;
secondly, to make our missions stronger and safer;
and, thirdly, to mobilize greater collective support
for political solutions and for well-equipped and welltrained troops. More than 150 Governments have
signed the Declaration of Shared Commitments in
support of Action for Peacekeeping, including 42 on the
African continent.
Partnerships with troop-contributing countries;
with regional organizations, particularly the African
Union; and with host Governments are critical
to the success of this initiative, which is already
showing results.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative was also
informed by the recommendations of the Dos Santos
Cruz report on improving the safety and security of our
peacekeepers. This also led to the development of an
action plan to address the performance and security of
United Nations peacekeepers.
Our operations are now taking a more proactive
posture to make these improvements. We are adopting
innovative measures to train and equip our troops,
and we have undertaken independent reviews of our
missions to determine how we can better fulfil our
mandates. We will remain vigilant and review the
results of these steps.
At the same time, our reforms of the United
Nations peace and security architecture will improve
performance by providing more integrated analyses
and stronger country and regional strategies. Closer
integration of conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding will allow us to put sustainable
development at the heart of our work.
Increasing the numbers of women in peacekeeping
at all levels is another way to improve the effectiveness
of our operations. I am taking steps to ensure that my
gender-parity strategy is implemented across all our

18-390743/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

peacekeeping missions, and to increase the numbers of
female troops and police.

that have pledged to the Force, but so far almost half the
pledges have not been earmarked, let alone disbursed.

We are also mobilizing to tackle sexual exploitation
and abuse in our ranks, including our peacekeeping
missions, putting the rights and dignity of victims front
and centre. We are providing more support to victims,
and we have a greater and more effective capacity
in seeking justice. We have stepped up training and
improved investigations.

There has been progress over the past year. The
Joint Force has reached initial operational capacity. But
we are far from what is needed to meet the security
challenges of the Sahel. An adequate level of funding
would enable the Force to fill equipment shortfalls and
capability gaps, and to better address the serious threats
facing the region.

Dozens of world leaders have joined the Circle
of Leadership in support of measures to implement a
zero-tolerance policy, and 100 countries have signed
voluntary compacts with the United Nations to tackle
the issue. The era of silence and taboos around this
issue is over, and the era of accountability has begun.

In our interconnected age, security challenges on
one continent pose a risk to the whole world. The factors
that drive conflict in Africa — including poverty,
youth unemployment, climate change, competition for
resources and transnational crime — threaten global
security. Improving the impact and effectiveness of
peacekeeping in Africa is a collective responsibility,
and we will continue to tackle it with our African
partners, across the continent and around the world.

The United Nations and the African Union are
cooperating more closely than ever before. African
peace operations, including those mandated by the
African Union, have played a key role in maintaining
peace and security on the continent and deserve
predictable systems of support.
Chairperson Faki and I will soon sign a joint
communiqué guiding the work of the Secretariat and
the African Union Commission in strengthening
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa and
paving the way for more adequately supported African
peace operations. We are working closely with the
African Union on joint planning for the mandating of
its peace-support operations and on legal and human
rights compliance frameworks.
As I have told the Council before, we need to
understand that United Nations peacekeeping has
limits. We face more and more situations in which
we need peace enforcement and counter-terrorism
operations that can be carried out only by our
partners — namely, the African Union and various
subregional organizations.
It is essential that African-led peace operations
acting under the Security Council’s authority be provided
with strong mandates and predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing, including through United Nationsassessed contributions where appropriate.
I have appealed to the international community to
support the regional Group of Five for the Sahel Joint
Force in combating terrorism and organized crime. I
am grateful to the European Union and other donors
4/68

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui (spoke in Arabic): On this holy day
on which we commemorate the birth of the Prophet, I
would like to express our warmest congratulations to
all present.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of the African Union and on my own
behalf, let me start by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the People’s Republic of China for demonstrating
your unwavering support and commitment to peace and
security in Africa.
At the outset, I wish to join His Excellency the
Secretary-General in extending, on behalf of the
African Union, condolences to the Governments and
the people of Malawi and Tanzania and to the United
Nations family on last week’s tragic loss of United
Nations peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Our thoughts and prayers are with the
families of the fallen soldiers.
Allow me also, Mr. President, to express
appreciation for this invitation to brief the Council on
the very important subject of enhancing capacities for
peace and security in Africa. As a Union, we always
appreciate the focus that you place on peace and security
in Africa during your presidency. In that regard, we
always endeavour to use this platform to reiterate our
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

position on the level of commitment and cooperation
we require of the United Nations to guarantee the
effectiveness of our strategic partnership.
I am also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive presentation. We recognize ourselves
in every word he said today. I want to pay tribute to
his tireless efforts to consolidate and further promote
the strategic partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations, including in the area of peace
and security. I would like to assure him of the African
Union and Africa’s full respect for and support to
all their joint endeavours, which the African Union
continues to enhance.
The issue of peacekeeping reform is of shared and
critical interest to the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union.
Last year’s Security Council high-level debate on
peacekeeping reform (see S/PV.8051) and the ensuing
resolution 2378 (2017), which was preceded by
resolution 2320 (2016), presented an important locus
on which to continue monitoring our efforts towards
effective partnership, enhanced cooperation and
peacekeeping reform.
Since my briefing to the Council on this topic last
year (see S/PV.7971), the African Union has spared
no effort in expediting key priorities that contribute
towards strengthening our partnership. Today’s
meeting thus offers the opportunity for me to highlight
three major areas that we have achieved considerable
progress in, which are also areas of mutual concern and
interest to our two institutions.
First, the Council will note that we continue to
facilitate key processes of the revitalized Peace Fund,
which we launched on 17 November on the sidelines of
the 11th extraordinary meeting of the Assembly of the
African Union on reform. The launch of the Peace Fund
was preceded by the inaugural meeting of the Board of
Trustees, of which the United Nations is a member, whose
members were also appointed last week. The Board will
ensure the effective management and accountability
of the Peace Fund. As I speak, we have recorded, as
the Secretary-General just indicated, $60.5 million in
contributions from African Union member States to the
Fund. This represents the highest contribution since its
establishment, and based on additional commitments
expressed at last week’s Assembly meeting, we are
projecting to reach $100 million in contributions
by early 2019. This accelerated momentum is a key

S/PV. 8407

component of our collective efforts to guarantee the
African Union’s access to United Nations-assessed
contributions, on which we seek to have agreement in
the draft resolution to be adopted by the Council in the
coming weeks.
Secondly, the African Union Commission has
recorded significant progress in enhancing its existing
human rights compliance framework for African
Union peace support operations. Allow me to reiterate
that ensuring compliance with and accountability to
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, and conduct and discipline is not new to the
African Union. These international norms and standards
have always been part of our mission planning and
management processes, long before the discussions on
predictable and sustainable financing of African Union
peace support operations began. For instance, since the
African Union’s first deployment in Burundi in 2003,
the African Union and its member States have been
ensuring preventive, response and remedial measures to
avoid and respond to any violations of these norms and
standards by personnel. That includes predeployment
training for all peace support operation personnel,
the signing of memorandums of understanding with
troop- and police-contributing countries to confirm
the responsibilities of the African Union, as well as
the conduct of court martials and public prosecutions
in mission areas and in the countries of alleged
perpetrators. Thus, our current efforts are focused
on enhancing these existing frameworks, which we
are facilitating jointly with the United Nations, with
support from the International Committee of the Red
Cross, to ensure common standards and processes.
Thirdly, our concrete partnership in particular
theatres of operations, such as Somalia, continue to
offer us opportunities to enhance greater cooperation
and consultation between our two institutions. Since
2013, the African Union and the United Nations have
jointly undertaken four African Union-United Nations
joint reviews of the African Union Mission in Somalia.
These processes have allowed for greater joint analysis,
planning and cooperation between the two Secretariats.
The recent joint engagements of the African Union and
United Nations Special Representatives in Somalia to
urge the Federal Government and states of Somalia
to resolve their current political differences through
constructive dialogue points to the inevitability of our
joint work to maximize our prospects for greater success
and achievements. However, more needs to be done to

18-390745/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

facilitate joint visits to these theatres, as well as regular
consultations between our two Councils, in order to
guarantee greater coherence and the convergence of
strategic directions and tasks in African Union Peace
and Security Council communiqués and United Nations
Security Council resolutions on the same issues.
We are firmly convinced that the aforementioned
elements serve as a guarantee of the mutually
reinforcing commitment of our two secretariats to
further aligning our processes in order to enhance our
joint efforts. Thus, we urge the Council to also further
enhance its strategic engagement and framework with
the African Union Peace and Security Council. In this
regard, we urge members of the Council to seize the
opportunity to adopt the draft resolution that will be
submitted in the coming weeks on the need for the
African Union’s access to United Nations-assessed
contributions for operations authorized by the United
Nations on a case-by-case basis. This, we believe, will
bring the international community one step closer
to establishing a more effective, predictable and
sustainable framework that will enable us to achieve
peace and security on the continent.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the African
Union understands the objective and aim of the draft
resolution that is currently being negotiated by Council
Members. As the African Union, we believe that
the draft resolution, when adopted, should indicate
that the Council, in principle, agrees to the use of
United Nations-assessed contributions for African
Union-mandated peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council on a case-by-case basis. In
this regard, the draft resolution is not intended to tie
the hands of the Council to any unending support, as
it offers a platform for proper consultations on each
conflict situation that will require such support before
any decision is made. In that respect, we urge that the
draft resolution, when adopted, not be overloaded with
conditionalities that would further delay us in making
progress to more effectively prevent and manage peace
and security in Africa.
We believe that further conditionalities will not
represent the spirit of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, signed on 19 April 2017. This is
why our two secretariats are currently finalizing a
joint communiqué that the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
and the Secretary-General will be signing before the
6/68

20/11/2018

adoption of the draft resolution in December. Thus,
the reaffirmation of the commitment to the African
Union-United Nations Partnership, and in particular
to operationalizing the African Union Peace Fund,
as well as to enhancing common and harmonized
standards of our existing human rights compliance
and accountability frameworks and mechanisms, will
address all the additional steps that need to be addressed.
On this note, we believe that without the political
cooperation and support of the Council, the attainment
of collective security within Africa and beyond will
be difficult to achieve. In this regard, we continue to
count on the leadership and guidance of African Union
member States, especially those in the Security Council,
in the realization of our institutional mandates.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
At the outset, I thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Mr. Chergui, the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, for their briefings. I highly
appreciate their personal efforts and the African
Union’s outstanding efforts and contributions made
towards achieving peace and security.
Africa is a continent full of dynamism and promise.
The African Union (AU) and African countries are
important forces for the maintenance of world peace and
regional stability. In recent years, African countries,
united in cooperation, have been active in implementing
the African Union Agenda 2063 and its Silencing the
Guns by 2020 initiative, building the African Peace and
Security Architecture, and pushing to address African
issues through African means, thereby making an
important contribution to the maintenance of regional
peace and security.
We are pleased to note that, guided by the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, the United Nations
and the AU have continued to deepen their cooperation
in the peace and security arena. The Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative reaffirms the need
to deepen the Organization’s partnership with the AU.
Strengthening African peacekeeping operations and
improving Africa’s peace and security capacities is in
the common interests of the international community,
and is our shared responsibility.
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

As rotating President of the Council for this month,
China initiated this open debate on peacekeeping
operations in Africa in order to increase the
international community’s attention to and input in the
cause of peace and security in Africa, and to effectively
assist the AU and African countries in bolstering their
capacity-building for peace and security. I would like to
make the following four points.
First, I stress the need to strengthen the United
Nations peacekeeping effort in Africa. Africa is
the priority of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Of the 14 peacekeeping missions, the five
largest are deployed in Africa. In its peacekeeping
operations in Africa, the United Nations should
adhere to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, as well as the basic principles of
peacekeeping — consent of the parties, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate — and should respect the sovereignty of
the country in question.
The Security Council and the Secretariat should
take into consideration such factors as the actual needs
of the country concerned, the security environment
and the mission objectives when designing tailor-made
peacekeeping mission mandates, and should adjust
the priority tasks and areas of focus for the various
stages. The Secretariat should take effective measures,
increase input, improve its command and control in
peacekeeping operations in Africa, raise the efficiency
of mission mandate implementation, enhance the safety
and security of peacekeepers, strengthen early-warning
capabilities vis-à-vis security threats, and provide
adequate logistical support.
Secondly, we must deepen the peacekeeping
partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union. We must further strengthen
communication and coordination between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council and
between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission. The timeliness and accuracy of briefings
and the effectiveness of decision-making must also be
improved. China firmly supports African countries in
resolving African issues the African way and in playing
the lead role in handling African affairs.
Thirdly, we must enhance collaboration between
United Nations peacekeeping operations and Africanled peace processes and operations. The AU and
subregional organizations in Africa have unique

S/PV. 8407

geographical advantages. AU peace operations
represent an important complement to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. China supports the United
Nations in its efforts to provide sustainable and
predictable funding for AU-led peace operations, help
the AU improve mission planning, fund-raising, mission
maintenance and the management of peace operations
under its leadership. China also assists the AU in
accelerating the establishment of the African Standby
Force, the rapid-reaction force and early-warning
mechanisms, as well as in deepening cooperation in
military technology and scaling up military training.
Fourthly, we must help African troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) to strengthen their peacekeeping
capacity-building. At present, more than half of the top
20 TCCs in United Nations peacekeeping operations
are African countries, which have made important
contributions to United Nations peacekeeping.
It is imperative to enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations through reforms. Through
bilateral and multilateral cooperation and in keeping
with the wishes of African countries, the international
community should provide assistance in terms of
training, equipment and resources. The Government
and the people of China have consistently supported
the African countries and peoples in their pursuit of
peace, tranquillity, development and prosperity. China
actively participates in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa, with about 2,200 peacekeepers
currently serving in peacekeeping missions in Africa.
In September, the Beijing Summit of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation identified Sino-African
cooperation in peace and security as one of the eight
major cooperation priorities. The declaration adopted
at the Summit clearly states that China will support
Africa’s Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. China
decided to establish the China-Africa Peace and
Security Fund to support cooperation between China
and Africa on peace and security, peacekeeping and
the maintenance of stability. It will continue to provide
free military assistance to the African Union for its
peace operations.
China supports the countries in African subregions
such as the Sahel, the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of
Guinea in their pursuit of regional security against
terrorism. With that in mind, it established the ChinaAfrica Peace and Security Forum to provide a platform
for increased exchanges between China and Africa in
the field of peace and security. Since its establishment,

18-390747/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

the China-United Nations Peace and Development
Trust Fund has financially supported multiple projects
aimed at bolstering African peacekeeping capabilities.
China will continue to support Africa in strengthening
its peacekeeping capacity-building; settling regional
hotspot issues at an early date; achieving peace,
stability and development on the African continent; and
joining hands to shape a more connected community
with a shared future for China and Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the African countries that are members of
the Security Council — Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia and
Equatorial Guinea — I thank the Chinese presidency
for organizing this open debate on strengthening
African peacekeeping operations.
This debate follows the 11th extraordinary session
of the Assembly of the African Union, held in Addis
Ababa on 17 and 18 November. At the Summit, the Heads
of State and Government took important decisions to
accelerate the institutional reform of the African Union
with a view to boosting its irreversible progress towards
financial autonomy and greater efficiency. China’s
timely choice of bringing Africa to the forefront of its
presidency echoes the recent Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, a major event
that fully reflects the virtuous path of Sino-African
cooperation over the course of several years.
We commend Secretary-General António Guterres
for his commitment to and ongoing support for conflict
prevention and resolution initiatives in Africa and,
on behalf of the African countries on the Council, I
thank him for his excellent briefings and insightful
recommendations. We also thank Ambassador Smaïl
Chergui, African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace
and Security, for the inspiring clarity of his briefing,
which informed the Council on the opportunities and
challenges related to peacekeeping in Africa.
Allow me also, on behalf of the African countries
on the Council, to pay a well-deserved tribute to all
peacekeepers who have fallen on the field of battle in
the accomplishment of their noble mission of bringing
peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
8/68

20/11/2018

As rightly stated in the concept note for this debate
(S/2018/1004, annex), Africa is an important part of
ongoing peacekeeping operations, not only through
its countries hosting United Nations missions, but
also and above all in the form of military contingents
and police units. Despite the current constraints on
its peacekeeping capabilities and in an environment
marked by the exacerbation of multifaceted security
threats, the African Union’s determination to take
ownership of the collective security of the continent is
well established. Over the past decade, the pan-African
organization has been firmly committed to increasing
its contribution and building its peacekeeping capacity.
To mention but a few emblematic significant and
recent examples, that is the case for the operations in
Somalia, the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel region. They
indicate our firm determination to propose innovative
responses, based on the comparative advantage of
the rapid deployment of peace missions with robust
mandates within the framework of continental and
regional arrangements.
Those operations also illustrate the flexibility of
the African Peace and Security Architecture and its
ability to adapt to ever-changing security challenges.
In that context, we value the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, formalized by
the signing, on 19 April 2017, of the Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security
by Secretary-General António Guterres and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. The strategic framework
sets out the modalities for a division of responsibilities
and closer coordination of the efforts of the two
organizations, with a view to promoting sustainable
peace and security in Africa.
While the African Peace and Security Architecture
is a decisive step towards ownership of crisis prevention,
management and resolution in Africa, the effectiveness
of African peace support operations remains dependent
on the availability of predictable and sustainable
financial resources. Those operations, needless to say,
are part of the implementation of endogenous solutions
to African problems.
But, as you, Mr. President, will agree, the
effectiveness of African peace support operations will
remain limited, as I mentioned earlier, so long as the
thorny issue of predictable and sustainable financial
resources has not been resolved through consensual
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

and sustainable funding mechanisms and criteria. That
is the thrust of resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).
In particular, paragraph 18 of resolution 2378 (2017)
states that the Council:
“Expresses its intention to give further
consideration to practical steps that can be taken,
and the conditions necessary, to establish the
mechanism through which African Union led peace
support operations authorized by the Security
Council and under the Security Council’s authority
under Chapter VIII of the Charter could be
partly financed through United Nations assessed
contributions, on a case by case basis, in compliance
with relevant agreed standards and mechanisms”.
Such funding would be based on consensus
standards and mechanisms, ensuring strategic financial
control and accountability for the management
of the resources available, as the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security noted. In that
regard, we appreciate the constructive cooperation
between the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission in strengthening the mandate,
management, oversight and accountability of African
Union peace support operations.
In view of the progress made on those issues
since the adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017), the African Union Peace and Security
Council has instructed the three African members of
the Security Council to promote the African common
position on the predictability and sustainability of
funding for African peace support operations, through
statutory contributions from the United Nations. We
therefore call for the commitment of all peacekeeping
stakeholders to ensuring that the ongoing efforts result
in the adoption in December, under the chairmanship
of Côte d’Ivoire, of a draft resolution providing lasting
answers to that question. We also hope that the draft
resolution, which does not trigger the immediate
provision of funding, but rather provides a framework
for the Council’s assessment, will obtain its agreement,
in principle, for consideration on a case-by-case basis,
as recommended by the report of the United Nations
High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446).
In any case, the three African members of the
Security Council endorse the concerns expressed
by the members of the Council on the framework for
compliance with human rights and transparency in

S/PV. 8407

resource management. We assure them that the United
Nations and the African Union have undertaken the
consultations necessary to developing a joint road map
that addresses the concerns of our partners. The road
map, which will be ready shortly — again, as noted by
the African Union Commissioner — will set out the
guiding principles and the progress made so far, and
identify outstanding issues.
The history of institutions, like that of the humans
who are their architects, illustrates the case at hand.
The history of the African Union, daughter of the
Organization of African Unity, is that of a continent
that has tirelessly sought, in perfect symbiosis with
the United Nations, lasting solutions to the challenges
to peace and security facing Africa. Our commitment
to owning and achieving our collective security and
destiny, as evidenced by the establishment of the
Peace Fund, has never been stronger in the face of the
complexity of the present challenges.
To conclude, I would therefore echo the urgent
appeal of the three African members of the Council that
we may be allowed to join in a dynamic of solidarity in
the search for lasting solutions to the multiple challenges
that mark African peace support operations. Beyond
our continent, that is an issue of international peace
and security, the maintenance of which, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, is the primary
responsibility of the Security Council.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Chinese
presidency for putting the spotlight on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa, and would like
to join previous speakers in commending SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and the African Union (AU)
Commissioner Smaïl Chergui for their comprehensive
and insightful briefings.
I would like to begin by underscoring that the
African Union is a crucial partner of the United
Nations on the issues of peace and security in Africa.
The African Union-led peace support operations
are absolutely essential to the Security Council’s
responsibility to maintain global peace and security
in certain situations, considering the limitations of the
United Nations peacekeeping doctrine with regard to
peace enforcement and counter-terrorism.
Kazakhstan welcomes strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU, aimed at
supporting Africa’s steady pursuit of peace, stability and
sustainable development. The Joint United Nations-AU

18-390749/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, as well as the joint framework on sustainable
development, mark a new level of enhanced strategic
partnership between the two organizations, based on
mutual respect and comparative advantages.
To improve the effectiveness of peace operations
in Africa, we need to capitalize on those frameworks
to the fullest, including through joint field visits to
conflict areas, joint briefings and the meetings of
the United Nations-AU Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security. Further technical work is also needed
to develop the modalities for joint analysis, planning
and assessment, as well as reporting to the relevant
intergovernmental bodies.
Both the United Nations and the AU need to
revise their internal administrative processes, policies
and procedures and arrive at strengthening common
synergies. Subregional mechanisms, such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, have
proven to be capable of resolving the most complicated
conflicts in the region. Therefore, closer links between
the United Nations and subregional mechanisms can
help African peacekeeping operations become more
responsive and effective on the ground.
Political solutions, preventive diplomacy and
mediation should be at the heart of any peacekeeping
deployment. African peacekeeping operations should
engage in a thorough analysis of the key causes of conflict.
We will succeed only if we can eliminate the drivers of
instability and not just manage the symptoms. We also
need a sound system of information-management and
sharing and to pool best practices and lessons learned.
It is commendable that the African Union, on its
part, has made significant progress in establishing the
necessary accountability, transparency and human
rights compliance frameworks, as requested by the
Security Council. We welcome AU efforts to enhance
the African Standby Force and its rapid deployment
capability, in accordance with the Maputo Strategic
Work Plan, and we call for the finalization of the
memorandum of understanding between the AU and
regional economic communities on the deployment and
employment of the African Standby Force.
My delegation also commends the AU for its efforts
on the operationalization of the management structures
of the Peace Fund, which plays an important role in
ensuring financial transparency and strategic coherence.
10/68

20/11/2018

We welcome the appointment on 16 November of the
five African members of the Board of Trustees of the
African Union Peace Fund. We encourage the AU to
continue at the same pace with its institutional reform
process, aimed at strengthening the African Peace and
Security Architecture.
The most critical issue may be the financing of
African peacekeeping operations. They will not be
able to deliver effectively without predictable, flexible
and sustainable financing authorized by the United
Nations. We believe that financing should be provided
on a case-by-case basis, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. By adopting
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), the Security
Council has expressed its readiness to consider the joint
financing of those missions through United Nationsassessed contributions. We therefore support the
initiative of the three African non-permanent members
to adopt a new Council draft resolution on financing
AU peace support operations, which will build on
those resolutions.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that Kazakhstan, as an
observer to the African Union, remains committed to
further strengthening the capacity of the AU and to
helping African countries fulfil their vision of peace,
progress and prosperity through the implementation
of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the African
Union master road map of practical steps for silencing
the guns in Africa by 2020.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): This is a topic that
should concern us all, and I thank China for convening
this important open debate today. Many of the threats
and challenges faced by our African partners, including
violent extremism, terrorism, serious and organized
crime and armed conflict have no regard for borders.
In our deeply interconnected world, our security
is inextricably linked together, and those threats
undermine our shared pursuit of a more peaceful,
prosperous world for all. It is therefore vital that we
continue to work together to address those complex,
shared challenges.
Effective partnerships between the United
Nations and the African Union and its subregional
organizations are particularly important in that context.
The African Union and its subregional organizations
play a vital role, not only in peacekeeping, but also
in preventing conflict and sustaining peace. I pay
tribute to their work in mediation, brokering political
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

agreements and supporting peace processes, as for
example in South Sudan, where the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has worked to revitalize
and support peace negotiations. No such discussion
would be complete without recognizing in particular
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the most impressive of the subregional
organizations, especially its efforts in The Gambia in
2017 and 2018.
Peacekeeping remains one of the most effective tools
of the United Nations for the promotion of maintenance
of international peace and security. So when we do
deploy our peacekeepers, whether in Africa or elsewhere
in the world, we need to collectively ensure that they
are properly equipped to meet the complex threats and
challenges that they will face. That is essential not only
to ensuring that they can effectively implement their
mandates — those that we set here in the Council — but
also to enabling them to ensure their own safety and
security. As the report authored by former United
Nations Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers, made clear, safety
and capability are inextricably linked. Where units
perform poorly, they put themselves, as well as the
civilians they are mandated to protect, at risk. That is
why I will concentrate the remainder of my remarks
on performance.
Again, I welcome the adoption of resolution
2436 (2018), which sets out measures for improving
peacekeeping performance. Let me be clear, though,
that discussing performance in this way should not
be seen as just something aimed at troop-contributing
countries. The Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations commits all stakeholders, including
the Secretary-General, to developing an integrated
performance policy framework, performance data,
effective field support, clear operational and technical
requirements, and to working with Member States to
generate specialized capabilities. Member States have
committed to providing well-equipped and well-trained
personnel to improve predeployment preparations and
coordinate better on training and capacity-building.
Additionally, the Council has of course been challenged
to write mandates that are better and more realistic.
First, we believe that missions must be robustly
and fairly assessed, using accurate data collected
from the field. That will improve our understanding

S/PV. 8407

of what works and what does not work so that lessons
can be learned. I welcome the work that the Secretariat
has undertaken in that regard to develop and pilot
new frameworks for performance assessment. Where
assessments do identify issues, they must be followed
by appropriate action, including repatriating ineffective
units and replacing them as necessary. The principles
of robust assessment and accountability are particularly
relevant to the conduct of peacekeepers. The United
Nations human rights due diligence policy for all United
Nations support and non-United Nations security
forces — which includes reimbursements — must be
implemented in full, as must the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
As the Secretary-General himself said this morning,
the era of silence is over and the era of accountability
has begun.
Secondly, with regard to collaboration, we should
make the best use of our comparative strengths so that
our collective effort is greater than the sum of its parts.
That means ensuring, for example, that African Union
peace enforcement operations complement United
Nations peacekeeping missions, while respecting
the relevant competencies. When we, along with 150
other countries, endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, we committed to enhancing
collaboration and planning between the United Nations
and the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements, while recognizing the
need for a clear delineation of roles. That includes, of
course, the African Union and the European Union,
which have deployed several mandated operations in
recent years.
The United Kingdom also recognizes the importance
of collaboration between organizations and their
member States to ensure that all peacekeepers in the
field are willing, capable of and equipped to effectively
and safely implement their mandates. We are proud that
British peace support teams in Africa provide training
to over 10,000 African peacekeeping personnel every
year. In Somalia, for example, the United Kingdom
continues to support the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia, both bilaterally and
through the European Union and the United Nations,
including through the deployment of personnel to
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM and
through predeployment training for regional forces.

18-3907411/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

We also, of course, have a substantial peacekeeping
presence in South Sudan.
Thirdly, we must recognize when peacekeeping
missions are not best suited to a particular challenge.
For example, due to their composition and character,
United Nations peacekeeping missions are not suited to
engaging in peace enforcement and counter-terrorism
operations. That fact underpins our support in principle
for African Union-led peace support operations that
are in line with the commitments set out in resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and authorized by the
Security Council under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations to access United Nations-assessed
contributions on a case-by-case basis.
In conclusion, let me commend the recent successful
transition from British to Vietnamese forces at the
United Nations field hospital in South Sudan. That
is the first time that unbroken clinical coverage has
been achieved during a United Nations field hospital
transfer, setting a precedent that, we believe, all future
operations should seek to emulate. Many lessons were
learned in that process, one being that some of the
existing Department of Field Support (DFS) regulations
constrained our ability to ensure unbroken clinical
coverage. It is therefore key that we all learn from that
and that DFS regulations be thoroughly reviewed and
adapted so that transitions between smart pledges are
as seamless as possible.
I would like to finish by paying tribute to all the
members of the British military currently serving in
United Nations peacekeeping missions and by reiterating
my admiration and respect for all peacekeepers who
work with bravery, dedication and patience in the
places where we in the Council send them.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres and
the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, for their comprehensive briefings.
The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
Today I will address three issues pertaining to
our discussion, namely, partnership, peace operations
and funding.
First, with regard to partnership, Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations provides us with an
12/68

20/11/2018

umbrella for regional cooperation. Seventy-three years
after its adoption, the majority of States Members of
the Organization adopted the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which addresses many issues, including
partnership, as stated in the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. The best example of that
is the cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).
The Security Council should therefore promote
cooperation with the AU Peace and Security Council
in keeping with its resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017). Those two resolutions highlight the commitment
to promote collective security and take steps to further
cooperation, including funding operations.
The 2017 Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, in addition to the annual meetings between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council as well as the United Nations membership in
the AU Peace Fund Board of Trustees, will provide
renewed opportunity to promote dialogue between the
two organizations and support political solutions and
their priority.
Achieving the noble objective of silencing guns,
although still a long way off, remains possible with our
concerted efforts. Kuwait became an observer at the
AU in 2001 and hosted the third African-Arab Summit
in 2013, based on our belief in the importance of
cooperation with the African continent and the specific
importance it represents for Arab countries and their
common security.
We thank you, Mr. President, for holding this open
debate, and we look forward to seeing the Security
Council continue to devote its attention to regional
cooperation. We rely on the unity of African States, in
both the AU and the Security Council.
Secondly, with regard to peace operations, there
is no doubt that the AU is willing and determined to
address the challenges facing the continent. African
countries bear the primary responsibility for their
security at the national level. They also possess great
knowledge and the capacity for rapid response to
urgent challenges.
Field cooperation between the two organizations in
peacekeeping is represented through two peacekeeping
operations in two Arab countries, namely, the African
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Union Mission in Somalia and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Those two
operations provide a model that puts African States at
the forefront of defending the security of their continent
and building the capacities of host countries, especially
because African troop-contributing countries have the
advantage of rapid response in addressing emergency
challenges. They have also built up a great deal of
experience over the past 20 years. Their troops now
account for almost half of United Nations peacekeeping
contingents. Therefore, cooperation between the two
organizations to define clear peacekeeping mandates,
including exit strategies and the role of women, has
become a priority of our institutional work based on the
Charter of the United Nations and the Joint Framework.
Thirdly, with regard to funding, we have followed
the official launch of the AU Peace Fund at the AU
eleventh Extraordinary Summit three days ago. That is
a historic turning point and a step towards promoting
African solutions for African problems in cooperation
with international partners, including the United
Nations, which is represented on the Peace Fund Board
of Trustees.
We hope to secure predictable, sufficient and
sustainable funding for peace operations led by the
African Union and mandated by the Security Council.
Of course, we will not be able to reap the benefits of
such funding unless mandates are achievable. Mandates
must be implemented in accordance with the three
principles of peacekeeping and with priority given to
political and peaceful solutions.
In conclusion, we express our appreciation to
peacekeepers in Africa and around the world, and to
all those who have sacrificed their lives for peace. We
would like also to renew Kuwait’s support for the efforts
of the African States of the Security Council, including
their determination to present a draft resolution on
peace support missions next month.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks you,
Sir, for having convened this meeting, which provides
an opportunity to discuss strengthening the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations with
respect to the strengthening of peacekeeping operations.
We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for his leadership on this crucial issue. We are
also grateful to Mr. Smaїl Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, for his briefing.

S/PV. 8407

My delegation would also like to align itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Bolivia reaffirms the importance of continuing to
improve cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We underscore the responsibility of
the international community to make that relationship
effective so as to reach a common understanding of the
root causes of conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the signing of the
United Nations-African Union joint framework for
the implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. That agreement
lays the groundwork for a systematic and strategic
partnership based on the principles of mutual respect
and comparative advantages. We also welcome the
efforts devoted to reaching the goal of silencing the
guns by 2020.
We believe it is necessary to deepen the integration
of activities related to peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and to strengthen and enhance dialogue and cooperation
and coordination mechanisms with a view to achieving
the overarching goal of overcoming challenges to peace
and security facing both organizations, which include
joint strategies related to demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration, as well as conflict prevention and
prioritizing leadership and participation by women and
young people on peace and security issues.
We also commend the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the two organizations, which
will improve capacities to fight terrorism and prevent
violent extremism, factors that continue to hamper
peacebuilding and development in Africa.
With regard to cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, a noteworthy example is the deployment of
joint and hybrid operations, which constitute a key tool
in the ongoing quest for peace, security and resilience.
They are also a useful tool for fighting threats such as
terrorism, transnational crime and humanitarian crises.
Bolivia likewise underscores the increasing level
of strategic partnership and commitment between the
Security Council of the United Nations and the African
Union Peace and Security Council in building a
structured and equitable relationship. That partnership
must be strengthened on the basis of mutual support

18-3907413/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

and continuous technical assistance, both for political
issues and for peacekeeping operations.
We also believe that we should continue exploring
the different modalities for partnership, support and
assistance to African Union operations, in accordance
with resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). In that
context, Bolivia fully supports the initiative of the three
African members of the Security Council regarding
the draft resolution on the financing of African Union
peace-support operations, which we are convinced will
contribute to consolidating predictable, sustainable and
flexible budgets and to strengthening the mobilization
of the international community when it comes to
providing the financial support needed to enhance
African capacities in the area of peace and security.
Moreover, Bolivia once again reaffirms its full
support for the subregional and regional architecture
for conflict resolution in Africa. African solutions for
African problems are essential given the nature of the
African Vision and its recommendations: Africans
themselves possess a deeper understanding of their
own reality.
In conclusion, Bolivia believes it is crucial to
grant a greater leadership role to the African Union
in decision-making on matters that concern it in full
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all its member countries.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
China for convening this important debate at a crucial
moment. In addition, we would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Commissioner Smaїl Chergui for
their informative briefings.
As the concept note (S/2018/1004, annex) states,
the African Union (AU) remains an important partner
for United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa.
We fully agree, and therefore hope that today’s debate
will serve as another step towards strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and AU in
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union (EU). The
EU’s contribution to peace and security in Africa is
considerable, both in peace operations and in support
for the African Union.
I will focus on three aspects of strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU: first, enhancing the partnership; secondly,
14/68

20/11/2018

enhancing collaboration between troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) and other partners; and, thirdly,
financing for AU peace support operations.
With regard to my first point — enhancing the
AU-United Nations strategic partnership — AU
and United Nations peacekeeping operations have
the potential to be mutually reinforcing. A strong
partnership enables the United Nations and the AU
to respond more swiftly and decisively to addressing
challenges to peace and security in Africa. The AU’s
ability to act as a first responder and move in quickly
should be facilitated as much as possible. We attach
great value to partnerships as an essential element
of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Closer
collaboration between the AU and the United Nations,
as enshrined in resolution 2320 (2016), is therefore
essential. In order to enhance the partnership, we
encourage joint AU-United Nations analysis, planning
and decision-making, and that includes the increased
issuance of joint statements. By sharing and jointly
developing early-warning information and analysis,
we can reach a common understanding of emerging
conflicts. Through consultative decision-making, we
can develop collaborative approaches to effectively
responding to conflicts.
Concerning my second point, the strength of both
United Nations and AU peace support operations is
dependent on troop-contributing countries, and we
pay tribute to the countries that contribute troops and
police. We just mourned this past week the deaths of
six peacekeepers from Malawi and one from Tanzania,
who paid the ultimate price in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We welcome their efforts and honour
their sacrifice.
We need well-trained and equipped peacekeepers
who are able and willing to act quickly when citizens,
troops or the mission is at risk. The Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative is an opportunity to
enhance collaboration between TCCs and partners on
peacekeeping performance, as stressed in resolution
2436 (2018). For peacekeeping to be effective, troops
must meet the highest standards. In that regard, we
welcome the close collaboration with Côte d’Ivoire and
Ethiopia in the lead-up to the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments. We continue to
work with Côte d’Ivoire on a draft resolution that will
provide follow-up to the Declaration by improving
peacekeeping mandates. We are also working
with Côte d’Ivoire on a draft resolution focusing
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

on peace, justice and corrections in the context of
peacekeeping operations.
Additionally, we express our appreciation for our
collaboration with Rwanda on the Kigali Principles and
for the peacekeeping preparatory conference to be held
at The Hague in January 2019. We also welcome the
ongoing collaboration with Ghana, Zambia, Senegal
and South Africa on the Elsie Initiative on Women
in Peace Operations, which focuses on strengthening
the role of women in peacekeeping operations — an
important issue mentioned earlier by the SecretaryGeneral. We encourage other TCCs to join us in
that endeavour. We still have much to accomplish
with regard to performance in peacekeeping, and an
enhanced AU-United Nations partnership will help
achieve that. Strengthening the AU-United Nations
partnership should also lead to enhanced dialogue
and clearer standards with regard to the performance
of peacekeepers.
Concerning my third point — the need for
predictable and sustainable financing for the African
Union — the AU’s role in peace operations in Africa is
essential, as resolution 2320 (2016) clearly states. We all
therefore need to invest in the AU’s capacities, and we
should agree on a different mode of financing between
the United Nations and the African Union. Sustainable,
predictable and flexible financing is needed to enhance
the effectiveness of AU peacekeeping. We should also
agree on compliance with relevant agreed standards
on international humanitarian law, human rights and
strategic and financial oversight. We encourage the
continued drafting and implementation of a robust
and comprehensive compliance framework in that
context by the African Union in collaboration with the
United Nations.
In conclusion, we need to make progress in the
following areas: first, implementing resolution 2320
(2016); secondly, enhancing peacekeeping performance
through dialogue with TCCs and police-contributing
countries; and, thirdly, ensuring the necessary
conditions for predictable and sustainable financing for
the African Union. The African Union will continue to
find a partner in the Kingdom of the Netherlands with
regard to efforts to strengthen the strategic partnership
on peace and security. We count on the engagement
and the support of the Council in connection with the
two draft resolutions that we are currently working on
together with Côte d’Ivoire, concerning the Action for
Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments and

S/PV. 8407

peace, justice and corrections. Let me reiterate our
most heartfelt thanks to the Secretary-General for his
leadership, and to both him and AU Commissioner for
their efforts.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We appreciate the idea of
holding this open debate, which will certainly contribute
to the improvement of our efficiency in ensuring
peace and security in Africa through United Nations
peacekeeping operations. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and African Union Commissioner
Chergui for their informative and helpful briefings.
Please allow me to begin by saying how much
our thoughts are with the families and friends of the
Malawian and Tanzanian Blue Helmets who perished as
they were carrying out their duties in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On behalf of Poland, let me
convey our most sincere condolences to their families
and friends and to the Governments of Malawi and
Tanzania. We condemn in the strongest terms all acts
of violence targeting United Nations peacekeepers.
As the Secretary-General stated when addressing
the African Union Peace and Security Council in
Addis Ababa in July, the African Union is the most
important strategic partner of the United Nations in the
realm of peace and security, development and human
rights. In that context, let me use this opportunity to
encourage the African Union and the United Nations
to continue strengthening cooperation, based on shared
respect for international law and human rights, as well
as comparative advantages. We also recognize the
role of subregional organizations, which can uniquely
contribute to early-warning mechanisms. Their
role is also crucial in the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation, as well as good governance principles.
As a strong advocate of international law principles, we
welcome the development of a compliance framework
for international humanitarian law, human rights
and the conduct and discipline for African Union
peace support operations. We strongly encourage the
Secretariat to continue its close cooperation with the
African Union Commission to enhance prevention
activities and the response to sexual exploitation and
abuse, as well as pursue important initiatives on training
standards for the integrated protection of civilians.
That should also be strengthened by multiple efforts
that would allow peacekeeping personnel to identify
and implement the rules and standards of international
law, especially with regard to child protection and

18-3907415/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

specific protection measures for women in the context
of peacekeeping operations.

empowered, with special attention paid to children,
women, and the elderly.

Every day, as Security Council members, we are
challenged by serious threats that are of a transboundary
nature. In that regard, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the concept of inter-mission cooperation,
which helps to better tackle regional threats. One
might want to consider streamlining certain procedures
and budgetary arrangements to enable more efficient
practical and economic cooperation. Numerous
benefits from such a complex and holistic approach
include a more productive use of human, financial
and equipment assets. Let us increase cooperation
among United Nations peacekeeping missions and
transfer inter-mission cooperation experiences and best
practices from Africa to other regions of the world.
That should inspire analysts and decision-makers to
adopt a regional perspective during the peacekeeping
mission planning process.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Chinese presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this important
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union (AU) for their very informative briefings
and their unflagging commitment to the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.

Let me also underline the issue of national
ownership of the political process, which is the key
element to successful United Nations engagement
and the achievement of the desired end state. It
has significant impact on the effectiveness and
performance of a mission as well as on the security of
our peacekeepers. We should therefore continuously
monitor the fulfilment of the mandate of each mission,
any infringement of the status of forces agreement and
possible risks and challenges resulting from changes in
the political situation.
Let me reiterate that peace and security in Africa
can be achieved only by comprehensive engagement
by regional organizations. As the role of the African
Union has already been mentioned, I would also like
to underline the commitment of the European Union in
that regard. For instance, the strong contribution of the
European Union was visible during the July elections
in Mali, and in the Sahel region in general, where the
European Union provided financing for the Group of
Five for the Sahel and supported the African Union
Mission in Somalia.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing that
the aim of political settlement should remain central
to peacekeeping missions in Africa. We must work
together to find the best possible solutions to help
African countries build sustainable peace, while
allowing all segments of society to be included and
16/68

At the outset, I would also like to echo the outstanding
statement made on behalf of the three African countries
on the Council by the Ambassador of Côte d’Ivoire. We
are completely in line with that position.
For France, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is of strategic importance
today, and we are resolutely committed to supporting
its development, which has immense potential in our
view. That partnership is fully in keeping with current
trends in peacekeeping and is a major component of the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In that context, we welcome the progress made
under the leadership of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, especially since the April
2017 signing of the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. That partnership is part of our day-today reality and is now being expressed in a concrete
way on a daily basis on the ground. I would mention,
for example, the Central African Republic, where the
United Nations and the African Union are working
hand in hand to restore peace and stability in the
country through the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, which
is the sole framework for achieving a comprehensive
and inclusive peace agreement. It is also because of
the importance of that partnership that we continue to
advocate for United Nations peacekeeping operations
with a strong collective commitment, clear mandates
for a genuine political strategy and provided with
adequate means. For the same reason, we would warn
against any reconsideration, including financial, of
frameworks that were determined collectively for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union is of strategic importance for
France; a reason for that is the increasing strength
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

of African peace operations. In the face of evolving
threats in Africa and the need for the United Nations
and the AU to become more responsive and efficient,
we consider that African peace operations represent a
real opportunity for a better division of labour between
peace enforcement and peacekeeping with the United
Nations. We see it on the ground with the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Multinational Joint Task
Force deployed in the Lake Chad basin. Those African
peace operations play a major role today and have at
least three points in common: they are better adapted
to their environment and to the threat; they have a clear
mandate with a single objective; and they are less costly
than United Nations peacekeeping operations. Those
operations therefore have, in terms of their range and
diversity, undeniable advantages.
However, it is clear that African peace operations
still do not count on predictable and sustainable funding.
It is therefore essential to remedy that situation. That is
why, as President Macron reaffirmed in his address to
the General Assembly in September (see A/73/PV.6),
France supports the African Union initiative aimed at
the adoption of an ambitious draft resolution by the end
of the year. That initiative has two cornerstones. First,
we are dealing with a decision made by the Heads of
State and Government of the African Union to support
the African Union Peace Fund, which will cover 25 per
cent of the cost of African peace operations. That is
followed by the African Union’s request to the United
Nations to cover 75 per cent of the cost of future
operations, including through mandatory contributions.
In that context, France welcomes the reforms led by
the African Union and the progress made in cooperation
with the United Nations since the adoption of resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). That progress represents
milestones in defining the framework we wish to give
to African peace operations. I would refer in particular
of the Secretary-General’s proposals for joint threat
assessment, planning, mandate-setting and evaluation
of African peace operations. I would mention as
well the work on the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the execution of mandates. Lastly, I
refer to the development of compliance frameworks
for international humanitarian law, human rights and
conduct and discipline, which are crucial in terms
of accountability as well as for the support that the
United Nations can provide to African operations. That
progress must also be part of a framework that responds

S/PV. 8407

in particular to two principles: the primacy of the
Security Council, which has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and the need for clear mandate that define a limited
duration and restricted area.
In that context, France considers that the important
progress made by our partners in the African Union
must now be strongly supported by the Security Council
through the adoption of a framework draft resolution
that definitively allows the Council to mobilize, on
a case-by-case basis, United Nations mandatory
contributions to co-finance African operations led
by the African Union or mandated by the African
Union. I emphasize that last point because coalitions
and subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community, mobilize African
forces who must also, when mandated by the AU, be
able to receive support from the African Union and the
United Nations.
The aim of that framework draft resolution would
be to establish a renewed partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. That partnership
should respond to the security challenges of our century
on the African continent by supporting African forces
as they grow in strength and bringing the solidarity of
the international community to the fight against the
terrorist groups and criminal networks that threaten
stability and prosperity on the continent. The countries
of the African Union can count on France’s resolute
support throughout that journey.
I would like to conclude by once again paying
tribute to all Blue Helmets deployed on peacekeeping
operations, particularly those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic
who recently made the ultimate sacrifice.
Mr. Cohen (United States): We thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Commissioner Chergui for
their briefings.
I too would like to begin by saying a few words
in special tribute to the Malawian and Tanzanian
United Nations peacekeepers and the soldiers from the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
who were killed there last week. This is an important
reminder for all of us that the decisions made in this
Chamber have real consequences for peacekeepers and
their families. Our prayers are with the families of the

18-3907417/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

men and women killed last week and with the wounded
who survived.

standards and maintain good conduct and discipline
and respect for human rights.

Making our peacekeeping missions more effective
and more accountable to the people they serve is a
top priority for the United States. The African Union
(AU) continues to be a strong and necessary partner
of the United Nations in advancing political, security,
economic and humanitarian goals in Africa. The
relationship between the two organizations is unique
and special, and must remain so. The United States
recognizes the sacrifices that the AU and African
troop-contributing countries are already making for
peacekeeping operations in Africa. Ethiopia alone
has more than 8,000 troops serving in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and over 4,000 in the AU
Mission to Somalia. Burkina Faso has more than 2,000
troops dedicated to United Nations peacekeeping, and
last month paid the ultimate price when it lost two
soldiers to a terrorist attack in Mali.

Progress has been made and we congratulate the
AU on it, but more work is needed before the Security
Council’s conditions can be considered fulfilled. It
is too soon to make decisions about changing the
peacekeeping relationship between the United Nations
and the AU when the AU is still working on its internal
reforms. Other issues have led us to believe that taking
this step now would be premature. There are serious
unanswered questions about how to protect the Security
Council’s authority on matters related to international
peace and security in any future arrangement that
supports AU peace support operations with United
Nations-assessed contributions. Council members
must be given time to ensure that there is full political
and legislative support from their capitals before
making this commitment. Our Congress’s agreement
is imperative for the United States. I know that is also
the case for other countries and their legislatures, and
we will not be able to engage our new Congress on this
important and complex issue until the new year, which
is the soonest we could consider joining consensus on a
new draft resolution.

The question we are asked to address today is how
we can improve the unique relationship of the United
Nations with the African Union — not for the benefit of
the organizations themselves, but to help the people of
Africa build a peaceful and prosperous future. It deserves
a focused, sustained and honest conversation. Council
members must not be rushed into making precedentsetting decisions without careful consideration of
their consequences. Many here today have called for
the Security Council to make United Nations-assessed
contributions available as a predictable and sustainable
means of support for African peace support operations.
This proposal, in particular, demands that we pause to
consider how it would aid peace, security and human
rights in Africa.
The Security Council is on record as adopting
two resolutions — resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) — expressing its desire to work with the AU to
find reliable funding structures for peacekeeping. We
have also affirmed that the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention lies with States and that the Council
is ready to work with them to keep the peace. Those
resolutions set out clear conditions that the African
Union has to meet before the Security Council can even
consider using United Nations-assessed contributions
to fund AU peace support operations. They include the
expectation that the AU must provide at least 25 per
cent of the cost of operations. The Council also asks that
there be full financial transparency and accountability
and requires AU troops to adhere to high performance
18/68

The United States is calling for more consideration
before we commit United Nations funds to AU peace
support operations, but it would be a mistake to
interpret our caution as a lack of support for peace,
security and human rights on the African continent.
The United States has long been and will remain the
Organization’s top contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, but on top of our assessed
funds, we are committed to helping troop-contributing
countries prepare their troops for deployment to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. Since 2005,
we have spent $1.5 billion on training support with 23
active partners in Africa. In 2018, the United States
supported the training of military personnel in African
peacekeeping missions in the Central African Republic,
Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur,
Abyei and South Sudan.
The United States also supports security in
Africa through hundreds of millions of dollars in
counter-terrorism and law-enforcement assistance.
Our humanitarian, health and development assistance
supports the health and education of millions of women
and children as well. In short, the United States is
committed to Africa’s future stability and prosperity.
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

We are proud of our partnership with the AU and the
many African troop-contributing countries.
In conclusion, we see today as a step forward in our
shared effort to strengthen the partnership of the United
Nations with the AU. A rushed process in a matter of
days to make a decision that would change peacekeeping
permanently would undercut our progress. Instead, let
us continue the good work on all sides to bring our two
organizations closer together, with respect for their
unique roles, to help the people of Africa create the
peaceful, secure and prosperous future they deserve.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Chinese presidency for
organizing today’s discussion on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa.
I would first like to join my colleagues in
expressing our condolences in connection with the
deaths of the Malawian and Tanzanian peacekeepers
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
Central African Republic. Needless to say, we condemn
attacks on Blue Helmets, pay tribute to their courage
and dedication and wish the wounded a speedy and
successful recovery.
We are grateful to Secretary-General António
Guterres for his informative briefing and his unwavering
focus on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. We also thank Mr. Smaїl
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for his views.
Russia has consistently supported the efforts of
African States to achieve greater independence in
maintaining peace and security on their continent. We
support the consistent, forward-looking development
of diverse types of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and African subregional
organizations, based on the principle of African
solutions to African problems. It is unacceptable to
impose prescriptions for responses to crises on Africans
without their express consent.
We very much appreciate the African Union’s
desire to get the African Standby Force established
under the African Peace and Security Architecture
working in practice as soon as possible. We see the
justification for African countries’ wish to bring up
the issue of the provision of material and financial
assistance for measures to maintain international
peace and security, including through the partnership

S/PV. 8407

between the United Nations and the African Union. We
agree that it is important to increase the predictability,
reliability and flexibility of the financing for African
operations and joint missions. In principle, we are not
against considering the possibilities for expanding
United Nations participation in such missions, and
we are ready for further constructive dialogue in this
regard. However, we believe it is important to maintain
the current United Nations procedure for reviewing
and approving related budget requests, ensuring
transparency and accountability in the allocation and
use of funds and providing for the participation of
United Nations staff at every stage of the planning and
practical implementation of the tasks involved.
We also want to point out that strict adherence to the
basic principles of peacekeeping is key to the success
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Mandates
should consider the views of host States and the ability
of troop-contributing countries to implement them.
Burdening peacekeepers with additional functions in
the areas of the protection of human rights, gender
issues and environmental problems only complicates
the implementation of peacekeeping operations’
primary duties.
We particularly want to note the importance
of the efforts of the African Union and subregional
organizations to prevent and mediate disputes. As
a rule, Africans know the local nuances better and,
importantly, do not have a dual agenda. Unfortunately,
we can recall a great many examples where African
mediation efforts have been relegated to the sidelines
or deliberately undermined by external actors. I should
not omit to point to the example of South Sudan in
that regard, where a number of countries rammed
through the decision to impose an arms embargo
despite the conclusions of the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and almost wrecked the revival of the negotiation
process there.
In spite of our Western partners’ constant
pronouncements about the importance of strengthening
the peacekeeping potential of the African Union and
the need for ensuring that it cooperates closely with
the United Nations, in practice things are often very
different. Narrow interests have the upper hand. Oilrich Libya is a clear example of that. After blocking
mediation through the African Union, which had
proposed a political plan for resolving the crisis, various
Western countries — we all know which — opted for

18-3907419/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

force. That turned out to be a tragedy for the Libyan
people with major consequences that are making
themselves felt to this day. Libya remains sundered,
divided into zones of influence, with no united State
governance institutions and a collapsing economic and
social infrastructure. It has become not just a haven
for terrorists from neighbouring countries and the
entire Sahara-Sahel but a destabilizing factor in it. It
is noteworthy that those whose irresponsible actions
destabilized the situation in Libya and the whole region
and then left the country to its fate are now presenting
themselves as peacekeepers and constantly bemoaning
the absence of an alternative political settlement for
Libya, while once again ignoring the good offices of the
African Union and its Ad Hoc High-Level Committee
on Libya in particular.
We support an approach whereby the Security
Council would speak based on united positions in
support of regional efforts. At the same time, however,
it is important to understand that there is a place for
all stakeholders with good motives and no hidden
agendas in dealing with crisis situations on the African
continent. Russia is assisting the stabilization process in
the Central African Republic based on those principles,
and is also helping the country’s authorities to restore
the security sector. We hope that our colleagues on the
Council will leave behind their own historical fears and
narrow national interests in the work of helping Bangui
to a way to emerge from its protracted crisis.
We do not have to look far to find examples of
Africans’ active involvement in the maintenance of
peace and security on their own continent. We would
like to pay tribute to the sacrifices that African countries
have made in sending military contingents to the
African Union Mission in Somalia to fight Al-Shabaab.
And we all know that it was Powers in the region that
were originally behind the Intervention Brigade. The
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur has already become a success story of close
collaboration between the two organizations in the
field of peacekeeping. We believe that establishing all
the essential preconditions in that region of the Sudan
will enable the peacekeeping mission to be completely
wound down by the end of 2020, in accordance with the
time frame for that set out in resolution 2429 (2018).
It is becoming increasingly clear that the United
Nations peacekeeping presence in a country should not
be open-ended. Any mission should have a clear strategy
for its eventual exit. Creating artificial obstacles to
20/68

20/11/2018

drawdowns of peacekeeping operations is not just
counterproductive, it is dangerous. It is essential to
take the views of host countries into account, especially
since there are still a number of crisis situations in
Africa needing the Council’s attention. In that regard,
I would like to remind the Council of the hopes of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has repeatedly raised the issue of optimizing the
numbers of the peacekeeping presence in the country.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
Russia provides multidisciplinary support to African
peacekeeping efforts in Africa, including by training
African military personnel and law-enforcement
officers in Russian higher educational institutions.
We would like to highlight the training we give
peacekeepers, including many from Africa, at the AllRussian Institute of Advanced Training for Employees
of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian
Federation in Domodedovo, which has United Nations
certification, as well as the Infantry Training and
Research Centre of the Combined Arms Academy of the
Russian Federation Armed Forces and the International
Mine Action Centre of Russia’s Ministry of Defence.
African law-enforcement officers have the opportunity
to study in higher education programmes as well as
internships in short-term refresher courses in our
Ministry of Internal Affairs educational institutions.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me start by
joining others in expressing my sincere condolences to
the families of the peacekeepers who lost their lives in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo a few days ago. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU) for their insightful briefings this morning.
I align myself with the statement to be delivered on
behalf of the European Union (EU) later today.
Today’s challenges to security and development
are increasingly interconnected. Climate change,
inequality, terrorism and violent extremism are
pertinent examples. African countries face security
threats and risks that have clear implications beyond
the African continent. Supporting and further
strengthening African capabilities to deal with those
challenges is therefore essential. Peace is best pursued
in partnership.
Sweden has been a long-standing supporter of an
enhanced strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

in Africa. We welcome the renewed momentum and
concrete steps taken to advance that partnership, not least
thanks to the dedicated leadership of the organizations
involved. Last week we saw first-hand evidence of
that closer cooperation through the briefing on the
joint visit to South Sudan by Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Commissioner Chergui (see S/PV.8403),
accompanied by Executive Director Mlambo-Ngcuka
of UN-Women. That represents a concrete example of
how cooperation at the subregional, regional and global
levels can generate results that will contribute to peace.
We believe that our two Councils should build on our
successful July meeting (see S/PV.8306) and follow suit
by conducting similar joint visits to enhance shared
analysis of the situations on our agendas.
We commend the work carried out by the AU to
enhance its capacity for preventing, mediating and
settling conflicts on the African continent, including
by strengthening the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The launch of the AU Peace Fund at the AU
Summit last week with the mobilization of $60 million
is a particularly important step for enhancing selfreliance and the financing of the AU’s own activities,
and represents concrete progress on the institutional
reform agenda. Perspectives from civil society remain
crucial to those efforts. However, additional financial
and political support is needed to realize the full
potential of the AU-United Nations partnership. We
welcome the discussions on the proposals pertaining
to financing that are laid out in the Secretary-Generals
report (S/2018/678), including the use of assessed
United Nations contributions. We are encouraged by the
collaborative work on strengthening the oversight and
accountability of AU-led peace operations, including
the ongoing work to strengthen and ensure compliance
with human rights and international humanitarian law,
as well as the conduct and discipline frameworks of the
United Nations and the AU.
Our joint efforts to enhance African capabilities
must go beyond strengthening military responses.
Holistic approaches across the conflict cycles are
needed for sustaining peace. That includes addressing
the root causes of conflict in order to achieve structural
prevention at the national level, and building effective,
transparent and inclusive institutions. It requires
scaling up efforts to address illicit financial flows and
fight transnational organized crime, which exploit and
exacerbate State fragility. Mitigating the effects of
climate change is also crucial.

S/PV. 8407

We commend the commitment of the African
Union to implementing Agenda 2063 as a means to
ensure peace, stability and prosperity in Africa, efforts
that clearly embody African leadership and ownership.
The women and peace and security agenda remains a
particularly vital area, and the AU has already taken
important steps to advance its implementation. But it
will still be important to ensure continued political will
and leadership in order to implement the regional action
plan. The support to the Network of African Women in
Conflict Prevention and Mediation, FemWise-Africa,
to promote women’s role, inclusion and leadership in
peace processes is encouraging, as is the work carried
out by the African Women Leaders Network to build
on and harness women’s participation throughout the
region. Triangular partnerships beyond the AU and the
United Nations should also be further explored. The
European Union has been a long-standing supporter of
the AU’s peace operations, not least in Somalia and the
Sahel, where we have close collaboration with the AU,
the EU and the United Nations. Further opportunities
for trilateral collaborations should be pursued.
We spend a large amount of time in this Chamber
discussing devastating crises on the African continent.
Today is an opportunity to focus solely on cooperation
and solutions, and on how our respective efforts can
yield better results if we join forces. Moving forward on
this agenda will require our substantial and sustained
political investment, and we look forward to doing
our part.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings delivered by Secretary-General
António Guterres and Commissioner Smaїl Chergui.
We would like to begin by recognizing the
commitment, vision and unity of African States in taking
on their responsibility to prevent and resolve conflicts
on their continent, and to highlight their development of
a comprehensive legal basis, administrative structures
and coordination mechanisms based on Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. All of that fosters
synergies and complementarity between the United
Nations system, particularly the Security Council, and
the African Union and subregional organizations, such
as the Economic Community of West African States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Southern African Development Community, with the
shared aim of institutionalizing and making the peace
and security architecture in Africa more effective. For

18-3907421/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

example, the African peacekeeping missions can benefit
from the accumulated experience of the Council’s
peacekeeping operations in the areas of planning, the
verification of aims, compliance with humanitarian
and human rights standards and accountability. In that
regard, we commend the recent African Union policy
documents on conduct and discipline and preventing
and responding to sexual exploitation in peacekeeping
missions. We would like to especially highlight the
best practices on fighting terrorism developed by the
regional operations in Burundi, the Sudan, Somalia and
the Sahel, which constitute an essential complement to
their respective United Nations missions.
We underscore the importance of having flexible
coordination mechanisms to enhance complementarity
between the various operational and geographical
dimensions and the synergies arising from greater
awareness of the circumstances and needs of the
regional actors on the ground. In that connection,
we would like to encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and other bodies in the United
Nations system to continue working closely with the
African Union in the framework of a strategic alliance
for developing policies and strategies for African
peacekeeping missions. To that end, it is important to
ensure coordination, joint visits and the annual meeting
with the African Union Peace and Security Council,
in accordance with resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) and the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security. In that regard, the recent Declaration of Shared
Commitments on the action plan for the maintenance of
peace reminds us of the importance of clearly defining
roles and tasks.
The United Nations can play a complementary role
by providing logistical and organizational support in
the areas where regional organizations take the lead.
We believe that we could explore the alternative of
temporarily assigning United Nations staff to offices
of the African Union. We also believe it is important
for the United Nations to support African development
and capacity-building, as well as the efforts of African
States to ensure predictable, sustainable and flexible
funding for peacekeeping operations by facilitating
their access to potential contributors. We emphasize
that ensuring adequate funding for such operations is
crucial if they are to achieve their targets and maintain
reserve forces that can deploy rapidly and in a timely
manner in the face of emerging threats. We stress that
22/68

20/11/2018

developing regional capacities for prevention would
bring the Council significant savings in its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security. In that regard, we also underscore the
importance of being able to rely on capacities for
analysing risks and conflicts and for mediation, and
in general for developing inclusive, transparent and
accountable institutions that can tackle the root causes
of conflicts and build sustainable peace.
In conclusion, we emphasize that it is crucial to
the effectiveness of all those tasks that we promote
the greater participation of women at all levels, and
especially in leadership roles and in interactions with
communities affected by conflict. Lastly, we would like
to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets who sacrificed their
lives in the past few weeks in the service of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
the texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber. I also want to inform
representatives that we will be carrying on this open
debate through the lunch hour, as we have a large
number of speakers to hear this afternoon.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Peacekeeping is a
shared responsibility, and all stakeholders therefore
have to learn to cooperate with one another in a spirit
of partnership. Since nearly 50 per cent of all United
Nations peacekeeping operations have been conducted
in Africa, we welcome the opportunity you have
provided, Mr. President, to share our views on an
important issue.
Africa has been transforming rapidly. The maturing
of the African subregional and regional groupings,
especially the African Union (AU), as reflected in
their undertaking of peacekeeping initiatives dealing
with conflicts in Africa, the institutionalization of the
coordination between the Security Council and the
AU Peace and Security Council, and the emergence of
several African countries as major troop-contributors,
are all reflective of the changes under way. Underpinning
all those changes is the collective belief that the AU and
other regional organizations and national Governments
in Africa are best placed to provide solutions to the
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

challenges facing their region. The AU’s Agenda
2063 sets out Africa’s long-term collective vision for
its future. We feel that it is the responsibility of the
international community, and in our collective interest,
to assist Africa in meeting its commonly agreed-on
goals. It is from that perspective that we would like to
make a few suggestions for strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa.
First, peacekeeping mandates are multidimensional.
However, we must resist the temptation to add
disproportionate mandate components, and we must aim
at prioritizing mandates, which will help in ensuring the
judicious allocation of the meagre resources available
for implementing the mandates.
Secondly, peacekeeping missions in Africa operate
in vast environments. As I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the peacekeepers from Tanzania and
Malawi who paid the ultimate sacrifice last week while
serving the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to what peacekeepers are facing while
deployed in MONUSCO. To give an example, one of
the sensitive areas of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — the Central Sector, which covers more than
500,000 square kilometres and contains more than
11 million people — is being looked after by four
battalions of United Nations peacekeeping operations
totalling about 3,000 troops. Those 3,000 or so troops
are responsible for that entire area of operations. That
amounts to one soldier per 158 square kilometres. If, in
such a scenario, we task the troops deployed to enforce
the protection of civilians without even providing
enabling air assets for rapid reinforcement operations,
it is obvious that the size and scale of United Nations
deployments are insufficient for the tasks entrusted to
them. The strategy of peacekeepers being required to
do more with less is setting us all up for a tragedy.
Thirdly, predictable and sustainable financing,
which follows on from the second issue, is a
prerequisite for all peacekeeping operations to succeed.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that African peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Security Council should also be considered for
assessed contributions.
Fourthly, we see that troop-contributing countries
increasingly devise deployment arrangements with the
highest number of caveats when deploying in Africa.

S/PV. 8407

That results in an unfair distribution of work among
the various troops on the ground, thereby affecting the
performance of missions. It is time that we do away
with such practices.
Fifthly, Africa collectively contributes the largest
number of personnel to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. If we include peacekeeping operations that
are not United Nations operations, the numbers will
be even higher. There is obviously much to share and
learn with our African partners. It is time to look at
how we at the United Nations can support that through
mechanisms of soft coordination.
India’s partnership with Africa is based on building
instruments of empowerment that would enable the
continent to find solutions to its problems. We urge the
United Nations to also look at longer-term efforts for
expanding African capacities and enhancing collective
cooperation. India is ready to walk along that path of
political and diplomatic engagement in partnering
African States and entities, in line with their own
articulation of the needs and requirements of a continent
in the throes of change.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this very
relevant open debate. Close cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union is vital from the
viewpoint both of strengthening African peacekeeping
operations and of the impact that such cooperation can
have on sustaining peace. In that regard, Switzerland
welcomes the various framework agreements signed
between the United Nations and the African Union. I
would like to emphasize three points.
First, Switzerland is convinced that a human
security approach that places the human being at
the heart of peace and security is fundamental. It is
necessary to understand and address the causes of
violence in order to provide real alternatives that make
a peaceful future possible. For that reason, for several
years Switzerland has been pursuing with its partners on
the African continent an agenda to prevent violence and
to strengthen peace. That involves promoting inclusive
dialogue to reduce the political, economic and social
exclusion that are often the root causes of violence. In
the United Nations context, Switzerland supports the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission, in particular by
chairing the Commission’s Burundi configuration. We

18-3907423/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

welcome the fact that the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund have strengthened their
cooperation with the African Union and other regional
organizations in recent years. In the bilateral context,
we maintain, for example, a network of human security
advisers who work to promote peace and human
rights and are based in our representations in Africa
and elsewhere.
Secondly, Switzerland would like to highlight the
important role played by the centres of excellence of the
various regional economic communities in capacitybuilding for African peace operations. For nearly a
decade, Switzerland has committed itself to African
peacekeeping operations by supporting such centres,
namely, at the School of Peacekeeping Alioune Blondin
Beye in Bamako, the Kofi Annan International Peace
Training Centre in Accra and the International Peace
Support Training Centre in Nairobi.
Thirdly, Switzerland, like the African Union,
its member States and other actors, is of the view
that ensuring sustainable and predictable funding for
African peace operations is strategically important.
Respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law remains an important frame of reference for that
cooperation. In that regard, Switzerland provides
expertise to the African Union.
We recognize that many challenges cannot be
overcome in isolation. The peacekeeping partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
paves the way for strengthened multilateralism for the
benefit of the entire continent and beyond.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank China
for having convened today’s meeting, which is of great
importance. I would also like to join other speakers in
paying tribute to those peacekeepers who have made
the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
A great number of countries on the African
continent have made marked progress in achieving
peace and strong economic development. Yet many
regions still face the threat of conflict and terrorism.
The five largest United Nations peacekeeping missions
currently operate in Africa.
As those missions demonstrate through the
implementation of their mandates, United Nations
peacekeeping missions have a pivotal role in
24/68

20/11/2018

contributing to efforts to maintain peace and security.
Successful and sustainable peace settlements must be
built on a political and social foundation that provides
peace and stability in the country.
In order to enable United Nations peacekeeping
operations to effectively assist political settlements and
achieve sustainable peace in Africa, the United Nations
must work to improve the quality of peacekeeping,
especially in cooperation with its African partners.
African countries play an important role in the peace
and security of their continent. That is illustrated by the
fact that 13 out of the top 20 troop/police-contributors
to United Nations peacekeeping are now from African
countries. Given their prominent role, we are therefore
convinced of the importance of capacity-building for
African nations.
Based on that conviction, for many years Japan
has supported African peacekeeping efforts both
multilaterally and bilaterally. For instance, since 2015,
Japan has provided engineering training to more than
200 personnel from eight African countries through
the United Nations triangular partnership project in
Kenya. Those trainees have been deployed to many
field missions, namely, the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
We also support the United Nations Military
Signals Academy in Uganda, which has trained more
than 1,500 personnel, many of whom have subsequently
been deployed to African peacekeeping missions.
Starting next year, we plan to launch medical training
to troop-contributing countries (TCC), including
African TCCs, through the United Nations triangular
partnership project.
In addition to support for multilateral efforts, Japan
has partnered with African peacekeeping institutes in
13 African countries, dispatching Japanese uniformed
and civilian experts to give lectures and assist with the
development of curricula at institutes in Cameroon,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Mali and South Africa.
The promotion of social stability for shared
prosperity was identified as one of the priorities at
the fourth Tokyo International Conference on African
Development, in 2016. Japan truly believes that
empowering African institutions and the African people
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

is among the most effective methods of creating a more
peaceful and secure environment. Japan will continue
to work with the United Nations to improve the quality
of United Nations peacekeeping for a peaceful and
stable Africa.
In closing, let me reiterate the importance of
building the African capacity to realize a peaceful
and stable Africa. The challenges that Africa faces are
multifaceted and require integrated solutions.
Given the wide range of complex security challenges
in Africa, we believe that empowering African
institutions and the African people would be the real
driving force behind peace and security in Africa. Japan
believes that United Nations peacekeeping continues to
be a major contributor to that end.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I thank the Chinese presidency
for having organized this important and timely debate
on strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa. I
thank also the Secretary-General and Commissioner
Chergui for their thorough and constructive briefings
this morning.
We also condemn the recent attacks on Blue
Helmets in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
express our condolences in connection with the deaths
of peacekeepers from Tanzania and Malawi.
Brazil has a long history of engagement with
United Nations peace efforts and has actively taken
part in several peacekeeping operations on the African
continent. From the outset, we contributed to the
United Nations Emergency Force in Suez, from 1956
to 1967, and to the United Nations Operation in the
Congo, from 1960 to 1964. We also made important
troop contributions to the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique and to the third United Nations Angola
Verification Mission. Over the years, our troops have
been recognized for their discipline, performance and
ability to operate in complex scenarios.
Currently, Brazil contributes police, military
observers and staff officers to six United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Africa, and Brazilian
General Elias Martins is the Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition
to deploying troops, Brazil is also engaged in the

S/PV. 8407

predeployment training of African military engineers
through triangular partnership projects.
The Brazilian Peace Operations Joint Training
Center is an important means of promoting the
exchange of best practices between Brazil and African
countries in peacekeeping missions. Through bilateral
channels, Brazil has also engaged with African
partners in cooperation projects aimed at strengthening
peacekeeping capacities. For instance, the Brazilian
army currently maintains cooperation initiatives with
several African countries, including Cabo Verde,
Ethiopia, Mozambique, Namibia, Sao Tome and
Principe, and South Africa.
From our vast collective experience in peacekeeping,
we can draw important lessons and identify good
practices that are useful to address challenges and
explore opportunities for an effective United Nations
engagement in peace efforts in Africa. A common trait
of successful peacekeeping missions is that they work
in close collaboration with United Nations agencies
and international partners involved with the promotion
of sustainable development. We must ensure that
long-term peacebuilding and development strategies
remain effective before, during and after the temporary
engagement of peacekeepers.
As they are the most important United Nations
presence in conflict settings, peacekeepers have
a fundamental role to play as a platform for early
peacebuilding. In order to fulfil their mandates,
peacekeeping missions are often required to help
disarm, demobilize and reintegrate ex-combatants, as
well as to assist in the rebuilding and strengthening
of local institutions and the promotion of the rule of
law. They should also have some flexibility to carry
out targeted and concrete quick-impact projects. Those
are responsibilities that will ultimately lead to greater
stability and allow for mission drawdown.
Another recommendation we would make on the
basis of previous experience is that a limited set of core
political goals should guide every task we assign to
our peacekeeping missions in Africa. Peacekeeping is
meant to be a temporary but decisive endeavour.
Moreover, Security Council mandates should
always be matched by the necessary human and
financial resources. The viability of a mission’s tasks
and the need for the prioritization and sequencing of
mandates must be assessed coherently.

18-3907425/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

It is essential that the African perspective be
taken into account in decision-making processes
on all African issues, particularly the mandates
of peacekeeping missions on the continent. Only
through a reform of the Security Council, with the
expansion of both the permanent and non-permanent
categories of membership, can the issue of the
representation of African and developing countries be
adequately addressed.
The prerogatives of being a permanent member of
the Security Council involve special responsibilities
in the funding of the Council’s decisions. It is not
reasonable to expect developing countries to have
additional financial responsibilities with regard to
peacekeeping operations without a corresponding
reform of the composition of the Security Council. We
also believe that the funding of the special political
missions established by the Security Council should
follow the peacekeeping scale of assessments.
A final point I would like to make is the need
for partnerships. We cannot expect our peacekeeping
missions in Africa to carry out the ambitious role
we want them to play without fluid cooperation with
African regional and subregional organizations, which
have increasingly assumed responsibility for security
issues on the continent.
By strengthening United Nations support for
African missions, we can make full use of Chapter
VIII of the Charter and promote African ownership in
addressing its peace and security challenges. However,
neither the principles nor best the interests of the United
Nations and Africa will be served if such support is
disproportionately focused on military operations once
conflict has broken out. Supporting the primacy of
African politics in preventing and peacefully solving
African problems should be part and parcel of a
comprehensive United Nations strategy to enhance
African capabilities in the area of peace and security.
African Union operations pursuing mandates
established by the Security Council must be adequately
funded. It is important that in-depth discussions be held
in the General Assembly, particularly on any case in
which assessed contributions might be considered.
As we are celebrating this year the centenary of the
birth of Nelson Mandela, let me end my intervention by
quoting his words:
26/68

20/11/2018

“To be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains,
but to live in a way that respects and enhances the
freedom of others”.
Madiba’s message makes solidarity a condition
for the full realization of freedom. That is exactly the
promise of the Security Council’s global collective
security mechanism, whose bedrock concept is that
global peace is indivisible. Freeing Africa from
conflict, poverty and violent extremism is indeed a
global responsibility, and United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Africa are a necessary tool for us to achieve
that goal.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I should like to express my condolences to Malawi and
Tanzania on the deaths last week of their nationals in
peacekeeping operations.
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa
have achieved considerable successes over the course
of the Organization’s history in terms of maintaining
international peace and security and protecting
civilians. The tasks of those peacekeeping operations
have evolved over decades and the expectations of the
international community have increased. However,
at the moment those operations are currently facing
unprecedented challenges in carrying out complicated
tasks in an unconventional security environment and
a tendency to reduce the funding for those missions in
Africa. That is why our meeting today is particularly
important. We therefore thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this open debate.
We are keen on participating in this meeting
in order to underscore our commitment to joining
any effort aimed at promoting the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations on the African continent. In
our capacity as Chair of the Group of 77 and China,
we have contributed to negotiations on increasing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, the 2019
peacekeeping operations budget and the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals on the structural reform of the
peace and security architecture.
Egypt is committed to supporting and developing
peacekeeping operations in Africa, and it has
contributed to those operations since 1960. Over
the past six decades, we have contributed more than
30,000 Egyptian troops and police to 38 peacekeeping
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

operations. Currently, Egypt is among the 10 countries
that contribute the greatest number of troops and police
to peacekeeping operations.
Egypt believes that in order to enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, we need to
adopt a comprehensive approach to all stages of those
operations, including mandate design and periodic
review, the configuration of missions with the provision
of equipment and deployment processes, as well as
exit strategies. Therefore, we must adopt practical
and objective frameworks to assess performance,
resources and the alignment of the configuration of
every mission with its mandate and with the security
and political environment. Egypt would like to stress
the following points.
First, priority must be given to political solutions,
and the United Nations response to African conflicts
must be adequate and comprehensive. Peace cannot
be achieved through military and security solutions
alone without clear political vision. In order to ensure
the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations must increase its efforts and resources
in order to respond to all stages of the conflict, and
strive to build peace according to the priorities of every
African host country and in line with the specificities
of every conflict.
Secondly, it is important to be committed to
the basic principles of peacekeeping, including the
consent of the parties to the conflict, impartiality and
the non-use of force, except in cases of defending the
mandates or self-defence. Those are the main criteria
for ensuring the success of peacekeeping operations and
the safety and security of international peacekeepers on
the African continent.
Thirdly, we must design clear and sequenced
mandates for peacekeeping operations in Africa.
The clarity of mandates is one of the most important
criteria for ensuring the success of peacekeeping
operations. Mandates must be realistic and capable of
keeping track of developments on the ground, including
political developments.
Fourthly, we must ensure the safety and security of
peacekeepers. We have witnessed recently an increase
in casualties and in threats facing peacekeeping
operations, especially as those international operations
expand in Africa. Therefore, we must focus, as a
United Nations priority, on the safety and security of
peacekeepers and we must allocate financial resources

S/PV. 8407

and provide technical capabilities in line with the
challenges facing our international troops in Africa.
Fifthly, we must stress the importance of national
ownership and respect for the sovereignty of concerned
African States. Peacekeeping operations must
contribute effectively to creating the necessary security
environment to allow States and institutions to carry
out their responsibilities, including the provision of
security and basic services to their citizens and support
for the basic role of States in ending conflicts.
Sixthly, we must ensure an equitable distribution
of responsibilities and strengthen the partnerships
of the United Nations. In order to ensure the success
of peacekeeping operations, we must ensure a just
distribution of obligations and tasks among troopcontributing countries, donor countries and the
Secretariat. This is also linked to strengthening the
strategic and operational coordination between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).
In closing, my country endorsed the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations in September, as part of the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We have
also signed on to the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians. That demonstrates Egypt’s commitment
to continuing to work to achieve more effective
international peacekeeping operations.
The Foreign Ministry of Egypt and the Cairo
International Centre for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding hosted over the past
few days a high-level regional conference in Cairo on
developing the performance of peacekeeping operations
in Africa. A number of United Nations and African
officials took part in that conference, including the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.
The conference sought to build on the content of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments and to give troopcontributing countries the opportunity to contribute
to the discussion on developing the performance of
peacekeeping operations.
As President of the AU in 2019, Egypt will continue
to strengthen the strategic partnership between the AU
and the United Nations in peacekeeping, reconstruction
and development in Africa. Egypt will inaugurate
a relevant AU centre in Cairo that seeks to ensure
cooperation and the mobilization of efforts to achieve
peace, stability and security on our continent and in
the world.

18-3907427/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.

turn those commitments into action and reality on
the ground.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
I also want to thank the Secretary-General and
Commissioner Chergui for their valuable briefings.

That brings me to my second point, namely, that
we must learn from the mechanisms in place and build
upon the daily efforts we are already making. We should
ensure that there is full use of the opportunities of the
Joint United Nations-AU Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We also encourage
greater communication between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council. Emphasis
should be placed on operational cooperation that makes
a real difference on the ground. Joint analysis, planning
and reviews are all fundamental.

Ireland aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.
At the outset, as a country with a long tradition
of peacekeeping, the people and the Government of
Ireland want to express their sincere sympathy to the
peoples and the Governments of Tanzania and Malawi
for the very tragic losses of brave peacekeepers recently
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ireland fully supports the need to mobilize the
international community to focus on and, perhaps more
important, to invest in African peace and security. We
are inspired by your useful concept note (S/2018/1004,
annex), Mr. President. I want to touch on a few areas
that we see as particularly useful, using your concept
note as a guide.
First, improving cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) is absolutely
fundamental. Ireland’s first deployment of an armed
peacekeeping contingent was in the Congo in 1960.
Nearly 60 years later, we are still actively contributing
to United Nations peacekeeping missions in Africa
and the Middle East. We, as peacekeepers, are acutely
aware of the growing and diverse challenges facing
United Nations peace operations in different countries
and regions. The range and complexity of the challenges
underscore the importance of working closely with
regional partners, such as the African Union, and, very
important, of empowering local stakeholders.
Equally, Ireland believes it is important to ensure
that the peacekeeping efforts we make respond to
local needs. Mandates must match the realities of the
conflict on the ground where it is happening. Resources
must match the mandate; and they must of course be
reinforced by political will around this table. Ireland
has endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations as part
of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. The Declaration highlights the importance
of enhanced partnerships with regional organizations.
Our collective challenge now, of course, is to actually
28/68

We must also implement the Secretary General’s
zero-tolerance policy for all forms of sexual exploitation
and abuse. That problem has been shamefully evident
in peacekeeping operations in many regions. Efforts
to enhance the United Nations-AU partnership should
also place emphasis on preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse and finding justice for victims. For its part,
Ireland has signed the voluntary compact on preventing
and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse, and we
encourage all States to do the same. Ireland’s Taoiseach,
our Prime Minister, is a committed member of the
Secretary-General’s Circle of Leadership on that issue.
Thirdly, in line with the concept note (S/2018/1004,
annex), we believe we must look again at financing
options from within, but also beyond the Organization’s
budget. It is clear that the current United Nations
financing structure for African- led peace operations
is unsustainable. The ongoing question of the role of
the Organization’s regular budget is an important
one, and it warrants serious discussion. However, it
cannot detract from the broader question of how the
international community can best support Africa to
finance its own initiatives for peace and security. That
is a serious question that we all need to address. Ireland
welcomes the launch of the African Union Peace Fund,
just last week, and its ambitious targets.
The transformative potential of the African Union
Agenda 2063 and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development will substantially reinforce
efforts to achieve sustainable peace and security in
the region. My country, Ireland, sees the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission as central to those efforts.
Finally, we see scope for continuing to invest
in capacity-building and training. Ireland’s Defence
Forces are currently on the ground in Burkina Faso,
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

training troops in countering improvised explosive
devices as they deploy to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali in neighbouring Mali. We also provide training
in the protection of civilians, which is a core mandate
of all peacekeeping missions. That sort of capacitybuilding is really essential for successful peacekeeping
missions. Council members can rest assured that
Ireland will continue to prioritize peacekeeping both
now and as an aspiring member of the Council for the
2021-2022 term.
African-led peacekeeping operations are crucial
to global peace and security. Africa’s own investment
and ownership of those operations is fundamental.
Ireland therefore not only supports but speaks out in
favour of reforming the Security Council so that the
historic injustices of African underrepresentation can
be addressed and more voices brought to the table
to support the discussion on peace and security in
the region.
Allow me to conclude by highlighting that the first
step in strengthening international support for Africanled peace operations is listening. We want to listen to
the informed and committed peacebuilders from the
region itself, and I am delighted we are doing that today.
I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate,
which provides us a much-needed opportunity to listen.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Let me first commend you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on such an
important theme. I also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Commissioner Chergui for their briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union (EU).
Africa is an active global player in the field of peace
and security and is enhancing its own instruments
to respond effectively to threats and crises affecting
the continent, to prevent them from occurring and to
achieve the objective of silencing the guns by 2020.
We commend the strengthening of the African
Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Standby Force, as well as efforts to develop frameworks
for international humanitarian law and for human
rights, conduct and discipline compliance for African
Union (AU) peace-support operations. We believe those

S/PV. 8407

frameworks are an essential component of the African
Peace and Security Architecture.
We welcome also the progress made in the
operationalization of the African Union Peace Fund,
which this year reached the highest contributions
level since its establishment. We appreciate that the
Fund is also set to finance mediation and preventive
diplomacy activities. Prevention is still the best option
at our disposal and avoids the human suffering and
destruction produced by conflicts.
Despite remarkable progress over the past few years,
more remains to be done. In that regard, partnerships
are essential because no one — not even the United
Nations — can do everything on its own. Moreover, the
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
and the implementation of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations are crucial to properly addressing
regional crises and finding sustainable solutions.
With the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations last
September, we committed once again to enhancing
collaboration and planning between the United Nations
and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements, including the African
Union and the European Union. We also committed
to supporting the African Union in strengthening and
implementing its policies, procedures and capacities.
The United Nations and the African Union have
a long and successful history of cooperation on the
ground. We commend the progress made in improving
that partnership and encourage further strengthening of
the United Nations-AU working relationship, which will
ensure effective and cost-efficient peace operations.
The European Union plays an important role in
complementing the efforts of the United Nations and
other regional organizations on the ground. The EU
has several training and capacity-building missions in
Africa and provides financial support to many African
peace-support operations through its African Peace
Facility, from the African Union Mission in Somalia
to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), where unique trilateral cooperation among
the EU, the United Nations and the G-5 Sahel was put
in place.
Italy is ready to contribute to strengthening African
capacities in the area of peacekeeping. Thanks to our
carabinieri and our defence forces, from Somalia to

18-3907429/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

the Sahel, Italy is sparing no effort to build capacity
across the board — from border security to election
security and from justice and correction practices to
the fight against organized crime and trafficking. We
committed additional resources this year to specific
training and capacity-building programmes. On
25 October, we organized in Rome the second ItalyAfrica Ministerial Conference, which focused, among
other things, specifically on issues related to peace and
security in Africa. Through our Centre of Excellence
for Stability Police Units, located in Vicenza, we
provide high-quality training and specialized courses
for peacekeepers on the rule of law, the protection of
civilians, sexual and gender-based violence in conflict
and the broader women and peace and security agenda.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

It is recognized that African Union-led peace
operations have comparative advantages in terms
of flexibility, rapid deployment in challenging
environments and the capacity to carry out robust
mandates. Their main challenge is still the lack of
sustainable and predictable funding. The SecretaryGeneral’s report on the subject envisages different
mechanisms to finance and support African Union
peace operations that are authorized by the Security
Council. Those options should be fully considered
and implemented.

We welcome this open debate focused on increasing
the level of attention to, and investment in, African
peace and security in general, and on peacekeeping
operations there in particular. The United Nations and
the international community have a responsibility to
assist Africa in strengthening its capacity to maintain
peace and security. At the same time, the fact that the
five largest of the 14 United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed in Africa proves the importance
that the United Nations attaches to preserving and
promoting peace and security in Africa.

The example of the G5-Sahel Joint Force is useful
in analysing the impact the lack of funding could have.
As the Secretary-General stated in his latest report
on the G5-Sahel Force (S/2018/1006), the Force’s
existing support model is not sufficient and a more
comprehensive and extensive United Nations support
package is needed. Only then could the countries
of the region fully realize the ambitious objectives
they set for themselves with that innovative and most
welcome initiative.

The United Nations also has a responsibility to
make use of the capacity of the African countries and
arrangements in promoting peace and security. We
support the principle of African solutions to African
problems. Chapter VIII, Article 52, paragraph 1 of the
Charter of the United Nations underlines the important
role that can be played by

Italy remains in favour of using United Nationsassessed contributions for African-led peace
operations, provided that appropriate standards in
terms of troop quality, training, equipment, financial
transparency, human rights compliance, conduct and
discipline are met. In order to achieve those goals, the
Security Council has to show readiness in embracing
the innovative spirit that the terms of the relationship
with Africa require today. Ultimately, what is at stake is
the idea itself of constructive multilateralism, which we
should uphold and advance by showing the necessary
political leadership.
30/68

Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me first
join previous speakers to express our condolences on
the deaths of peacekeepers from Malawi and Tanzania.
I would like to begin by thanking the Chinese
presidency for organizing this meeting. My thanks
also go to the Secretary-General and to the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
valuable input.
I also associate myself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

“regional arrangements or agencies for dealing
with such matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security as are appropriate
for regional action”.
It also obliges the Security Council, where appropriate,
to utilize such regional arrangements or agencies for
enforcement action under its authority. It is clear that
such activities must be conducted consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Therefore, to promote peace and security in the
African continent and countries, Africa’s leading role
in resolving its own security issues has to be respected.
Accordingly, we should promote African Union-led
peace operations authorized by the Security Council.
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

All such peacekeeping operations should be based on
respect for the basic principles of peacekeeping, namely,
the consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of
force except in self-defence or defence of the mandate.
At the same time, African countries and
organizations should be given assistance in playing
their role in promoting international peace and security,
since some African troop-contributing countries and
African Union peace operations are constrained in
terms of financial resources, equipment and internal
management, which limits their ability to respond to
peace and security challenges. It shall be appreciated
that more than half of the top 20 countries currently
contributing troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations are African countries.
In conclusion, I should stress that Africa has already
proved its ability in overcoming challenges such as
apartheid, and we hope it will soon also overcome its
security challenges.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank the People’s
Republic of China for taking the initiative to convene
this debate and for circulating the concept note to guide
our interventions (S/2018/1004, annex). We also thank
the Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union for their briefings.
Argentina reaffirms its firm commitment to
peacekeeping operations, initiated 60 years ago, in
line with our resolute support for the development of a
transparent and effective peacekeeping system within
the framework of the United Nations. We believe that
peacekeeping operations must be part of a holistic
strategy that includes conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and sustainable peacebuilding that integrates the
perspective of sustainable development and human
rights and addresses the root causes of conflicts.
Against that backdrop, Argentina has been
participating in peacekeeping operations in Africa for
58 years and is currently present in the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic.

S/PV. 8407

We believe that the mandates of peacekeeping
operations should be tailored to specific contexts. We
also see a growing tendency to require peacekeeping
operations to perform better in performing a greater
number of tasks in increasingly risky and complex
operational environments. In that context, there is a
need for more effective and flexible missions, based on
clear mandates and benchmarks for both staff and host
States, with adequate advance planning and resources.
Argentina has supported from the outset the
conception of peacekeeping operations as policy tools
to be designed and implemented as part of a broader
strategy in support of viable political processes and
the peaceful resolution of disputes. That is why we
are convinced of the value of regional and subregional
bodies for the maintenance of international peace
and security, as well as for peacebuilding and the
building of sustainable peace. The development of
multilateralism at the regional level and cooperation
with the peacekeeping operations has proved to
be highly effective for the peaceful resolution of
conflicts, through the promotion of political dialogue
and mediation.
Argentina agrees on the need for all stakeholders
to renew our commitment to peacekeeping operations.
That is why we support the reform of the peace and
security pillar presented by the Secretary-General and
have adhered to the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, launched
within the framework of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. Through the Declaration,
we reaffirm the primacy of politics in conflict
resolution and the supportive role of peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, with regard to the prevention
of conflicts and the maintenance of peace and security
in Africa, it is essential to highlight the role of regional
and subregional bodies in promoting political solutions
based on dialogue through their mediation efforts,
as well as the action of African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Council under Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, by endorsing the Declaration, we
committed ourselves to support the African Union in
strengthening and implementing its policies, procedures
and capacities, through international cooperation
and support measures, with the aim of improving the
strategic partnership between the two organizations,
in order to improve the planning, deployment and
management of peacekeeping operations in Africa.

18-3907431/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

The security of peacekeeping operations staff
continues to be a major concern, as missions increasingly
deploy in highly unstable scenarios and where there is
no peace to keep. In that regard, we condemn in the
strongest terms all attacks and acts of violence against
peacekeeping personnel, and we call for all the necessary
measures to be taken to bring those responsible to
justice and ensure adequate accountabililty.
Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing my
sincere appreciation for the courageous personnel of
field missions and to pay tribute to the personnel who
have lost their lives over the past year in the discharge
of their duty in maintaining peace and in pursuit of the
ideal of a more just and peaceful world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): As I have not yet had
the chance to speak before the Security Council this
month, I congratulate the People’s Republic of China
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of November and thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the important
topic of peace and security in Africa. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General and the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
insightful briefings.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and with
the statement delivered by the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire on behalf of the three African countries that
are members of the Security Council.
Nine days ago, the world stood still for a moment
to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the end of
the First World War. While it is indeed a moment to
celebrate the armistice with Germany that came into
effect on 11 November 1918, that annual day has also
become a moment for the world to stand still and
reflect on and commemorate the countless lives that
were lost during that war and so many other subsequent
conflicts. Following the recent shootings of innocent
young people in a bar in California and the unthinkable
attack on worshippers in a synagogue, a grief-stricken
mother of a young woman cried out for people to stop
sending her thoughts and prayers, for nothing would
take away the pain and sorrow caused by the cruelty of
violence and death.
32/68

20/11/2018

This is the world we live in today, it is one where
we all hate that we are confronted with what seems
to be never-ending conflicts, death, destruction,
terrorism, violence and threats to peace and security.
It is in that real world where we, the United Nations
and in particular the Security Council, now more than
ever have our work cut out to live up to our obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations to promote,
encourage and seek peaceful means to end conflicts.
My delegation therefore commends you, Mr. President,
for affording us this opportunity today to reflect once
again on the important topic of peace and security.
At the General Assembly’s recent general debate
(see A/73/PV.8), His Excellency Mr. Hage G. Geingob,
President of the Republic of Namibia, referred to
peace and security as the bedrock of our collective
determination to achieve sustainable development. He
recognized that partnerships are key to achieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and that
strategic partnership between international and regional
bodies, such as the United Nations and the African
Union (AU), are fundamental for the realization of our
common objectives and desires for peace and security.
There are currently eight United Nations peacekeeping
operations on the African continent. Strengthening the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU is
key to strengthening those peacekeeping operations. In
April 2017, the United Nations and the AU signed the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. As stated
in the concept note for this debate (S/2018/1004, annex),
the Framework provides guidance for deepening peace
and security cooperation at all levels between the
two organizations. Security Council resolutions have
also underscored the important United Nations-AU
partnership with regard to peacekeeping cooperation.
The capacity of the United Nations and the AU to
cooperate on matters of peace and security has been
demonstrated. The organizations have successfully
cooperated in various ways — in Somalia with the
African Union Mission in Somalia and in Darfur
with African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur.
Africa has assumed its full share of peacekeeping
contributions, and due recognition should be given to
the contributions of African countries and for their
peacekeepers who have valiantly stood in harm’s way
and on innumerable occasions laid down their lives
for the cause of keeping peace in the world. In that
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

regard, we wish to pay tribute to the peacekeepers
from Tanzania and Malawi who lost their lives in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo just last week. Their
sacrifice should only strengthen our resolve to continue
pursuing peace.
The African Union’s commitment to finance
25 per cent of its peace activities bears further witness
to its unflinching commitment to securing peace on
the continent. Namibia supports the call by the AU
and the African members of the Security Council
for predictable financing for AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Council through United
Nations-assessed contributions. Namibia remains fully
committed to the African Union initiative to silence
the guns in Africa by 2020 as a step towards reducing
conflict and war.
Namibia reaffirmed its commitment to peacekeeping
by endorsing the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative during the General Assembly
high-level week. As a small country with a population
of approximately 2.3 million people, Namibia has been
a long-standing troop- and equipment-contributing
country. Namibia is close to achieving the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations target of 15 per cent of
women participating in peacekeeping missions by the
end of December, as 13.3 per cent of deployed Namibian
peacekeepers are women.
Women played an incalculable role in Namibia’s
long-fought liberation struggle. That, in part, is what
led us to vote in favour of resolution 1325 (2000). The
resolution reaffirms that peace processes, mediation,
conflict resolution and negotiations are far more likely
to be successful if women are included. While progress
has been made since the adoption of the resolution, 18
years ago, much remains to be done, as was highlighted
during the annual open debate on women and peace
and security (see S/PV.8382), held a month ago in the
Chamber. Given the new developments on the African
continent, including the appointment of Ethiopia’s first
female President and the increasing participation of
women in politics across the continent, we trust that
that will lead to more countries embracing gender
equality. There can be no sustainable peace, security
or development without gender equality and the full
participation of women and young girls.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
remind members that, on 10 and 11 April 2019, Namibia
will host, in Windhoek, the third capital-based Focal

S/PV. 8407

Points Network Meeting. The theme for the event
will be “Women, Peace and Security: Towards Full
Participation”. All Member States and members of civil
society are invited to participate in Namibia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
As long-standing and consistent supporters of peace
and security in Africa, the Nordic countries welcome
this timely debate. We commend African countries,
as well as the African Union (AU) and other African
entities, for their increasingly active engagement
in peace operations in Africa, to the benefit of our
collective security. The most recent example is the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which several
Nordic countries support, both directly and through
participation in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
However, in spite of those efforts, and in spite
of positive developments in several countries, the
situation remains challenging. We believe that the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative
will benefit all peace operations in Africa. As outlined
in the initiative, a comprehensive approach is needed
to sustain peace. We would also like to emphasize the
importance of providing adequate training for personnel
and using innovations and modern technologies.
The Nordic countries would like to highlight four
additional issues.
First, peace operations should always support
a political process. Joint visits and assessments by
the United Nations and the AU and/or other African
partners are vital for developing a common approach
so that threats to peace and stability can be dealt
with effectively. The revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan illustrates the importance of a united message
for moving political processes forward.
Secondly, much more needs to be done to increase
the number of women peacekeepers. Seminars such
as the one organized by Rwanda, Indonesia and
Norway here in New York in May are one way of
sharing experiences. We were encouraged to see the
joint visit to South Sudan last month by the Head of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women

18-3907433/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

and the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security.
That was a welcome sign of willingness to join forces
in mobilizing women and promoting the gender
perspective as key to the success of peacekeeping.
Thirdly, we applaud the work of Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Denis Mukwege and the many others who
are engaged in addressing sexual and gender-based
violence in conflicts in Africa. We call on the United
Nations and the AU to join forces in countering that
scourge, including through peacekeeping. We have to
make sure that peace operations also effectively prevent
and combat sexual exploitation and abuse. The Nordic
countries will continue to support that important work.
Finally, the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the AU must be further strengthened
as well with regard to financing. The Nordic countries
are in favour of a system that combines assessed
contributions from the United Nations with AU
funding. It should be based on transparent financial
reporting, and AU-led operations should comply fully
with United Nations standards, including the human
rights due diligence policy.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): First of all, allow
me to introduce to the Security Council my colleague
Military Adviser Ruben Fajardo. He is the main
officer responsible for the increase in the number of
peacekeepers whom we deploy to various missions. We
thank him for his service.
Peacekeeping remains a flagship agenda of the
United Nations. More importantly, it is a core element
in sustaining peace. The Secretary-General’s latest
report on the work of the Organization emphasizes that,
“Sustaining peace is relevant to all the United
Nations peace and security tools and entails an
emphasis on partnerships, national ownership
and recognition of the interlinkages of the United
Nations work.” (A/73/1, para. 57)
We therefore commend China for convening today’s open
debate on peacekeeping operations in Africa. We also
commend Secretary-General António Guterres’ strong
commitment to a culture of prevention and partnership
through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which was endorsed by 150
Member States, including the Philippines.
34/68

20/11/2018

For more than 50 years, the Philippines has
consistently played an important role in 19 United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Asia, the
Middle East, South America and Africa. Along with
North American F-86E Sabre jet fighter planes and
equipment, the first Philippine United Nations-formed
unit was composed of members of the Philippine Air
Force Limbas Squadron deployed to the United Nations
Operations in the Congo in 1963. I would like to
highlight three points.
First, as a troop- and police-contributing country,
the Philippines is committed to international efforts
for peacekeeping operations in Africa. In general, the
Philippines continues to support the Secretary-General’s
initiatives to advocate for integrated approaches to
addressing security, development and humanitarian
challenges in the African region. Specifically with
regard to strengthening peacekeeping operations in
Africa, we believe that much could be accomplished
through capacity-building, training, or peer-learning
exercises, and through the exchange of best practices
and lessons learned. Voluntary contributions are also
very important, and the Philippines is a contributor to
the Peacebuilding Fund.
Secondly, the Philippines will continue its active
engagement with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in the deployment of Filipino peacekeepers.
Nationally, our deployment policy is guided by the
Philippine National Council for United Nations Peace
Operations and approved by the Office of the President.
We therefore strongly support the recommendations of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
to further improve the safety and security of our
peacekeepers. To date, Philippine military, police
and civilian personnel are deployed to United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions in Darfur,
the Central African Republic, Somalia and South Sudan.
Thirdly, the integration of women in peacekeeping
operations is part of our effort under the women and
peace and security agenda, as we promote the important
contributions of women in peace negotiations and
peacebuilding and their roles in shaping the narratives
of peace. There are 17 female military, police or civilian
personnel serving in peacekeeping and special political
missions in Africa.
Philippine participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding missions in
Africa demonstrates my country’s enduring commitment
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

to working with key actors and stakeholders to ensure
international peace, security and stability.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I join others in thanking
the Chinese presidency for convening this open debate
on peace and security in Africa. I also join others in
paying tribute to the peacekeepers from Malawi and
Tanzania who lost their lives recently in a heinous attack.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the African
Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security for
their briefings. We commend the engagement of our
African partners expressed in their statements during
this open debate.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).
I will focus on three points: first, the support of
the United Nations and the international community
for African countries; secondly, efforts by the United
Nations and the international community to help
African Union-led peace operations obtain more
predictable and sustainable financing; and, thirdly,
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union on peacekeeping;
First, Germany was among the first countries
to endorse the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on Peacekeeping Operations, put forth by the
Secretary-General in August. We are committed to
its implementation. We take the shared commitment
of improving cooperation with regional organizations
very seriously, in particular with the African Union.
It is important to strengthen regional organizations
to enable them to secure peace and stability in their
own regions. Throughout the past years, Germany has
already stepped up its contribution to crisis prevention
efforts and peacekeeping on the African continent. We
support capacity-building for the African Peace and
Security Architecture, provide training and specialized
equipment to a large number of African troop- and
police-contributing countries. We are also contributing
to the Africa-wide roll-out of best practices in controlling
small arms and light weapons by United Nations
peace missions in order to stop their proliferation and
prevent them from falling into the hands of non-State
actors. In addition, we support the ongoing process of
enhancing the performance and effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations through bilateral
and multilateral programmes. For instance, Germany

S/PV. 8407

provides mobile training teams for predeployment
training in the area of improvised explosive devices to
troop- and police-contributing countries in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We have already trained troops from
Egypt, Guinea and Senegal. We also provide in-mission
training to further increase command capabilities
in high-risk missions in Africa, and we support
peacekeeping training institutes in Mali, Ghana
and Kenya.
Moreover, in the context of the EU, as will be
highlighted by the observer of the European Union,
Germany is actively engaged. The EU currently
supports seven African missions. Germany is the
largest contributor to those projects. For instance, in
the case of Mali, in the context of the EU Training
Mission, currently led by a German Force Commander,
we provide training for the soldiers of the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel and deploy personnel
to two civilian missions — the EU Common Security
and Defence Policy (EUCAP) Sahel Niger and EUCAP
Sahel Mali — which advise their host countries on
security sector reforms.
Let me now turn to the question of financing.
While Germany recognizes that financing is an integral
aspect of any peace operation, we would like to the see
a broader debate on performance and human rights
compliance, as well as the nexus of peace operations
involving prevention and peacebuilding activities. It is
important to take a holistic approach involving civilian
and military means and addressing all phases of a
conflict from the outset.
At the same time, there is a need to enhance
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing for AU-led peace operations authorized by
the Security Council. We believe that establishing a
mechanism through which AU-led or AU-mandated
peace operations could be partly financed through
United Nations assessed contributions should be given
further consideration, on the understanding that such
funding would be on a case-by-case basis, complement
African contributions and respect the primacy of the
Security Council.
In addition to the aforementioned, we would
be reassured if two aspects received due attention:
first, the establishment of a robust accountability
and compliance framework to ensure strategic and
financial oversight; and secondly, a human rights

18-3907435/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

and conduct-and-discipline framework in accordance
with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. While there can be no doubt that the
United Nations and the international community must
help provide the resources peacekeeping missions need
to deliver on their mandates, we also commend the
AU’s ongoing efforts to enhance self-reliance and the
financing of its activities.

fulfilment of mandates. In order to build truly successful
peacekeeping operations, we need better-prepared
troops. Providing sufficient training that is suitable to
the conditions on the ground, the right equipment and
interoperability of forces is the responsibility of all of
us. Fully trained forces with greater capabilities and
fewer caveats are critical to ensuring that our troops are
prepared and able to carry out the tasks we ask of them.

In conclusion, the African Union is undoubtedly
one of the United Nations most important partners in
peace and security on the African continent. Germany,
jointly with our African partners, is committed to
supporting and further developing the United NationsAU partnership, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Based on the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, we would like to see
this partnership develop even further and to address
all phases of a conflict, from prevention and peace
operations to post-conflict peacebuilding. We are on
a good track. We should sustain that momentum and
maintain the political will to take the next step, with a
view to sustaining peace.

Estonia commends the work of the Security Council
in mainstreaming the gender aspects in the mandates
of the United Nations peacekeeping missions. We also
strive to ensure gender parity in our own peacekeeping
troops. The greater inclusion of women peacekeepers
is crucial to raising awareness and improving the
implementation of gender aspects in peace operations.
The importance of including the question of women and
children in the context of peace and security cannot be
overemphasized. It goes without saying that the zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse must
be fully implemented, and all perpetrators must be
held accountable.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union (EU).
At the outset, allow me to thank the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council for this month for
convening today’s very timely open debate. Today,
half of all United Nations peacekeeping missions are
on the African continent, including the largest and the
most complex ones. That makes improving the overall
performance and safety of peacekeeping operations in
Africa of paramount importance.
The importance of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and
the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers, cannot be overstated. Estonia
fully supports striving towards more realistic, robust
and tailored mandates for peacekeeping operations. In
addition, it is important to enable closer coordination
among United Nations mission commanders that
would help set up achievable tasks for the successful
36/68

In discussing peace and security in Africa, I want
to underline the importance of addressing the root
causes of conflict. Agenda 2063 of the African Union
highlights the fact that forging synergies between
governance and peace and security is crucial for
addressing conflicts in a holistic manner. We very much
welcome African efforts on concrete structural conflict
prevention initiatives, early warning, mediation and
preventive diplomacy, and encourage further efforts
to those ends. Furthermore, Estonia fully supports
the Secretary-General’s prevention agenda and all his
efforts in that regard.
None of us will be able to resolve the conflicts of
this world alone. Forging synergies between partners
and taking the most of what the multilateral system
has to offer will bring us closer to lasting peace and
economic well-being. For our part, Estonia will
continue contributing to Africa’s peace and security.
Our troops remain on the ground in Mali as part
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the French-led
Operation Barkhane. We fully stand by the EU-United
Nations strategic partnership on peace operations and
crisis management and strive for deeper trilateral
cooperation between the United Nations, EU and the
African Union on peace operations, conflict prevention
and crisis management.
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

In conclusion, in order to strengthen peacekeeping
operations — be they in Africa or elsewhere in the
world — we need tailored country- and region-specific
mandates and better-prepared forces with greater
capabilities and fewer caveats. We need to focus on
prevention and address the root causes of conflict. We
need to involve all stakeholders on the ground, starting
from larger regional organizations and ending with the
local communities in conflict areas. On our side, Estonia
will continue to promote these ideas throughout our bid
for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
the period 2020-2021.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank China for convening this debate
on a topic of great relevance to the Organization and
the international community, particularly in a context
marked by enormous challenges to international peace
and security.
During its more than seven decades of existence,
the Organization has played fundamental roles in
the maintenance of peace in conflict zones around
the world. The men and women who have sacrificed
themselves for the cause of peace under the banner of
the United Nations deserve to remain in our memory,
and they have all of our gratitude.
Changes in how the international community
addresses peace, security and stability challenges have
been consolidated in the concept of sustainable peace — a
new paradigm in which the pillars of peace and security
converge with those of sustainable development. The
centrality of the prevention of conflicts and their
reoccurrence must be promoted and perfected in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and
meeting their targets. In Africa and throughout the
world, the inclusion and development of communities
with a healthy social fabric, in which all people can
develop their potential, are of vital importance to their
prosperity, the prevention of conflict and even the
prevention of violent extremism.
The role of communities, women and youth must
be adequately reflected in the solutions offered by the
United Nations, and this exercise in inclusion is the only
one that can guarantee the transition from a situation
of parties in conflict to societies with a healthy social

S/PV. 8407

fabric that can be fertile soil for sustainable peace, as
already mentioned.
Mexico once again welcomes the approval of the
restructuring of the peace and security pillar, as well
as the reform of the management of the Secretariat. We
call for the Secretariat to fully implement the reforms
and make available to the Member States complete
information on the results achieved, the prevailing
challenges and any additional adjustments that may
be required.
We welcome the fact that one of the objectives of the
reforms is to increase the effectiveness and coherence
of peace operations, guaranteeing the primacy of policy
and the flexibility of their approach in order to respond
more quickly and effectively to crisis warning signs
and the outbreak or intensification of conflicts. The
legitimacy and trust placed in those operations demands
the effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it:
saving lives, preventing massive atrocities, and laying
the foundations for sustainable peace and development.
For this reason, we believe that reforms should enhance
their effectiveness, responsiveness and accountability.
Mexico has joined the 150 countries that have
endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations as a collective
effort to contribute to refocusing peacekeeping efforts
with realistic expectations. This will make these
operations stronger and more secure by endowing them
with well-equipped, well-structured and well-trained
forces, and by mobilizing the broadest support for
political solutions, including United Nations cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations. Today, I
refer in particular to the African Union, promoting the
strategic nature of that alliance in light of Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.
Since rejoining peace operations in 2015 — and
aware that the priority needs of the Organization are
focused on providing peacekeeping operations in
Africa with indispensable and well-trained personnel
so that its mandates can be fulfilled — Mexico has
gradually increased its participation in these operations
by deploying observers to the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara. Moreover,
since 2017 Mexico has participated in the Integrated
Multidimensional Mission of the United Nations in
the Central African Republic, and this year began its
involvement in the Multidimensional Mission of the
United Nations in Mali. Furthermore, I am pleased to

18-3907437/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

report that, as of this year, my country has its own joint
training centre for peace operations, where we also offer
training for personnel from other countries. Mexico
wishes to express its firm commitment to continuing
its participation in operations deployed in Africa.
We emphasize the importance of the Secretariat
privileging the preparation and predeployment training
of personnel participating in peace operations. In this
context, we join the calls of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations in its most recent report
(A/72/19) for the Secretariat to formulate practical,
implementable, realistic and effective recommendations
to reduce peacekeeping fatalities and injuries from acts
of violence.
We reiterate that, in order to achieve greater
efficiency, effectiveness and security on the ground,
it is essential that peace operations deployed in Africa
have a clear and express mandate from the Security
Council that ensures the ownership of the operation
by the host State, whose opinions must be heard at
all times. Peacekeeping operations must be evaluated
continuously; they must be properly equipped and
count on clear and viable strategies that enable
solutions to multidimensional security problems; and
they must be endowed with the necessary resources to
reach their maximum potential. All this must follow
on from an essential change in their approach and
raison d’être — they must ensure that sustainable peace
is achieved.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to I now give the floor to the Chargé d’affaires ad
interim of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations.
Mr. Martin Prada (European Union) (spoke in
French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union and its member States thank
the Chinese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate on strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa. Indeed, peacekeeping operations
remain a vital instrument for the promotion of
international peace and security on the African
continent. Peacekeeping remains a crucial tool for
promoting conditions conducive to political solutions.
38/68

20/11/2018

In this regard, the European Union and its member
States support the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative launched in March and
subscribe to the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations. By engaging
in discussions on the subject of African peacekeeping
operations, we are paving the way for the autonomy
and stability of the continent, which are two essential
preconditions for our collective security.
The issue of operations under Chapter VIII that
are conducted at the regional level warrants our full
attention. In 2015, the conclusions of the Independent
High-level Panel on Peacekeeping Operations (see
S/2015/446) emphasized the importance of further
developing the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. They also underscored
the need to be able to guarantee, on a case-by-case
basis, the financial resources allocated to operations
mandated by the African Union and authorized by the
Security Council.
The European Union and its member States reiterate
their support for the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security adopted by the United Nations and the African
Union. We welcome the convening of the high-level
meeting held on the margins of the General Assembly,
which was attended by representatives of 150 countries.
This event demonstrated the desire to reinforce
regional partnerships and to support the capacity
development of the African Union in particular. This
crucial partnership has been strengthened in particular
by resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), which
advocate greater collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union and the strengthening
of both the African Peace and Security Architecture
and peace support operations mandated by the African
Union Peace and Security Council.
The European Union and its member States
welcome the recognition of African responsibility in
managing the security challenges on their continent.
We are particularly attached to the primacy that African
States have granted to the African Union in this area.
This predominant responsibility of the African Union
must be valued, recognized and respected more than
ever. In addition, the growing participation of African
countries in peace operations on their continent is part
of the larger framework of the Silencing the Guns by
2020 initiative, while participating in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Agenda 2063 — all initiatives taken and developed by
the African Union.
Africa is changing, as is peacekeeping. The
challenges involved in maintaining and implementing
peace in African theatres of operations are among the
most significant we face. Peace support operations
mandated by the African Union are generally
conducted in degraded security environments, without
the agreement of all actors party to the conflict and in
spaces where the principles that govern peacekeeping
operations deployed by the United Nations are
undermined. In this context, African peacekeepers are
increasingly called upon to act as mediators or follow
lengthy processes of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and reconciliation.
Moreover,
the
constant
evolution
of
threats — especially terrorist threats — implies a
change in the content of mandates and in the way
missions are deployed on a daily basis. The control and
monitoring of ceasefire zones are no longer enough.
Troops must enjoy logistical support adapted to such
engagements and the means that will enhance their work.
Furthermore, peacekeeping missions led by the United
Nations are seeing an increase in the participation of
African contingents. All these constraints reinforce
the need for troops who are equipped, trained and
prepared for these purposes. It is also imperative that
they commit themselves to respecting human rights
and international humanitarian law. Any behaviour that
runs contrary to this would undermine their work and
thereby endanger the desired outcome.
Finally, the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda — the top priority of the strategic
partnership between the European Union and the United
Nations on peace operations and crisis management for
the period 2019-2021 — is fundamental. It also means
actively promoting the full and genuine participation of
women at all levels and positions of responsibility, on
an equal footing, by systematically taking into account
gender issues at all stages of peace processes. That is
the meaning of the work that our three organizations
carry out together.
The African Union Peace and Security Architecture
proposes that security issues be taken into account in
their entirety. The recent revitalization of the Peace
Fund is certainly one of the indispensable tools for
securing the resources needed for crisis management.
The decision to include the European Union and the

S/PV. 8407

United Nations among the members responsible for
ensuring the governance of the Fund is testament to the
richness and mutual trust that nurture relations among
our three institutions.
The support of the European Union and its member
States for the Architecture — in its broader dimension
and in the spirit of the final communiqué released
following the AU Peace and Security Council meeting
held in November 2017 in Addis Ababa — has been in
effect for more than 15 years. It goes well beyond the
€1 billion committed through the African Peace Facility,
both to support African peacekeeping operations
and for the development of Africa’s own capabilities,
including the participation of our 28 member States,
bilaterally or through the voluntary contributions of the
United Nations.
Furthermore, the European missions deployed
with the agreement of the United Nations, within the
framework of the European Security and Defence Policy,
provide another form of support with their presence
on the ground, whether autonomous or together with
African or United Nations actors. The cases of Mali and
the Central African Republic are concrete examples of
that closeness and complementarity.
Moreover, the European Union and its member
States are already working on a daily basis to support
African contingents, be they in Somalia with the
African Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia,
in the Lake Chad basin with the Multinational Joint
Task Force against Boko Haram, or with the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel. Given the realities on
the ground, that support adopts new forms and involves
ever more flexible and creative actions. In the same
vein, the European Union and its member States are
preparing for the future. A new financial instrument
with a wider range of possibilities in relation to the
African Peace Facility is being redefined and will be
known as the European Peace Facility. We are also
following with interest the development of other trust
funds and their capabilities.
We hope to continue to make progress, both within
the framework of the relationship established with the
African Union, which was formalized by the signing
of a protocol of understanding on peace, security
and governance, and by harmonizing our political
approaches and initiatives on the ground beginning
with the prevention phase, and in assisting each other’s

18-3907439/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

actions to support governance within the multilateral
framework of the United Nations.
The European Union and its member States insist on
the need to produce immediate and targeted responses
in anticipation of crises. Prevention and mediation
have a real added value in that respect, especially
when it comes to rectifying governance gaps. We
should collectively learn from the crises endured and
responses undertaken, whether in a United Nations or
African context. In the Great Lakes region, for example,
we need to collectively analyse the value added by
certain subregional organizations, operating within
a regional framework and under the political control
of the African Union Peace and Security Council,
by assessing their capacity to anticipate appropriate
economic or political responses, particularly in terms
of governance, where appropriate.
That is the spirit of partnership enshrined in the
communiqué released following the trilateral meeting
held in September on the margins of the General
Assembly. On that occasion, the senior leaders of our
three organizations recognized the important role of
peacekeeping operations that are mandated or authorized
by the African Union, and confirmed the resolve of
the three organizations to strengthen collaboration,
coordination and planning between their respective
missions and operations, in a spirit of complementarity.
At the same time, they expressed their wish to continue
thinking about ensuring predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing for those operations. We hope that
today’s debate will make it possible to capitalize on
what has already been accomplished and contribute to
the improvement of peacekeeping operations in Africa.

20/11/2018

de la République Démocratique du Congo, who were
killed last week in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; and another peacekeeper from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, who lost his
life in the Central African Republic over the weekend.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of the
fallen heroes from Tanzania and Malawi. As a country
that has faced similar tragedies time and again, we
fully appreciate and relate to their pain. Such incidents
also remind us all of the importance of investing in the
safety and security of the Blue Helmets.
Today’s debate is important on many counts. It
takes place at the initiative of a permanent member
of the Security Council that is also one of the world’s
top 10 troop-contributing countries, as well as a major
financial contributor to United Nations peacekeeping,
and it focuses on a region in which peace and security
continue to dominate the Council’s agenda.
Pakistan was the first country to accede to the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, adopted during the highlevel week of the General Assembly in September.
More than 150 Member States have now joined,
committing themselves, inter alia, to strengthening
peacekeeping partnerships with the Africa Union and
supporting the African Union in capacity-building.
The Declaration also reaffirms the need to provide
predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for AUled peace operations, especially those authorized by the
Security Council.

Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by conveying
my delegation’s gratitude to the Chinese presidency for
convening today’s debate, and to the Secretary-General
and the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security for their insightful and informative briefings.

The situation in Africa needs a comprehensive
approach to effectively address the many challenges it
faces — one that relies on strengthening cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
emphasizes the importance of a cooperative,
interdependent and mutually reinforcing relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
More often than not, countries of a region are better
equipped to understand the challenges faced by their
region and also to respond to them. We acknowledge
and appreciate the AU’s commitment to stabilizing
conflict situations and resolving disputes in Africa.

Let me at the outset also pay tribute to the eight
peacekeepers from the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the 12 members of the Forces Armées

The growing dialogue between the Security
Council and the African Union for a better and effective
response to peace and security issues in Africa is
also a welcome development. In addition, there is

Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all of
the Blue Helmets who have sacrificed their lives in the
course of their missions.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

40/68

18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

engagement in Africa by other United Nations bodies,
including the General Assembly. The recent annual
session of the Peacebuilding Commission, focusing
solely on the Sahel region, is another example of that
cooperative approach.
The brave peacekeepers of Pakistan, one of the
world’s top troop contributors to the United Nations,
have and continue to be deployed in Africa. They have
contributed to many of Africa’s success stories, from
Liberia to Côte d’Ivoire to Sierra Leone. Our welltrained and professional peacekeepers have protected
civilians, provided much-needed medical care and
rebuilt communities. They have worked in difficult
and, at times, dangerous situations, but have never
shied away from fulfilling or failed to fulfil their
mandates. Pakistan remains committed to exploring and
supporting initiatives that help improve peacekeeping
to make it fit for purpose and adapt better to changing
environments and needs.
But successful peacekeeping is a two-way street.
Its success depends as much on the dedication and
professionalism of peacekeepers as on the adequacy
of resources and realistic and achievable mandates.
We therefore urge the Council to invest in flexible,
sustainable and predictable resources, and better utilize
triangular cooperation avenues to listen to and include the
views of troop-contributing countries — the Council’s
eyes and ears on the ground — at the time of evolving
and updating mandates. That will help the Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries. All of us will benefit from that.
Successful peacekeeping is our success. The
credibility of the United Nations depends on it, and so
does international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Molefe (South Africa): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate on the issue of peace
and security in Africa: Strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa.
First, we would like to pay tribute to the Blue
Helmets killed in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and other African Union-United Nations
and United Nations operations elsewhere in Africa and
in the world. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security for their briefings.

S/PV. 8407

Secondly, my delegation aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
South Africa is among the top 20 troop-contributing
countries and is presently deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
South Africa has also pledged a formed police unit
ready to be deployed to a United Nations peacekeeping
mission. Furthermore, South Africa is also active in the
finalization of the African Standby Force and its rapid
deployment capability. My delegation further wishes to
emphasize the following four points.
First, we welcome the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative, which was launched during
the high-level week in September. Collaboration,
particularly with regional organizations, is the
cornerstone of making peacekeeping more effective.
The complementary relationship between the United
Nations and the AU is demonstrated by the important
role that the African Union plays in peace operations on
the African continent. We should continue to explore
ways to enhance that cooperation, including through
the implementation of resolution 2033 (2012). Both the
AU Peace and Security Council and United Nations
Security Council should undertake regular joint field
missions and make special envoys and representatives
of both organizations available for briefings to
both Councils.
Secondly, we welcome the two agreements signed
between the United Nations and the African Union — the
joint framework for the implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
form the platform for renewed cooperation between
the two organizations. South Africa hopes that those
agreements will be fully implemented in order to help
Africa achieve inclusive and sustainable peace, security
and development and help the continent achieve the
2030 Sustainable Development Goals.
Thirdly, we would like once again to echo the call
of the AU and the report of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) for
sustained, predictable and flexible funding mechanisms
for African Union peace operations. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption of resolutions 1809 (2008), 2320

18-3907441/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

(2016) and 2378 (2017), which stress the same need as
the report, particularly for the African Union-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
Actions taken to implement the resolutions will take
peacekeeping on the African continent to the next level.
Progress in that area will be in line with the partnership
pillar of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its
consistency with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We call for support of the draft resolution that
will be presented by the three African countries that
are members of the Security Council, which addresses
the issue of financing for AU-led peace operations,
as Africa has the political will and human resources
to deploy, but needs to enhance some of its capacities
in order to respond to conflicts. Furthermore, we also
welcome the AU initiative of establishing the African
Union Peace Fund, aimed at developing a mechanism of
self-financing for Africa’s peace and security activities,
which was launched recently at the AU Summit in
Addis Ababa and of which South Africa’s Minister of
Finance is a member of the board of trustees.
Lastly, there will never be sustainable peace
without development. Therefore, there is a need to
ensure that the appropriate steps are taken to ensure
that countries emerging from conflict are given the
necessary support to ensure that they do not relapse into
conflict. Post-conflict reconstruction and development,
including peacebuilding, are necessary components
of the peace process. Our approach to peacebuilding
needs to be re-engineered as a supporting mechanism
to peacekeeping and towards restoring institutional
capacity and governance structures in the maintenance
of the rule of law, curbing violence, restoring justice
and socioeconomic development, as well as prioritizing
community and national reconciliation.
In conclusion, we should recall the political
declaration adopted at the Peace Summit (General
Assembly resolution 73/1), commemorating the
centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela, which
highlights the role of the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations that have a multitude of
tools and mechanisms to support peace, and expresses
our desire to continue to review the effectiveness of
the tools at our disposal to address the armed conflicts
at hand.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
42/68

20/11/2018

Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union and would like to
make the following comments in its national capacity.
I would also like to pay tribute to the peacekeepers
who fell in the service of peace, especially the Blue
Helmets from Malawi and Tanzania, who showed
exceptional courage last week in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the Central African Republic.
We thank the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this debate on a highly
topical subject. The African Union and subregional
organizations now play the leading role in peace and
security on the continent. Not only are they more
involved in peacekeeping and peace enforcement
activities, but they are also at the helm of the political
processes that pave the way for sustainable conflict
resolution and are at the forefront of preventive
diplomacy and mediation efforts.
Neither the United Nations nor the African Union
alone can address all the peace and security challenges
facing Africa. The partnership therefore represents not
a choice, but a necessity. I welcome the fact that the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, to which 150 States and
4 international organizations have subscribed, gives
priority attention to the partnership.
For Belgium, operations under African command
contribute to international peace and security. They
therefore warrant multilateral support. The question is
not as much about the principle as about the specific
modalities for funding such operations through the
United Nations budget.
In that context, we commend the African Union
and its member States for the progress made in setting
up and financing the Peace Fund, which will ultimately
have to fund African peace operations to the tune
of 25 per cent of. We are also very pleased with the
ongoing work of the African Union and the United
Nations to develop a joint communiqué to describe the
progress made and a road map for the next steps.
There can be no question of imposing more stringent
criteria on missions conducted by the African Union
than those applied to United Nations operations or of
lowering such criteria. In theatres where an African
Union mission works together with a United Nations
mission, the reference and compliance frameworks and
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

the obligations with regard to respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights and to civilian
populations should be consistent. That is a fortiori the
case for theatres where the African Union conducts
operations alone.
The increasing involvement of African States in
crisis management also means strengthening African
capacities to rapidly deploy forces. Belgium and the
European Union support the African Union and African
troop contributors in the areas of both troop capacitybuilding and rapid deployment.
Finally, the Security Council is clearly not the ideal
forum to discuss specific funding modalities. However,
whatever solution is reached, it must be compatible
with the budgetary requirements that we, the Member
States, require of the United Nations.
Lasting solutions can come only from a candid
and sustained dialogue between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
We must establish a genuine multiparty dialogue that
involves all the parties concerned: the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Secretariat, regional
organizations — the African Union as well as the
European Union — Member States, troop contributors
and the financial donors. I am convinced that we can
move the consensus on this issue forward. It is in that
spirit that we will approach our term on the Security
Council starting on 1 January 2019.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of the Holy See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): The Holy See
thanks the presidency of the People’s Republic of
China for convening this open debate on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa — a topic that
affects the whole international community, whose
response has come, in part, in the form of peacekeeping
operations, seven of which are currently active on the
African continent.
It is through the presence of the immediately
recognizable blue helmets that the United Nations
is most visible around the globe. In a world that is
increasingly fragmented, peacekeeping operations
provide a concrete opportunity for the international
community to collaborate through diplomatic activities,
financial contributions, expertise, troops and personnel.
Frequently working amid immense challenges, those

S/PV. 8407

missions have the arduous task of re-establishing
peace, protecting civilians and facilitating political
processes with a view to restoring justice and laying the
foundations for lasting stability. At times, the men and
women serving under the United Nations flag literally
build bridges, only to have the enemies of peace destroy
them. Armed groups and terrorist organizations on
the African continent, often manipulated by political
machinations from within or from beyond the borders
of the country, cause chaos to reign.
A peacekeeping operation can at times be
something of a misnomer. It seemingly implies that
peace is already enjoyed and simply needs to be
maintained. Sadly, we know that all too often that is not
the case. Today, United Nations peacekeepers serve in
some of the most dangerous and hostile environments
on the planet, risking their lives to ensure the delivery
of the most basic services to those in need. Caught in
conflicts that they have come to defuse, some have
made the supreme sacrifice. We are right to pay tribute
to them, while also ensuring that the positive impacts
that United Nations peacekeeping missions have made
and continue to make are not overlooked or undermined
in the face of unrealistic expectations or stretched or
limited resources or because of the abhorrent cases of
human rights abuses and sexual exploitation that have
come to light.
While it may be true that significant financial
resources are devoted to Africa in terms of development
programmes, it is nonetheless worthwhile recalling that
the cost of peacekeeping represents only a tiny portion
of the world’s military spending — a very small fraction
indeed. Strengthening peacekeeping operations
certainly requires increased financial support, which
should go hand in hand with the indispensable diplomatic
efforts aimed at preventing or resolving conflicts. For
that to happen, the international community must be
prepared to invest. As Secretary-General Guterres has
remarked, the chances of success increase dramatically
when we work together with Member States and share
burdens, risks and responsibilities. We urgently need a
quantum leap in collective engagement.
For truly effective and collective engagement,
we must look to the young and vibrant populations of
Africa, who deserve to have better access to quality
education and to decent work in order to realize their
great potential, thereby enabling those young men
and women to be key players in building up their own
countries and taking their rightful place as future

18-3907443/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

leaders. The alternative is the sad reality that leaves
many young Africans without schooling or training
of any kind. Without prospects, they become prey to
a future of exploitation and violence. As a preventive
measure, the international community, in particular
through United Nations peacekeeping missions, should
seek greater collaboration with local populations so as
to put the incredible resources, both human and natural,
with which the African continent has been endowed to
good use. The abundant natural resources in Africa
become a curse when their exploitation does not benefit
the people and, worse, when wars and conflicts are
exacerbated or even artificially provoked to provide a
smokescreen for the illicit and abusive exploitation of
those precious natural resources. During his in-flight
press conference on his return to Rome from the Central
African Republic, Pope Francis noted the sad reality
that there were Powers that sought only to take the
great wealth of Africa but did not think about helping
it to grow.
Heightened attention to peace and security on the
African continent, as well as the very specific role
of strengthened peacekeeping operations, will help
African countries to prosper. That will benefit not only
the countries of the region but even those beyond it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the Head of Delegation and Permanent Observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
United Nations.
Mr. Mardini (International Committee of the Red
Cross): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
giving the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) the opportunity to contribute to this important
open debate on strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa.
The largest peacekeeping operations are currently
deployed in Africa. Regional coalitions have also
increased in response to the security challenges on
the continent. The ICRC is aware of such challenges
because we operate in those very same contexts. Forty
per cent of our budget is dedicated to and spent in
that region. From South Sudan to the Sahel, the ICRC
is mandated to protect and assist victims of armed
conflict on a neutral, impartial and independent basis.
Today, I want to address two points with regard to how
the international community can effectively assist the
African Union (AU) and African States in building
their capacity for peace and security.
44/68

20/11/2018

First, we can support the commitment of African
States to respecting, and ensuring respect for,
international humanitarian law and other applicable
legal frameworks. It is critical that United Nations
and AU-mandated forces are clear about which legal
frameworks govern their operations. Promising steps
have been taken by the AU to establish a framework
that will foster greater respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The AU and its member States have also committed
to maintaining high standards in the conduct and
discipline of their peacekeeping personnel.
On our part, the ICRC has long assisted African
States in the integration of international standards into
their national law. The ICRC is currently supporting the
AU in the enhancement of its compliance framework. In
addition, every year the AU and the ICRC co-organize a
round table in Addis Ababa to discuss challenges to and
best practices of peacekeeping operations, addressing
international humanitarian law and the protection
of civilians.
Secondly, we can provide assistance in terms
of training. At this time of enhanced partnership,
the United Nations, the AU, Member States and
international organizations must ensure that troops and
police are adequately trained in applicable standards.
Training modules need to be comprehensive, tailored
to the mandate and relevant to operational needs. For
example, many peacekeeping operations conduct lawenforcement tasks. Therefore, police components
need to be reinforced, and when military contingents
are involved, law-enforcement principles should be
translated into actionable military guidance.
On the ICRC’s part, we contribute to the training
effort. Last year, we conducted sessions on legal
standards and humanitarian priorities for more than
25,000 peacekeepers, including 16,000 from African
States. The ICRC also participates in the AU-led
discussions on training standards, including on the
operationalization of the African Standby Force. In
addition, the ICRC has expertise on health to share,
from its first aid and pre-hospital emergency care
programmes, to the treatment and management of the
weapon-wounded.
The determination of the AU and African States
to resolve their own challenges is commendable. In
engaging together on peacekeeping operations, the
ICRC has seen the benefits of close collaboration
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8407

on both the respect for legal norms and on training.
Developing the capacity for peace and security of the
AU and African States is critical and requires sustained
partnerships within the international community.

importance for both organizations of working more
closely in the field of peace and security, including joint
cooperation, operational evaluation and joint reporting,
when appropriate.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.

From our perspective, the active and strong
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations reaffirms regional and national leadership in
peacebuilding, which means that the responsibility for
the stabilization of a society is not the task of only the
international community, but also the host country and
subregion concerned, even if deployment is temporary.

Mr. Skinner-Kleé Arenales (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Guatemala thanks your delegation,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and for
preparing the concept note (S/2018/1004, annex). We
also thank Secretary-General António Guterres and
Mr. Smaїl Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, for their briefings.
Before beginning, allow me to first strongly
condemn the attack on the bases of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Governments and the peoples of
Malawi and Tanzania for the hapless murder of their
Blue Helmets. I recall that in 2006, Guatemala also
suffered the irreparable loss of soldiers who were
fulfilling their mandate in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The sacrifice of our troops is a sign of the
great value of protecting the most vulnerable civilian
populations who are at the greatest risk. Those who
fall while on peace missions are heroes for the entire
international community.
One of the most noble tasks of the Organization
is peacekeeping, in which my country is honoured
to participate. The positive strategic partnership for
peace among Member States, which, despite great
asymmetries, share a common objective, demonstrates
the irreplaceable value of multilateralism, concerning
which a debate was just held on 9 November (see
S/PV.8395). For more than two decades, Guatemala has
actively participated in peacekeeping, and even made
the ultimate sacrifice in an ambush by elements of the
so-called Lord’s Resistance Army, as we mentioned.
As stated in the concept note, peacekeeping is
stronger when there is a greater sense of ownership
and joint cooperation. That is precisely what we have
noted in recent years regarding the participation of
the African Union as an essential partner in efforts to
protect civilian and vulnerable populations in conflict
situations. Through the African Union’s peace support
operations, the ability of the United Nations, in particular
the Security Council, to maintain international peace
and security is also strengthened, which highlights the

Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
indicates that cooperation among regional organizations
and the United Nations to address peace and security
issues is a task that should be fulfilled. For that reason,
we believe it is important that, at the next session of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, to be
held in February 2019, the General Assembly be able to
strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities.
For that reason, the strategic partnership is key
to the ongoing task of peacekeeping. In real terms,
our contributions to the Organization of personnel
who are deployed in such operations are symbolic in
comparison to the resources that are invested in war
or punitive operations. History itself is testament to
that. Stabilization can come from a peacekeeping
operation, but it should be harnessed, taking into
account the priorities of the country where it is located
and highlighting the fact that they are not permanent
missions, while of course trying to address the
root causes of the conflict in subsequent efforts to
build peace.
My country reaffirms its commitment to
continuing to participate in peace missions in Africa,
since our vocation is peaceful and our history reminds
us of the priceless value of the absence of conflict and,
consequently, of building peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We express our gratitude to the delegation of the
People’s Republic of China for convening this debate on
a topic of great importance to the Movement, bearing

18-3907445/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

in mind that 88 per cent of the peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the field come from non-aligned countries.
The Movement reiterates its commitment to the
promotion of the peaceful settlement of disputes under
the provisions of Article 2 and Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations, all relevant resolutions
of the Organization and international law as a whole,
convinced that it will contribute to the strengthening of
international peace and security.
At the most recent ministerial conference in April,
member States reaffirmed their position on operations,
which must be carried out in strict compliance with
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. At the same time, they stressed
that respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence, as well as non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, are fundamental elements
for promoting peace and international security. In
that regard, the Ministers reiterated that respect for
the principles of peacekeeping — namely, consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and in defence of mandates — is
essential to the success of operations, particularly those
mandated to protect civilians.
The implementation of tasks assigned to operations
must be supported by a broad political process that
is based on national ownership and backed by the
international community, as well as on the consent
and commitment of the parties concerned. Operations
should not be used as an alternative to address the root
causes of conflicts or to manage conflicts themselves.
From the outset, they should receive political support
and human, financial and logistical resources, as
well as clearly defined mandates and exit strategies
to guarantee the safety of the personnel deployed in
the field.
Moreover, we reiterate the importance that we attach
to the deliberations and reports of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, which is the only body
mandated to consider all aspects of peacekeeping
operations, including the development of concepts,
policies, doctrines and strategies. In that regard, we
emphasize the need to establish a relationship of shared
responsibility among the Security Council, police- and
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat, with
a view to making objective evaluations and harnessing
the potential of mandates and operations. That will
ensure the formulation of clear mandates responding to
46/68

20/11/2018

the challenges on the ground. However, it will come
to pass only if such cooperation is continuous and
substantive, including before the renewal of mandates.
The Movement welcomes the determination of
the United Nations to strengthen its relationship with
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
with the African Union, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations. We are convinced that such
cooperation is essential, while taking into account
African potential, as long as peace and stability prevail.
States members of the Movement reaffirm their
support for efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping
capacities and underline the importance of implementing
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed on 19 April 2017. In that regard, and in line with
our principled position in favour of African solutions
to African problems, we stress the importance of
securing financial support for African Union-led peace
operations mandated by the Security Council so that
deployed missions — including the African Standby
Force, which has demonstrated its ability to respond
to complex security situations — can maximize their
effectiveness on the ground.
In conclusion, we believe that the security of
United Nations mission personnel remains a matter
of great concern. We therefore categorically condemn
all attacks and acts of violence against peacekeeping
personnel, and we call for measures to be taken to
ensure that those responsible are brought to justice. In
that regard, the Movement pays tribute to the work of
the men and women peacekeepers who carry out their
duties in the context of armed conflict and who work
in adverse conditions, even at the risk of their lives.
We express our sincere recognition of all peacekeepers,
including those who have lost their lives on the ground
while defending the flag of the United Nations and the
cause of peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia thanks China for
convening this timely open debate.
Let me start by condemning the recent killing of
United Nations peacekeepers from Malawi, Mali and
Tanzania in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

the Central African Republic. Our thoughts and prayers
are with the families of those peacekeepers.
We also thank the Secretary-General and the
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security for their valuable comments.
Ever since the Asian-African Conference in
Bandung over six decades ago, in 1955, Indonesia
and Africa have worked together to achieve equality
among all nations and spur decolonization. Indonesia
remains committed to standing shoulder to shoulder
with Africa. We initiated the New Asian-African
Strategic Partnership in 2005 to accelerate cooperation
in politics, the economy, society and culture. The
Partnership was reinvigorated in 2015, and it is currently
manifested in numerous multifaceted support projects
between Indonesia and Africa. At the same time, we
are undertaking South-South and triangular projects
and programmes whereby peace can be achieved
through development, since we believe in the concept
of sustaining peace.
Peace and security in Africa are also among
Indonesia’s top priorities. That is being realized, among
others, through Indonesia’s contribution to eight United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the African region,
in which nearly 1,400 Indonesian troops and police are
participating. We are in the final stages of sending an
additional 1,000 Indonesian peacekeepers to our recent
rapidly deployable battalion for deployment to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to our formed
police unit to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. As a strong
believer in the important role of female peacekeepers,
particularly in winning over the hearts and minds of
host communities, those two Indonesian contingents
will also include a number of female personnel. We will
continue to play a greater role in helping sustain peace
efforts in Africa.
We warmly welcome various positive developments
in several African countries that are illustrated, inter
alia, by the closure of United Nations missions or the
adjustment of mission mandates. The closure of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia is certainly a clear
example of such a development. I must say that I am
happy, as the Ambassador of Indonesia to the United
Nations, to see that three of our peacekeepers were
among the last to leave Liberia after honourable service
to Blue Helmet contingents and the people of Liberia.

S/PV. 8407

I am happy to see that the United Nations has been
successful in that regard. The termination of United
Nations sanctions against Eritrea last week was also
another positive development that needs to be nurtured.
Notwithstanding laudable advancements on the
continent, many African countries confront serious
conflict and governance issues. The work of the
African Union — as a strong and principled force for
dialogue, peaceful resolution and cordial relations, with
the promotion of constitutionalism, democracy, human
rights and State building — is crucial. It is also welcome
that the AU and United Nations are increasingly
working better together. As vital as national ownership
by African countries is, a robust partnership among
them and the United Nations, along with other partners,
to support peace and security on the continent, is
essential. In that regard, we would like to welcome the
worthy intention expressed by the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council to formulate
common positions and recommendations on conflict
areas in Africa.
Indonesia fully supports the AU Agenda 2063, with
its key pillar of a conflict-free Africa, as well as the five
thematic priorities of the AU road map 2016-2020. The
AU master road map of practical steps for Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020 is also laudable. A successful
outcome of those will significantly elevate people’s wellbeing. Those mechanisms need to be fully supported by
all relevant regional and international actors.
Secondly, the question of how to strengthen peace
and security in Africa cannot be answered without
spelling out how the needed financial support will
be provided. The commitment of African leaders to
financing 25 per cent of the costs of AU peace support
operations is a concrete sign of their resolve. It should
be responded to befittingly. Indonesia is pleased
that resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and the
subsequent report of the Secretary-General on options
for authorization and support for AU peace support
operations (S/2017/454) underlined, among other
things, the need for adequate, sustainable, flexible
and predictable financing for AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council. We
need to act upon that.
Responding to the proposals of the High
Representative for the AU Peace Fund, the SecretaryGeneral’s report pointed to five financial models
and various decision-making options to support AU-

18-3907447/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

initiated peace support operations. Recognizing that
each situation may warrant its own particular solution,
we expect that the collective wisdom of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee and the Security Council will lead to a
cogent answer.
Thirdly, and as a final point, we should also
innovatively explore the utilization of the near
universal endorsement for the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations to fill gaps in bolstering
support for peacekeeping missions in Africa. All
stakeholders should consider how to actualize their
commitments under the Declaration in the specific
contexts of peacekeeping missions in Africa.
To conclude, Indonesia once again fully stands
behind the United Nations-AU partnership to sustain
peace, particularly by improving peacekeeping
operations. We will continue to work actively in United
Nations and non-United Nations forums to ensure that
robust support is extended to Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Wax (Israel): We welcome the convening of this
important meeting and would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security Chergui for their briefings
this morning.
The maintenance of international peace and security
is the foremost reason for which the United Nations
was created, and traditionally, the most instrumental
tool that the United Nations has to fulfil that goal is
peacekeeping operations, most of which are located
on the African continent. Peacekeeping operations in
Africa have faced unprecedented challenges in recent
years, as they are increasingly targeted by armed
groups whose attacks are also steadily increasing in
complexity and intent. Strengthening those operations
in the most immediate future requires enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers, as highlighted in
the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers. In the long run, that must go
hand in hand with development efforts, support for the
political process and humanitarian assistance, all of
which are far more effective when done in cooperation
with regional organizations, such as the African Union,
48/68

20/11/2018

which can work as a multiplier for the efforts of the
United Nations.
If we wish to ensure that peacekeeping remains
sustainable, we must adjust our mindsets to match
the realities on the ground. We must recognize that
wearing a blue helmet no longer guarantees protection.
Last year proved to be the deadliest year in decades
for United Nations peacekeepers, with 61 fatalities due
to malicious acts, all of which were in Africa. While
we are encouraged to see a much lower number of
casualties so far this year, the tragic incident this week
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which sadly
took the lives of eight United Nations peacekeepers,
reminds us that there is still much work to be done, and
we wish to express our condolences to the families of
those peacekeepers.
Israel is committed to strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa and enhancing their protection.
We have expanded our partnership with the United
Nations to improve camp security, and we are
providing the training and capabilities necessary to
fulfil peacekeeping mandates. Israel is determined to
invest in African peace and security and has increased
its support in recent years for the development of the
continent, which goes hand in hand with supporting
peacekeeping in the region. We are encouraged by
the recent developments in the Horn of Africa, which
exemplify how peace and stability can be achieved.
However, as many delegations have stated here today,
we also agree that we must be respectful of Africa’s
leading role in resolving its own security issues. In
that regard, utilizing United Nations partnerships
with regional organizations and supporting their
peacekeeping activities, as stated in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, should be an important part of our collective
efforts in the region.
Africa is blessed with a great resource, which is its
people — men and woman who, together and supported
by the international community, must lead the continent
out of conflict. Many of those men and woman serve
bravely in peacekeeping missions in the region and
dedicate their lives to the pursuit of peace. Israel is
actively engaged in lending knowledge, expertise and
training to those peacekeepers and is working closely
with the Medical Services Division and the Department
of Field Support to improve the standard of medical
care in peacekeeping by facilitating life-saving first-aid
training, medical field training, medical evacuation and
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

standards of health care in hospitals. We look forward
to continuing our partnerships with the relevant United
Nations departments, as well as offering our expertise
in medical training to troop-contributing countries,
especially those serving on the African continent
Last but not least, allow me to convey Israel’s strong
support for the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and sexual harassment.
We are encouraged by the efforts made so far to combat
those phenomena, both at Headquarters and in the
field, but much more still needs to be done. The efforts
to strengthen peacekeeping operations in Africa and
empower the continent to strive for peace are inherently
weakened by such incidents. The United Nations must
be trusted not to harm the local populations it is meant
to protect; otherwise, its ability to be truly effective is
severely compromised.
Israel has a profound understanding of the need for
peacekeeping operations that work effectively and fulfil
their mandates. We hope that we can all work together
to strive for those goals, and we thank the peacekeepers
for their important work and dedication to the cause
of peace.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and
the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Smaїl Chergui, for their statements.
Rwanda aligns itself with the African Union position
on this subject matter.
Let me also convey our condolences to the people
and the Governments of the Republic of Malawi and the
United Republic of Tanzania for the recent tragic loss
of their gallant peacekeepers, who lost their lives in the
pursuit of peace.
This debate could not have come at a more
opportune time. In Addis Ababa, the African Union
has just concluded an extraordinary session of the
African Union Assembly, which focused entirely on the
institutional reform of the African Union. It is of central
importance to note in this debate that those reforms are
aimed at ensuring the effectiveness of delivery in the
area of peace and security, among other priorities. It
should be encouraging to us all, including the Security

S/PV. 8407

Council, that the African Union is taking greater strides
towards better efficiency and delivery of services.
Africa currently hosts the largest number of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which, combined,
account for 75 per cent of all peacekeeping personnel,
the majority of whom are African troops. In addition,
over 60 per cent of all Security Council resolutions
concern Africa. Africa is clearly a central part of the
business of the Council. That should be a wake-up
call for a more substantive involvement of the African
Union in matters of peace and security concerning
our continent.
Rwanda has made a long-standing contribution
to sustainable peace across the continent. As a troopand police-contributing country, we believe that, if
regional peace arrangements are adequately supported,
then we can make more progress. I will make my
statement from the vantage point of a country that is
fully committed to global peace and security. In that
regard, my remarks will focus on two key issues: first,
enhancing cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the realm of peace and security
in Africa; and secondly, funding for peace operations
in Africa.
I think that we can all agree that the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU is indispensable
with regard to sustainable peace and security on the
continent. Our partnership must be based on regional
peace frameworks and mobilize further support for
regionally led peace processes and initiatives. Such
initiatives have yielded positive results, including
a number of contemporary cases of which we are
all aware.
Rwanda would like to reiterate its position in support
of the United Nations-AU partnership framework. The
need for cooperation among international and regional
organizations is crucial in the context of contemporary
global challenges. The unprecedented role of regional
organizations in achieving security and stability has
arisen from a mutual understanding that the most
effective method for peace attainment is the joining of
efforts and resources.
Moreover, Rwanda recognizes the importance of
close coordination and cooperation, based on strategic
assessment, planning and reporting that are, in turn,
based on respective comparative advantages, as well as
burden-sharing on the basis of collective responsibility,
to handle conflict in a timely manner.

18-3907449/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

Rwanda acknowledges the progress of the
cooperation between both institutions and supports the
idea of increased mutual engagement, as spelled out in
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. It is our
belief that, over time, with a spirit of trust and support,
this would allow for greater mutual understanding
and synergy, ultimately leading to more effective
peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate Rwanda’s firm
commitment to global peace and security. We have
demonstrated time and again that our commitments are
matched with action, be it through the performance of
our peacekeepers or our political support to strengthen
the peacekeeping activities of the United Nations and
the African Union.

We reaffirm our support for the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, particularly concerning performance and
accountability. We need to build effective peacekeeping
operations that are based on strong partnerships in
building predictable readiness capabilities in terms
of the skills and logistics required that are tailored to
mission-specific challenges.

Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): Mr. President, my
delegation joins others in warmly congratulating
your country, the People’s Republic of China, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. We particularly commend
you and your delegation for having convened this open
debate under the important theme “Peace and security
in Africa: strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa”.

Regarding funding for peace operations in Africa,
Rwanda welcomes the launching of the African Union
Peace Fund at the just-concluded AU Extraordinary
Summit. This is a critical step towards realizing the
African commitment to financing peace and security
operations on the continent.
Rwanda also welcomes the initiative taken by the
three African Security Council members in proposing a
draft resolution on the stable financing of African Union
peace operations, which we hope will be adopted very
soon. It is our understanding that the draft resolution
will provide a framework that will enable the Council
to further consider the financing of AU-led peace
operations from United Nations assessed contributions
and that such a decision would be made on a case-bycase basis. If such an agreement were to be reached,
we believe that we would be closer to resolving the
issue of the sustainable and predictable funding of AU
peace operations.
In this regard, supporting the Peace Fund initiative
and the adoption of the Security Council draft resolution
on the funding of African peace operations is a great
stride that needs the support of the United Nations
and the Security Council in particular. The African
Union is also committed to enhancing accountability
in its partnership with the United Nations and
other partners. The ongoing institutional reforms
of the AU are also geared towards putting in place a
transparent accountability framework for the Union’s
effective performance.
50/68

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.

We also thank the Secretary-General and the
African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, His Excellency Ambassador Smaïl Chergui,
for providing invaluable insights in their briefings on
the subject matter.
At the outset, my delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered by delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
As we engage in today’s debate, my delegation
joins others in paying a befitting tribute to all of the
peacekeepers deployed around the world for their
gallant efforts and commitment to sacrificing their
precious lives to achieve peace and comfort for their
fellow human beings. We have recently once again
been reminded of the unavoidable price of peace by
the regrettable loss of life of Tanzanian and Malawian
uniformed personnel in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. As we mourn their heroic demise and convey our
heartfelt condolences to their families and other loved
ones, it is incumbent upon us to ensure that their loss
and that of others before them was not in vain but will
embolden our collective resolve and focus to enhance
peace and security globally, particularly in Africa.
Despite the notable overall progress made over the
years since the old days of frequent inter-State wars,
Africa is still mired mainly in festering and active
conflicts, some of which, of course, have delicate
cross-border dimensions. This trend and the sometimes
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

fragile peace agreements reached unfortunately have a
great opportunity cost. Efforts to restore and rebuild
peace are without a doubt an endless drain on the already
scarce resources required to realize the socioeconomic
aspirations of our continent.
The double jeopardy situation we face is that as
a result, the African continent finds itself at crossroads of competing needs in simultaneously dealing
with conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, in parallel with the imperative
to implement the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate
Botswana’s commitment to the various initiatives
taken in that respect, which will go a long way
towards strengthening the international community’s
response mechanisms in addressing issues of peace
and security, especially in Africa, including the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446); the reform of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission; and the SecretaryGeneral’s recent Action for Peace Initiative.
There is no doubt that United Nations peace
operations have proved to be a critical intervention
instrument in building and sustaining peace and
stability in conflict-affected areas. Important
cumulative lessons in countries such as Liberia and
Sierra Leone have shown that while a peacekeeping
mission cannot go on indefinitely, it can nonetheless
provide the countries affected a second opportunity to
re-establish peace and rebuild sustainable economies.
When interventions are better managed — through
proper phase-to-phase transitions from peacemaking
and peacekeeping to peacebuilding — the real end
result is indeed achievable. While preserving basic
principles such as consent by parties to a conflict, we
must nonetheless resist the temptation of presumed cost
savings through premature withdrawals, as history has
taught us that sometimes the cost of future redeployment
is even higher.
It is also important to note that as the Security
Council mandates the respective operations, the
Council must be mindful of the fact that while
situations may seem similar, there could be unique
characteristics in every case. In this context, close
cooperation and collaboration between the penholders
and the various key stakeholders, including the regional

S/PV. 8407

blocs and potential troop-contributing countries that
may understand the situation better, must be ensured.
We agree with the recommendations arrived at by
the reports and several initiatives alluded to earlier,
but we wish to further highlight some critical areas
for reflection, particularly in relation to the effective
maintenance of peace and stability in Africa.
First, we share the view that in order to achieve
genuine and sustainable peace, the primacy of local
context and politics, as well as the underlying regional
dynamics, must be fully taken into account. Clearly,
peacekeeping contingents must support — and should
benefit from — homegrown solutions as a guarantor
for the required buy-in and future sustainability of the
peace when peacekeepers have withdrawn.
Secondly, it cannot be overemphasized that,
ultimately, the primary responsibility for absorbing
external peacekeeping assistance rests with the
national actors themselves. Apart from subsequent
ongoing long-term development and peacebuilding
support, peacekeeping is meant to be a temporary
intervention measure whereby the United Nations and
other international actors can support and facilitate
efforts in such areas as national dialogues for peace.
It is therefore within the purview of host countries’
responsibility to help address the underlying drivers of
conflict and meet the legitimate interests of their wider
populations in order to sustain peace.
Thirdly, at the local level, we believe that
peacekeeping and peacemaking processes must always
aspire to inclusive participation and to equitable
economic distribution of the peace dividend as a
pathway to building credible institutions and restoring
good governance, democracy and the rule of law,
bearing in mind the special interests of the most
vulnerable groups in our societies, such as the innocent
women and children who more often than not bear
the bigger brunt of these brutal conflicts. It is for this
reason that on the occasion of today’s commemoration
of 20 November as Universal Children’s Day, Botswana
has joined others who supported that noble initiative
in a letter addressed to the Secretary-General by the
Permanent Representatives of Qatar and the United
States calling for the prevention of the widespread
abduction of children in conflict and crises.
With a view to overcoming the many obstacles
to peace and security on our continent, Africa has
unquestionably demonstrated the determination needed

18-3907451/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

to provide both financial and personnel support to
peace operations. Alongside many other Non-Aligned
Movement member States, who collectively contribute
some 88 per cent of peacekeepers globally, our
delegation would like to take this opportunity to
commend our fellow African countries, especially
our now top contributor, Ethiopia, for taking this
collective responsibility seriously. But Africa and other
developing countries cannot do it alone, and it certainly
requires enhanced capabilities from the international
community. To borrow the Secretary-General’s
own words,
“Enhancing African capacities is essential
both in the context of our collective response to
international peace and security challenges as well
as for the African continent’s own self-reliance.”
(S/PV.8006, p. 2)
This statement, we believe, recognizes that African
countries and regional institutions such as the AU
currently face serious gaps in their capacity to
support their own peace operations. In that context,
it is worth recalling that the peace dividend we are
observing today in Somalia is in part the result of the
bold and unprecedented decision taken by the General
Assembly and its subsidiary Committees in 2009 to
make an exception by authorizing a United Nationsfunded support package for the African Union Mission
in Somalia. That deliberate act of true partnership
was a commendable step in providing critically
needed logistical and life support to the Ugandan and
Burundian peacekeepers who, among others, were part
of an AU-mandated mission at the time and braving a
vicious Al-Shabaab insurgency. The Somalia case is
therefore a good partnership success story, in that while
it is an exception to the rule that the United Nations
cannot provide direct financial support to operations
sanctioned by other regional bodies, similar support by
partner organizations should not be discouraged if it
can bring the desired result.
We noted with satisfaction the signing in April
2017 by the principals of the two organizations of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, in
recognition of the nexus between peace and security
and development, and in January of the United NationsAfrican Union Framework for the Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as well as the 2017 Memorandum of
Understanding on Peacebuilding. We also welcome
52/68

20/11/2018

partnerships such as that of the European Union with
the AU, as well as the growing bilateral collaboration
between individual member States, which will greatly
enhance the prospects for peace and security in Africa.
We see such joint efforts as indispensable to Africa’s
capacity development, particularly in strengthening the
region’s contribution to peace and security initiatives
on the continent. We also want to underscore and
express our appreciation for the United Nations support
to the AU Peace and Security Council initiative to
declare September of every year until 2020 to be Africa
Amnesty Month for the Surrender of Illegally Owned
Weapons and Arms, in line with the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative.
Finally, the role of subregional organizations is
a very important pillar for the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa. We fully recognize the efforts
to bring peace to various parts of Africa by regional
economic communities and other entities such as the
Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the East African Community. Our experiences with
the SADC-mandated operations in countries such as
Lesotho confirm that the involvement of such entities
and their knowledge of local conditions and close
cultural and ethnic ties across boundaries make them
a main pillar of conflict resolution and management.
It would be remiss of me to end my remarks without
advocating for the full participation of women, in
particular, and of young people and other civil-society
groups, in the prevention and management of conflicts
on the continent. These groups, especially women and
children, are not only vulnerable but also bring unique
capabilities without which our attempts to effectively
address conflict would be undermined.
I would like to conclude by affirming Botswana’s
unwavering commitment to continuing to play its
part and provide needed support to the international
community’s collective efforts to promote and protect
international peace and security, particularly in Africa.
With our uninterrupted track record of stability, our
strong desire to see peace prevail on our continent
remains one of the main objectives of Botswana’s foreign
policy. We firmly believe that durable peace and stability
represent the key foundation for achieving sustainable
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

socioeconomic progress, including the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate China on organizing
this open debate, which is of particular interest to my
delegation, and to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the leading role that China is playing
in peacekeeping. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and for the action he has initiated since he
took office, sparing no effort to strengthen and reform
peacekeeping and provide Africa with substantial
support. We thank him for his efforts and reiterate
our full support to his mission to reform peacekeeping
in order to enable it to adapt to today’s challenges,
including through the follow-up to his Action for
Peace initiative. My statement today will address three
main points.
First, with regard to the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU) in the areas
of peace and security, the concept note (S/2018/1004,
annex) clearly details the importance of Africa in every
aspect of peacekeeping — first in its role as a theatre
of operations, including for the five most important
missions of the United Nations, which served as
the standard for the Secretary-General’s action plan
on troop safety and security, but also because of the
participation of African troop- and police-contributing
countries in United Nations operations. Furthermore,
almost 80 per cent of peacekeeping operations personnel
are deployed in Africa, which unfortunately continues
to be the focus of nearly 70 per cent of the Security
Council’s work.
It is therefore clear that the two organizations have no
choice but to strengthen their cooperation in the area of
peace and security on a basis of mutual respect and their
respective comparative advantages. The Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed in April 2017,
reinforces that strategic partnership. In that regard, we
welcome the commitment of the United Nations, under
the leadership of the Secretary-General. However, we
have to consider the human and financial resources at
the disposal of each of the organizations, which are
a key element in the implementation of joint projects
aimed at promoting complementarity. A good example
of such complementarity is the case of the Central

S/PV. 8407

African Republic, where the African Union is leading
the political process through the African Initiative.
In fact, as a result of the recent strategic assessment
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Parfait Onanga-Anyanga is now part of the
panel of facilitators for the African Initiative.
My second point is about African troop- and
police-contributing countries. Morocco has been
contributing to United Nations peacekeeping operations
since 1960. An overwhelming majority of the
deployments from the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces
continue to be to peacekeeping operations in Africa.
They are currently deployed within MINUSCA in the
Central African Republic, and in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). In that context, the
Kingdom of Morocco is in the process of finalizing the
deployment to MONUSCO of a fifth rapid deployment
battalion, which represents a significant contribution
by the United Nations to our brother country’s peace,
stability and security.
I would also like to point out that many African
troop- and police-contributing countries have
accumulated significant experience and expertise
in peacekeeping. We therefore believe that training
support would be more effective if provided by African
countries. Morocco, which has recognized experience
in United Nations peacekeeping, has been sharing it
bilaterally with many African countries, including
through scholarships to various military academies
and by sending experts abroad. We are in discussions
with the Secretariat about involvement in triangular
partnerships. It is clear that the supply of assistance
is much greater than the demand. The coordination
mechanism established by the Secretary-General
must now be implemented in order to ensure the
most effective support possible. We also welcome the
Secretariat’s efforts to make continuing improvements
to the procedures and criteria related to deployment,
training, recruitment and reimbursement so as to adapt
them to current peacekeeping requirements.
My last point is on the financing of African
peacekeeping operations. Whether they are financed
by the AU or subregional organizations, this is a
crucial issue about inescapable facts. Considering the
challenges it has to deal with, Africa has pledged to
finance 25 per cent of the cost of such operations, and

18-3907453/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

in that regard, we welcomed the official launch on
18 November of the African Union Peace Fund, aimed
at eventually achieving our African organization’s
financial independence. At the level of the United
Nations, it will be vital to continue discussing financing,
but not in the Security Council alone. After more than
15 years of discussions, it is high time to step on the
gas in order to make sure that Africa’s positions and
demands on this issue are taken into full consideration.
Every military operation should be able to rely on
predictable funding to ensure its success. We need an
innovative and flexible approach and real political will
to advance this key issue for all African countries.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
peacekeeping is a noble endeavour, a symbol of
international solidarity and a flagship activity of
the United Nations, with soldiers who often work in
difficult conditions, risking their lives. I want to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to all who have made the
ultimate sacrifice, often thousands of kilometres from
home, for peace and stability, on behalf of the United
Nations. Morocco, in its capacity as a member of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
as an active participant in United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, will spare no effort to strengthen relations
between the AU and the United Nations for the sake of
peace and stability on our continent.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): At the outset, I would like
to commend the People’s Republic of China for holding
today’s debate. I am confident that under China’s
presidency the Security Council will continue to build
on this important topic.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
In the light of the recent sacrifices made by the
Blue Helmets, I would like to recall the words of former
Deputy Secretary-General and President of the General
Assembly Jan Eliasson when he said,
“For all the civilians saved thanks to the presence
of peacekeepers, there have been those who were
lost — the United Nations personnel who sacrificed
their lives for a noble cause. Even as we mourn
our fallen colleagues, we are all uplifted by their
unflinching commitment and are inspired to strive
even harder for the collective cause so eloquently
54/68

20/11/2018

envisaged in the United Nations Charter: a world
free from the scourge of war.” (GA/SM/374)
Romania has a long-term commitment to the core
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the peace, development and justice nexus,
which is also our motto as a candidate country for a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council for a term
from 2020 to 2021.
As a security provider, my country attaches great
importance to the effectiveness of the United Nations
Organization in the pursuit of peace and stability. Since
1991, when the first Romanian military peacekeepers
were deployed to the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission, more than 12,500 Romanian
military, police and close-protection personnel have
served under the blue flag all over the world in 25
United Nations missions. Romania is currently one of
the foremost European contributors of police officers
to United Nations missions. Our national contribution
to the United Nations missions on the African
continent covers the entire spectrum of security in six
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
in the Central African Republic, Mali, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Darfur and Libya.
We also recall the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations, and see
them as a tool for achieving the Organization’s most
valuable goal, global peace. At the same time, Romania
strongly supports the efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General, through his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, aimed at ensuring that the primary focus is on
political solutions and on strengthening the protection
of civilians and improving the safety and security of
peacekeepers through effective performance in the
field and accountability at all levels.
Following its endorsement of the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, Romania notified the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) that in line with
our peacekeeping commitments, starting in October
2019 we will contribute a military utility helicopter
unit made up of four helicopters to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. They will not only provide transportation
services, but will also be able to carry out aerial medical
evacuation tasks, which should now be a standard
requirement for all utility helicopters in United Nations
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

peacekeeping operations, as recognized in resolution
2436 (2018).
Romania is also committed to maintaining its
current rate of 20 per cent female participation in
peacekeeping operations as military observers and
military staff officers by implementing a set of
measures designed to increase the pool of female
officers fit for such missions and ready to be deployed
in accordance with the positions allocated by DPKO.
Moreover, for the second consecutive year, Romania
is supporting the work of the Office of the Special
Coordinator on improving the United Nations response
to sexual exploitation and abuse with a military expert
on military loan, and in doing so is one of only two
countries that have made available the services of
qualified military personnel to assist the Office of the
Special Coordinator.
Lastly, Romania welcomes resolutions 2320 (2016)
and 2378 (2017), which we regard as a cornerstone of
the foundation for solid and sustainable peacekeeping
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, and we stand ready to contribute further
to that cooperation.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank China for organizing today’s open
debate on strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa.
On behalf of Canada, I also express my sincere
condolences to the families of the Malawian and
Tanzanian Blue Helmets and Congolese soldiers
recently killed in an operation of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) against the Allied
Democratic Forces in the Beni area.
The Council has often been called on to address
complex and enduring conflicts in Africa, including in
Somalia, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and South Sudan. These
conflicts continue to cause enormous loss of life,
population displacement and economic hardship.
Another reality, however, is sometimes forgotten.
African States play a leading role in international
efforts to manage and resolve conflicts and crises, and
we particularly have in mind United Nations successes
in countries such as Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. It

S/PV. 8407

is important to emphasize the determination and
perseverance of the African Union (AU), its member
States and African subregional organizations, which
have resulted in so many lessons learned and so much
strategic patience and cooperation. Needless to say,
the partnerships that have been established attest to
what we can achieve together. The strengthening of
peacekeeping operations in Africa is not merely a
question of resources, resolve or means but rather of our
ability to join forces in order to innovate and maximize
our impact. Enabling African States to act collectively
through the United Nations, the African Union and
other African regional organizations is a practical step.
That is why Canada supports the full implementation
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security. In
addition to the annual joint consultative meeting on
peace and security between the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the Security Council, we
believe firmly that there are other opportunities to
strengthen cooperation and collaboration between
the two Councils, including through joint field visits.
Together we can accomplish more. We therefore
encourage efforts to find more predictable, flexible and
sustainable funding mechanisms for African-led peace
operations. In that regard, we commend AU member
States for the leadership that they have shown in
mobilizing African-sourced funding under the auspices
of the African Union Peace Fund. We also look forward
to the Security Council’s forthcoming discussion and
debate on the subject and hope to see concrete progress
on developing such mechanisms.
(spoke in English)
If we are to get results, all Member States have to
pull their weight. That is why Canada has committed new
resources to United Nations peacekeeping, including
the provision of a helicopter task force to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The task force has been
used during essential medical evacuations of injured
peacekeepers and civilians doing critical work in very
dangerous and isolated environments. We have also
deployed police to MINUSMA, leveraging the long
experience of Canadian police in United Nations peace
operations. Those contributions build on our longstanding and ongoing engagements in Africa, including
in MONUSCO and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, and we are working with the United Nations
to provide additional critical enablers, including the

18-3907455/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

deployment of a tactical airlift detachment to the
Regional Service Centre in Uganda in 2019 to provide
critical logistical support to missions across Africa.
Recognizing the vast experience of African
troop- and police-contributing countries, we are
building new partnerships and sharing our experiences
and capabilities, and also learning from those of
others. For example, we are partnering with Ghana
and Zambia under the Elsie Initiative on Women in
Peace Operations. Together we will test innovative
approaches for reducing barriers to uniformed women’s
meaningful participation in United Nations peace
operations. In that regard, we would like to congratulate
Superintendent Phyllis Osei of Ghana, who yesterday
received the United Nations Female Police Officer of
the Year Award for her work in Somalia.
We have partnered with Senegal and Ghana to
deliver the United Nations senior mission leaders
course. We have partnered with the École de maintien
de la paix Alioune Blondin Beye in Bamako to deliver
essential training to peacekeepers. We have partnered
with UNICEF and the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers
Initiative to strengthen mission capacities to end the
use of child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia and the Sudan, including working
in collaboration with the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the African Union. We have partnered with
Mali to support the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and related
stabilization efforts. Ahead of the next United Nations
ministerial meeting on peacekeeping, we are partnering
with Ethiopia to organize a preparatory meeting on
women, peace and security and peacekeeping on
28 and 29 January 2019. Together with our co-host,
we welcome the participation of all Member States in
that important exercise. We believe that those kinds of
partnerships enable each of us to put our strengths and
experiences forward in order to build a safer and more
peaceful world.
Partnership, working in concert with multilateral
institutions and in defence of our rules-based
international order, is at the heart of Canada’s approach
to international peace and security. It is the approach
that we take to peacekeeping in Africa and one that
we hope to bring to the Security Council should we
be elected to a non-permanent seat for the term from
2021 to 2022. Together we can develop a more secure,
inclusive and prosperous world.
56/68

20/11/2018

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kai-Kai (Sierra Leone): I am honoured to
participate in today’s open debate on peace and security
in Africa and strengthening peacekeeping operations
in Africa. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November, and also thank you for
convening this important meeting. And I would like to
thank the Secretary-General and the Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union (AU) for their
insightful briefings this morning.
Sierra Leone conveys its deepest condolences to the
Government and the people of the Republic of Malawi
and the United Republic of Tanzania for the recent loss of
some of their peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We must pay tribute to the gallantry,
bravery and courage of peacekeepers by giving them the
appropriate tools and mandate to expand the frontiers
of global peace, security and stability.
Strengthening peacekeeping operations in Africa is
immensely important to the international community.
That is especially so given that Africa’s efforts to
maintain regional peace and security are fraught
with well-documented challenges, including a lack of
sustainable, adequate and predictable financing and the
difficulties of operationalizing the establishment of the
African Standby Force and implementing sustainable
post-conflict
reconstruction
and
development
initiatives. The attention and support of the Security
Council and the wider international community is
therefore required in order to address the challenges
of strengthening peacekeeping operations across the
continent. And addressing those challenges requires
an effective political strategy. In our view, the political
strategy should incorporate the need to increase the
role that eminent regional leaders can play through
their good offices in resolving conflicts, as well as
the political engagement of all parties to conflicts for
inclusive solutions.
Sierra Leone commends the Secretary-General
for his reform agenda, which prioritizes the primacy
of political solutions in addressing the root causes
of conflicts and their prevention, and through that
achieving sustaining peace. Sierra Leone also welcomes
the signing of the Joint United Nations-AU Framework
for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, and
we look forward to a more constructive and productive
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

engagement in that regard. In that context, Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, which provides
for cooperation between regional organizations and
the United Nations in addressing matters of peace
and security on the continent, should be central to
peacekeeping mandates. That will require a more
coordinated and integrated approach to resolving
conflicts in Africa. In that regard, we should focus
on African initiatives emanating from the AU Peace
and Security Council, decisions adopted by the AU
Assembly and the role of subregional organizations in
resolving conflicts. We therefore acknowledge with
appreciation the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2018/678) on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the AU, particularly on the
importance of meeting the financing requirements of
AU peace operations.
Given the evolving role of subregional organizations,
it is important to cascade that partnership down to
subregional economic communities, in view of their
effectiveness in addressing and promoting subregional
and continent-wide initiatives for conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. The performance of Africa’s regional
organizations, particularly subregional economic
communities, in ensuring peace and security on the
continent through peacekeeping operations cannot
be overemphasized. In that regard, it is important
to further build on and strengthen the mediation
capacities of the African Union and the subregional
organizations, as well as civil-society organizations
engaged in mediation efforts.
The funding of peacekeeping operations in all
their complementary aspects, including peacebuilding
and State-building efforts, remains a huge challenge
to the work of silencing the guns in Africa. In that
regard, it is imperative to ensure that the international
community seeks lasting solutions to the problem of
the funding constraints that continue to inhibit the
success of peacekeeping operations. Sierra Leone
therefore supports the Security Council’s future
adoption of a resolution aimed at establishing United
Nations assessed contributions for financing Councilmandated AU peace support missions. The launch of
the AU Peace Fund on 17 November is integral to the
AU’s ongoing reforms and a clear indication of Africa’s
commitment to resolving conflicts on the continent. It
will substantially increase the capacity of the African
Union as a first responder in the areas of mediation,
preventive diplomacy and peace operations.

S/PV. 8407

Sierra Leone applauds the Secretary-General for the
launch in March of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
as well as the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which has so
far been endorsed by more than 150 Member States.
For Sierra Leone, as a troop- and police-contributing
country, the Declaration of Shared Commitments
resonates with our commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security. While the Declaration
aims to strengthen peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations and the international community, in addition
to providing funding, should make greater efforts to
assist African troop- and police-contributing countries
with the requisite technical support, including training
and equipment, that they need to enhance their
peacekeeping capabilities.
In conclusion, if we are to strengthen peacekeeping
we must also understand and appreciate the nexus
between peace, security and development both during
and after peacekeeping operations. That is critical to
building the resilience that can prevent relapses into
conflict, which in turn is essential in order to protect
the investments made in peacekeeping.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s open debate
on this important issue, and we appreciate your wise
leadership of the Council for the month of November.
We would also like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and Mr. Smaїl Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union (AU), for their
insightful briefings this morning.
I would like to express my condolences regarding
the peacekeepers from Tanzania, Malawi and Mali who
lost their lives while carrying out their sacred missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Central African Republic.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered this morning by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and we would like
to add the following comments in our national capacity.
We must reaffirm the importance of Africa in
African-led peacekeeping operations. The partnership
in peacekeeping between the United Nations and the
AU is a successful one, and of the several examples

18-3907457/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

of that, the most notable is the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
which is nearing its closure. UNAMID is a success
story in terms of African-led joint coordination and
efforts. It was preceded by the African Union Mission
in the Sudan, which was transformed into the hybrid
operation that is currently preparing for closure and has
successfully made the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and development. The drawdown began
in September on the margins of the high-level week of
the General Assembly.
After reviewing the situation on the ground, the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
recommended in its report (see S/2015/446) that the
partnership between the United Nations and the AU
be strengthened by providing additional funding
specifically directed to African-led peacekeeping
operations. That recommendation was implemented
through the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, which was signed in April 2017 here in New
York. However, the Framework will become effective
only when the necessary financial and political
obligations are implemented.
In coordinating peace efforts in Africa, we must
consider regional and subregional perspectives, along
with those of neighbouring countries, so that we can
resolve conflicts where they arise and address them
on the basis of the principle of African solutions for
African problems. We urgently need to improve the
coordination between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council, in addition to enhancing
the partnerships between the Security Council and
the regional and subregional organizations working
to maintain peace and security in Africa, such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. And
we want to focus on the importance of strengthening
the capacity of African countries with regard to all the
various aspects of peacekeeping forces — military,
police and civilian personnel — so that we can truly
silence the guns in Africa by 2020.
We also want to highlight the importance of
enhancing
partnerships
between
peacekeeping
operations and host countries. In that regard, we
note the successful coordination experience of the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID establishing
a triangular mechanism that brings together the
Sudanese Government, the United Nations and the
58/68

20/11/2018

AU and oversees all of that peacekeeping operation’s
developments and needs.
We all know the growing importance of ensuring
financing for African-led peacekeeping operations,
which will help them to address conflicts before they
intensify and spin out of control, at which point such
conflicts are much more difficult to address. In that
regard, we note the AU’s efforts to establish a Peace
Fund providing 25 per cent of the funding needed
for AU-led peacekeeping operations, enabling the
African continent to contribute to addressing its own
security challenges.
The latest developments in the Horn of Africa
promise a bright future for the region following the
implementation of the peace agreement in South Sudan
and the efforts to advance the peace process in the
Central African Republic, in addition to the positive
developments between Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti and
Somalia and bilaterally between Somalia and Eritrea.
All these positive developments will require support
from regional and international partners so that we
can foster development efforts in those countries and
enhance regional complementarity, which is continuing
to make progress.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mrs. Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing
today’s open debate on the important issue of
strengthening African capacities in the area of peace
and security.
I am grateful to the Secretary-General and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU) for their contributions to our discussion.
I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
concept note (S/2018/1004, annex) prepared for this
meeting, which once again demonstrates how important
your country considers our continent to be.
Djibouti associates itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
(spoke in English)
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
United Nations peacekeeping and one in which we
have achieved several key milestones, including the
approval of reform of the Organization’s peace and
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

security architecture, the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which my delegation has endorsed, and the
implementation of the action plan to strengthen the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers.
Djibouti welcomes the Secretary-General’s reform
initiatives aimed at making peacekeeping more effective
and efficient, as well as achieving a more coherent and
coordinated approach to conflict prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding.
(spoke in French)
Of the total of 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, nine are deployed in Africa and account
for more than 80 per cent of uniformed personnel and
approved financial resources. Of the 30 countries that
are the main contributors of uniformed personnel to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, 19 are African
States. Furthermore, 50 per cent of peacekeeping
personnel come from African Union member States.
Today’s debate is being held in the wake of the
eleventh Extraordinary Summit of the African Union,
held in Addis Ababa three days ago. At the Summit
our Heads of State and Government made important
decisions aimed at accelerating institutional reform
of the organization, particularly through the launch
of the Peace Fund, which will enable the institution
to advance the irreversible steps it is taking towards
financial autonomy and greater efficiency.
I want to emphasize Djibouti’s commitment to
peacekeeping operations through our contribution of
nearly 2,000 men serving in Somalia and a formed
police unit in Darfur, as well as women and men in other
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Djibouti’s
presence enables us to make a concrete contribution to
the peace and stability of our continent. In that regard, I
would like to focus on the following three points.
First, the United Nations and the international
community should promote greater cooperation
and strategic coherence in the context of conflict
prevention in Africa. Establishing a process for
planning and defining the joint mandates of African
Union peace operations authorized by the Security
Council is essential to their effectiveness. More
real-time consultations with the African Union and
other relevant regional organizations, along with joint
assessments and reviews, among other things, are vital
for recommending coherent options to decision-making
bodies for the timely prevention of conflicts, including,
but not limited to, preventive diplomacy. Greater

S/PV. 8407

flexibility in the interpretation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations would substantially
reduce divergent approaches in areas related to peace
and international security. The United Nations-AU
Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, signed in April 2017, provides a good
basis for institutionalizing that practice.
Secondly, we must work together to resolve
seemingly intractable conflicts by building resilience
through sustainable post-conflict reconstruction and
development initiatives. That means supporting the
African Union’s efforts to combat violent extremism
by increasing investment in political, humanitarian,
human rights and development strategies. In addition,
the African Union Special Fund on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism, the African Centre for the
Study and Research on Terrorism and the Nouakchott and
Djibouti processes constitute important coordination
platforms for supporting the African Union in its fight
against terrorism.
Thirdly, funding for African peace support
operations continues to be the subject of endless
discussion. With the progress that has been achieved
in Somalia, the Sudan, Mali and the Central African
Republic, the African Union and its subregional
organizations have demonstrated their capabilities
in acting as first responders to African conflicts. In
complementarity with the United Nations, they are
contributing to collective security as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations. We hope that the
draft resolution to be introduced next month under
Côte d’Ivoire’s presidency of the Security Council, on
behalf of the three African countries that are members
of the Council, will lead to a more harmonious AUUnited Nations partnership in preventing, mediating
and managing violent conflicts, as well as in more joint
efforts to increase resource mobilization.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that the growing
need for women in peacekeeping operations today is
more evident than ever if we are to be able to prevent and
resolve conflicts, support complex political transitions
and maintain peace through national stakeholders.
(spoke in English)
Finally, I would like to conclude by paying tribute
to the brave women and men who are working to
implement their peacekeeping tasks, as well as to the
Malawian and Tanzanian peacekeepers who recently

18-3907459/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

lost their lives in the field while defending the cause
of peace.

of those activities would allow the United Nations to
better focus on its core mandate of peacekeeping.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.

We therefore join others in calling on the United
Nations to work more effectively with those regional
actors by providing the necessary support, in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
In that regard, we welcome the recent progress made
in enhancing the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the AU, including the signing of the
Joint United Nations-AU Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. It is also encouraging
to note the greater number of joint briefings and field
visits by senior officials of the two organizations.
Going forward, I wish to highlight three areas in which
we would like to see further progress.

Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa. I also want to
thank Secretary-General Guterres and Commissioner
Chergui for their informative briefings.
Given the complex, interconnected nature of
today’s global challenges, it is widely recognized
that the United Nations cannot maintain peace and
security around the globe alone. At the same time, in
recent years a growing number of actors have gained
a better grasp of the realities on the ground and of the
resources and expertise needed to address Africa’s
peace and security challenges. Building strong,
strategic partnerships with these stakeholders is now
an imperative. As the Secretary-General said, the
world already has the resources to deliver. The United
Nations, which has a brand like no other, is best placed
to convene and coordinate these different actors. It is
in that context that we welcome the fact that more than
150 Member States and regional organizations have
endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which aims
to make peace operations more fit for purpose by
enhancing collaboration between the United Nations
and the relevant actors.
The role of regional and subregional organizations
in Africa has become especially important for
implementing these shared commitments. Since its
establishment nearly two decades ago, the African
Union (AU) in particular has been making considerable
progress in strengthening ownership and enhancing
its capacity to promote peace and security on
the continent. Regional economic communities have
also been playing an increasingly proactive role in
their respective regions. Most notably, the Economic
Community of West African States took the lead in
helping to resolve the political crises in The Gambia in
late 2016 and deployed forces to maintain stability in
the country. The comparative advantage of regional and
subregional organizations vis-à-vis the United Nations
has been particularly evident in peace enforcement and
counter-terrorism operations. A clear division of labour
60/68

First, it is important that the AU and the United
Nations work together more strategically to facilitate
sustainable political solutions on the ground. Based
on a joint analysis and assessment of the situation,
the mandates of the United Nations and AU peace
operations should be designed as part of a broader
common political strategy. We hope that the ongoing
reforms at the United Nations and the AU will allow the
two organizations to better achieve that end.
Secondly, we encourage the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council to closely align their
agendas and to convene more regular meetings between
them to make effective joint decisions and actions.
Thirdly, there is a need to provide predictable,
flexible and sustainable financing for AU-led peace
operations, as recognized by the Security Council
and the wider membership through the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. We positively view the Council’s intention
set out in resolution 2378 (2017) to consider practical
steps to finance AU-led peace operations through
United Nations assessed contributions on a case-bycase basis, provided that the standards ensuring
oversight and accountability are met.
In that regard, we welcome the progress that the
AU, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
has made in developing compliance and reporting
frameworks. We also welcome the AU’s initiative to
enhance its financial self-reliance by revitalizing the
AU Peace Fund and meet its commitment to fund
25 per cent of African peace operations. We understand
that the United Nations and the AU will soon present
a joint road map to address existing concerns on the
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

accountability and compliance frameworks. We hope
that those initiatives, including the draft resolution
on the financing of AU-led peace operations to be
introduced by the three African members of the Council
next month, will help to move the discussions forward.
Next year, the Republic of Korea is expected to
join the ranks of the top 10 financial contributors to the
United Nations peacekeeping budget for the first time.
We feel a greater sense of responsibility to ensure that
peacekeeping operations remain an effective tool for
maintaining peace and security in Africa. In addition
to deploying troops to South Sudan, we have been
supporting the AU’s efforts to strengthen its capacity
to maintain peace and security through the Peace
Fund. More specifically, we deployed a level-2 hospital
in Gao, Mali, in July and we are now supporting the
Continental Logistics Base of the African Standby
Force in Cameroon, which will provide the adequate
infrastructure for the rapid deployment of African
troops. To enhance women’s participation in AU peace
operations, we are helping to build the necessary
capacity within the Peacebuilding Commission.
In closing, I wish to assure the Council of my
Government’s commitment to playing its due part in
strengthening peace operations in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the Chinese
delegation, under its presidency of the Security Council
for this month, for prioritizing multilateralism as
an essential mechanism for preserving international
peace and security and promoting economic and social
progress. I would also like to commend the initiative
to convene this important debate on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa. As a major troopand police-contributing country, Senegal commends
the concern shown by actors, including the Council,
in the spirit of triangular dialogue, with regard to
making peacekeeping operations more effective and
able to respond to the pressing current and future needs
and challenges.
I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, and the African Union (AU) Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Smaїl Chergui, for their
excellent contributions. I would also like to commend
the statement made by the representative of Côte d’Ivoire
on behalf of the three African members of the Council

S/PV. 8407

and reaffirm Senegal’s support for the continuing efforts
to find definitive answers to the issue of predictable
financing for African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations.
The conclusion is clear: most of the activities
planned within the framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
particularly for peacekeeping operations, involve
Africa. This debate is therefore timely in that it offers
the opportunity to evaluate efforts to support Africa in
its resolute determination to take control of its destiny,
including with regard to peace and security, without
which the sustainable development that we all seek to
achieve through the Sustainable Development Goals
would be futile.
While we welcome the expressed will of the African
Union to fully assume its role as a key player in seeking
political solutions to disputes in Africa, including
through the AU Peace Fund, which was launched three
days ago at the eleventh extraordinary summit of the
organization, my delegation commends the tangible
progress made in the context of the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative and the
subsequent Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which
has been endorsed by 151 Member States, including
Senegal, and four regional organizations, are a renewed
opportunity to make prevention and mediation a top
priority in Africa. In the spirit of the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446) and resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017), we call on the two organizations, including
the United Nations-AU Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security, to continue consultations on the issue of
predictable and sustainable support for African Union
peace operations in order to help make the African
Union initiative to silence weapons by 2020 a reality.
My delegation also welcomes the attention given
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Economic
and Social Council to the situation in the Sahel, not
only in terms of the challenges ahead but also in terms
of the opportunities in the region, which deserves the
full support of the international community. I also
welcome the continued focus of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union, in particular
the strengthening of the African Union’s peacekeeping

18-3907461/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

20/11/2018

capacities. Moreover, given the increasing commitment
and involvement of French-speaking countries in
peacekeeping operations, as well as the deployment
of peacekeeping missions in those countries, mainly
in Africa, my delegation reaffirms the importance
of promoting multilingualism in the context of
those missions.

will need to place greater emphasis on training and
capacity-building. In that context, Senegal has set
up a dedicated training centre, in accordance with
United Nations standards, where contingents undergo
predeployment training that takes into account not only
feedback but also, and above all, awareness of the issue
of sexual abuse and exploitation.

For its part, whether it be in a regional or
subregional context, Senegal will continue to work,
together with actors such as the United Nations, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union, to make prevention and mediation
priorities in seeking and maintaining peace in Africa.
In the context of that preventive approach, which calls
for deep reflection on the crises in Africa, President
Macky Sall, among other initiatives, established the
Dakar International Forum on Peace and Security in
Africa, the fifth of which was held on 5 and 6 November.

Senegal remains ready to share its unique
experience in peacekeeping, including through SouthSouth and triangular cooperation. It is equally essential
for both organizations to make the zero-tolerance policy
of sexual abuse and exploitation a high priority. The
same is true for the increase in women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000).

If the expected outcomes of the peacekeeping
operations deployed in Africa are to be achieved,
those missions must be based on a well-defined
political strategy, with focused, clear, realistic and
achievable mandates, while taking into account the
peacebuilding dimension.
Beyond regional and subregional organizations,
it is necessary to strive to make cooperation with
neighbouring States a reality on the ground, while
establishing a relationship of trust among missions,
States and host populations. More than anywhere else,
there is also the issue of adapting missions deployed in
Africa to the sociocultural realities and the environment
on the ground.
In Mali, for example, our troops operate in a sensitive
context, with targeted attacks against Blue Helmets,
United Nations personnel, the people and civilian
infrastructure. That means appropriate equipment and
training in order to operate effectively and safely. In the
same vein, we must consider, where necessary, the use
of modern technologies. The experience of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic has shown that the responsible use of those
tools has a positive impact.
Given that missions have become multidimensional,
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
62/68

We join in offering our condolences to Tanzania
and Malawi, whose Blue Helmets have recently fallen
in theatres of operation. I reiterate the strongest
condemnation of any attack on United Nations personnel
and join in paying tribute to the men and women who,
sometimes at the risk of their lives, put themselves at
the service of the noble ideals of our Organization.
As a champion of pan-Africanism and having
enshrined in its Constitution its readiness to surrender
all or part of its sovereignty in order to achieve African
unity, Senegal reaffirms its ongoing commitment to
work for international peace and security, particularly
in Africa, including by pursuing its high-quality
contribution to the peacekeeping operations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to commend you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. Portugal attaches
particular importance to peacekeeping efforts in Africa.
Six of the seven United Nations missions
and peacekeeping operations in which Portugal
participates are in Africa, namely, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
With respect to MINUSCA, Portugal participates
with its largest contingent — 165 military personnel
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

and 13 police officers, including a rapid reaction
force — operating without restrictions or reservations
in circumstances that require a high level of mobility
and rapid response, in particular to deal with the
situation of unprotected civilians.
With regard to MINUSMA, our participation is
a concrete example of best practices of cooperation
among the various States Members of the United
Nations. That initiative, which takes the form of a pilot
project on sharing air capacity in the context of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, illustrates well
the huge potential that joint work brings to strategic
coherence, the efficient use of available resources and
the improvement and effectiveness of missions.
The increasing scope and complexity of mandates
have not always been matched by the resources
and capacities required by missions to address
contemporary, asymmetrical and, often, transnational
threats. We therefore fully share the importance attached
by the Secretary-General to conflict prevention, the
stabilization of tensions, the primacy of politics and
the use of diplomacy as a preferred means to achieve
lasting peace.
Indeed, Portugal is one of the 151 signatories to
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, further to the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
In that regard, my country supports the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the context of peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. The complementary
action of the European Union, including through
trilateral cooperation in various scenarios and formats
on the African continent, represents value added.
As to how that cooperation can be improved, we
support the measures contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on options for authorization and
support for African Union peace support operations of
26 May 2017 (S/2017/454). Indeed, that document sets
out various modalities to ensure flexible and predictable
funding for missions. It proposes responsibility and
audit procedures. In that context, it stresses the need
for African Union peacekeeping forces to be properly
trained on respect for human rights and the code of
conduct in peacekeeping operations.
Portugal also supports peace operations in Africa
through the African Peace Facility of the European

S/PV. 8407

Union. We believe that it is essential to ensure
predictable and sustainable funding for African peace
operations, whether led by the African Union or
regional organizations through the African Union.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Portugal remains ready to participate in the training
of military contingents from other troop-contributing
countries, as is the case within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I thank China,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. I would
first like to offer our condolences to Malawi and
Tanzania. It is a cruel reminder of what it costs to have
peacekeepers all around the world.
Although not explicitly provided for in the Charter
of the United Nations, peacekeeping has evolved over
the past seven decades to become the most visible part of
the United Nations actions and activities. Let us remind
ourselves that peacekeeping has been brought about
from the thirtieth floor by bold diplomats, not as part of
the Charter. It was an innovation. Yet that situation can
be likened to a double-edged sword in that any failure
to deliver properly in that area could have a detrimental
impact on the credibility of the United Nations. There
are many examples to testify to that reality.
The focus on Africa in today’s debate is also very
pertinent for two reasons. First, Africa remains the
main theatre of United Nations peacekeeping efforts,
with 7 out of the 14 peacekeeping operations, and no
doubt the most complicated and robust ones, currently
operating in Africa. Secondly, it is on African soil that
United Nations peacekeepers face the most serious and
complex challenges, ranging from the fact that they are
deployed in dangerous environments where there is
no peace to keep to the increasing threat of terrorism
and violent extremism, which poses fundamental
questions about the doctrine and practice of United
Nations peacekeeping.
In other words, while the peacekeeping context in
Africa has changed dramatically over the past decade,
the same cannot be said of the concept and practice
of United Nations peacekeeping, which, despite some
notable exceptions, continues to be underpinned by
the formal principles of impartiality, neutrality and the
limited use of force. Therefore, while acknowledging

18-3907463/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

the steps taken so far to adjust peacekeeping to that
new environment, including the recent adoption of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which my country has of
course fully endorsed, that should not be the end of the
process. Collectively, we should continue to analyse
recent trends and explore ways and means to make
sure that peacekeeping is fit for purpose given the new
realities on the ground.
On that note, allow me to underline the following
key points, which we believe to be important. First,
peacekeeping cannot succeed without a viable political
process. It is therefore important and urgent to redouble
efforts to accelerate the pursuit of political solutions.
Undertaking offensive military operations, although
necessary in some cases, should not translate into a
preference for military solutions. Even in counterterrorism contexts, beyond reducing the violence,
our objective should remain to encourage as many
stakeholders as possible to join the political process.
Secondly, while the mandates of peacekeeping
operations continue to expand — and I would
like to quote the Secretary-General, who has said
that current mandates “look like Christmas trees”
(S/PV.8218, p. 3) — we should be mindful of the fact
that peacekeeping on its own is only one element in
the effort to restore peace and security to countries in
conflict. In other words, while peacekeeping should
be empowered to create the conditions for lasting
stability, it cannot address all the underlying causes
of the situations that motivated its deployment. It is
therefore crucial for the international community to
step up its commitment towards post-conflict situations
well beyond the duration of the mandates of peace
operations. The need to strengthen the nexus between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in order to achieve
sustainable peace cannot be overemphasized.
Thirdly, I would like to draw the attention of the
Council to a real risk that we have already seen in a
number of situations. Owing to their ever-growing
responsibilities, in certain cases peacekeeping
operations have substituted for failed States in providing
the population’s basic needs, including security. They
have increasingly become an alternative that, instead
of promoting the rebuilding of national capacities, has
had the opposite effect on that process. In dealing with
that situation, we should bear in mind that the only
way to achieve sustainable peace is by building strong,
responsive and accountable State institutions at the
64/68

20/11/2018

local and the national levels that will be responsible for
delivering essential services.
Fourthly, and lastly, it is necessary to strengthen
partnerships for peacekeeping operations. As the
nature of international peace and security threats has
evolved, no single organization has the legitimacy
and the capabilities required to act alone. Since
its establishment in 2002, the African Union has
demonstrated a clear comparative advantage in two
particular kinds of situations: first, in missions where
offensive operations are needed and the United Nations
is unable to deploy; and, secondly, where the Security
Council is unable to mobilize the requisite political
consensus to initiate action. It is therefore important
to build a strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union based on mutual
respect, solidarity and, most important, adherence to
the principle of comparative advantage.
That brings me to the issue of financing, which
remains one of the most important challenges facing
such a partnership in the area of peace and security.
Funding is indeed a central concern when it comes to
launching and sustaining African Union peace support
operations. The ongoing African Union Mission in
Somalia testifies to that reality. That is why the African
Union has consistently called for predictable and
sustainable financing through United Nations assessed
contributions for African Union-led peace operations.
Let me draw attention to the decision that was
taken only two days ago at a summit with regard to
the reinstatement of the Peace Fund of the African
Union. When Africa calls on the Security Council
to do more regarding the issue of funding, the call
should be understood in the context of the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, which entrusts
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security to the Security
Council. Therefore, by providing responses to threats
to peace and security, the African Union is doing so on
behalf of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. My delegation also
welcomes the informative briefings by the SecretaryGeneral and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security.
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Kenya recognizes the vital role played by
peacekeeping as a critical tool available to the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We remain firmly committed to peacekeeping
for a better world. Kenya would once again like to pay
tribute to the Blue Berets and Blue Helmets who have
paid the ultimate price for peace. In particular, we
pay a special tribute to the peacekeepers of Mali and
Tanzania who lost their lives last week serving in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our prayers are
with their loved ones.
Peace and indeed security are a vital component of
development and the well-being of people throughout
the world. Africa, too, faces some peace and security
challenges that continue to undermine development on
the continent. In an effort to address them, the African
Union-led peace operations face several difficulties,
including inadequately resourced peace missions
with regard to both personnel and equipment and the
inability to fund the post-conflict reconstruction and
peacebuilding that are necessary for a country emerging
from conflict. That is frequently compounded by a lack
of funds dedicated to such peace operations due to the
overreliance on donors.
Most of those challenges can be appropriately
addressed by deepening the strategic cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union (AU).
The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the AU Commission, presents an excellent opportunity
to boost coordination between the two organizations
strategically and operationally. The regular interaction
between the two organizations, including through the
hosting of joint biannual meetings, has led to a better
understanding of the strategic environment surrounding
conflicts on the continent. The two institutions should
take advantage of the opportunity presented by the
partnership to ensure a greater degree of coherence
and coordination and constantly involve each other
in the planning and execution of peace and security
operations to synergize their efforts. That will help to
align the visions of the two bodies.
We appreciate the basic principles of peacekeeping
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
the primacy of politics as key to conflict prevention and
resolution. However, the circumstances surrounding
the peace and security environment have changed

S/PV. 8407

over time. Let me, for instance, highlight a few, such
as the African Union Mission in Somalia, which faces
threats that continue to challenge the conventional
peacekeeping doctrine. Similar threats are facing the
Group of Five for the Sahel initiative in Mali, where
peacekeepers are a direct target. That calls for a rethink
of doctrine and concept of operations in such missions
so as to align them to the new realities on the ground.
Similarly, although authorized by the Security Council,
such missions suffer from a mismatch of resources
as a result of reliance on voluntary sources that are
rarely predictable. Accordingly, funding such peace
operations from the assessed contributions remains the
most viable option to ensure sustainability.
With regard to training, it is worth noting that no two
missions are identical in either context or environment.
Each mission presents unique challenges by virtue of
the threats it faces and its environment. It is for that
reason that equipment and predeployment training need
to be tailored to suit each mission’s environment and
threats. Africa is host to the five largest peacekeeping
missions and contributes over half of the peacekeepers
in those missions. It is therefore important that training
be conducted in environments similar to those in
which they operate. Kenya has, for instance, offered
the internationally recognized International Peace
Support Training Centre to the United Nations for the
training of peacekeepers. The Centre offers excellent
training facilities and training areas with a capacity to
accommodate an infantry battalion. We look forward
to partnering with the United Nations and other
stakeholders to advance peacekeeping training.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): We thank the presidency
of China for convening this important debate. My
appreciation goes to Mr. António Guterres, the
Secretary-General, for his leadership and commitment
to peace and security in Africa, as well as his insightful
remarks. I am also grateful to Mr. Smaïl Chergui,
the African Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and
Security, for his illuminating presentation.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
United Nations-African Union cooperation on African
Union-led peace support operations, as well as the
laudable adoption of resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017), which focus on the need for sustained, predictable

18-3907465/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

and flexible funding for African Union-led peace
support operations authorized by the Security Council.
The root causes of conflicts in Africa are
multifaceted. A comprehensive approach is required
for their resolution. Above all, our response must be
situated within the rubric of the quest for collective
security, which does not rest on any one country or
region but on the international community acting in
concert. We must therefore have a shared strategic vision
of our goals, recalling that peacekeeping in Africa is
an integral part of the maintenance of international
peace and security, for which the Security Council has
primary responsibility.
Nigeria’s experience in Sierra Leone and Liberia has
taught us a great deal about the challenges of regional
peacekeeping, principally in financing, equipping and
mission-support arrangements. Africa constitutes a
majority of matters on the Council’s agenda. Invariably,
those matters are also on the agenda of the African
Union, which is frequently called upon to respond. Such
demands placed on the AU far outweigh its resources
and capacities to respond effectively. The consequences
of ineffective response would include mission failure,
increased instability and a reluctance among potential
partners to contribute to what is perceived to be a
failing system, among others. Therefore, we must use
our political authority to ensure that, where regional
capacities exist, appropriate support follows. Without
a truly strategic partnership, the enormous investments
in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
will continue to be arbitrary and will not achieve the
desired end.
Although financing AU peacekeeping operations
remains a daunting challenge, the landmark Prodi report
of the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to African Union peacekeeping operations
of 2008 (S/2008/813), the Brahimi report of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (S/2000/809) and
the report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (S/2015/446) remind us that financing
options are not difficult to identify. The problem
persists because stakeholders have failed to adopt the
far-reaching and creative alternatives required. Given
that the current financial frameworks for partnership
in peacekeeping are not conducive to building a
sustainable long-term strategy, it is imperative that the
Council endorse a financing option that guarantees the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
for AU peacekeeping operations mandated by the
66/68

20/11/2018

United Nations. In that regard, Nigeria welcomes the
Action for Peace initiative of the Secretary-General and
looks forward to its implementation.
We encourage the AU to continue with its
institutional reform process, as well as the development
of a long-term capacity-building road map. We believe
that the United Nations Secretariat can play a key role
in pulling that framework together in order to improve
the technical support to the African Union. There may
also be scope to support initiatives such as the Nigerian
Army Peacekeeping Centre, in Jaji, Kaduna state, to
enhance its capacity to train and prepare AU troops for
the planned African Standby Force.
Nigeria recognizes the increasingly important role
women play in conflict resolution and in building stable
communities. It welcomes their increased participation
in peacekeeping operations, as they have no doubt
brought a critical skill set to peacekeeping, particularly
in addressing gender-based issues in the various
missions that they serve.
Incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse continue
to occur in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Nigeria strongly condemns that abhorrent practice of a
few who take delight in abusing those they are meant to
protect. Last year, our President Muhammadu Buhari
joined the Secretary-General’s circle of leadership
to champion the fight against that menace. Nigeria
will continue to lend strong support to ending sexual
exploitation and abuse in all its forms and ramifications.
We strongly urge the Secretary-General, with the
support of all Member States, to continue to intensify
efforts to find sustainable funding for peacekeeping
missions in Africa. It is only by acting together that
we can demonstrate the shared responsibility of the
international community for the maintenance of peace
and security.
In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to all
those who have made the supreme sacrifice in serving
as Blue Helmets around the world. We also offer
our deepest condolences to their families, friends
and Governments. Nigeria salutes the courage of
peacekeepers, humanitarian workers, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders for their hard
work, often in difficult circumstances, to ensure the
safety and security of the world.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
18-39074

20/11/2018

Peace and security in Africa

Mrs. Koçyiğit Grba (Turkey): We would also like
to join previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate.
Allow me at the outset to pay tribute to the United
Nations peacekeepers who put their lives at risk in the
line of duty and express our deepest sympathy for those
who paid the ultimate price for the noble cause of peace,
most recently in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic.
Peacekeeping is the flagship activity of the United
Nations aimed at assisting host countries in the difficult
transition from war to peace. The intensification and
sophistication of asymmetrical threats posed by terrorist
and extremist groups is a serious challenge to United
Nations peacekeeping, both in terms of force protection
and the implementation of the mandate. In that context,
peacekeeping missions should be supported logistically
so as to be well equipped, trained and prepared to meet
the challenges. We need to have in place predictable,
professional and flexible logistic support systems, as
well as the necessary tools and means for increasing
the performance of our troops and police. Peacekeeping
is constantly evolving and being tailored to meet new
challenges. The United Nations has come a long way
in that endeavour, and its peacekeeping capabilities
have progressed considerably over time. We welcome
the efforts of the Secretary-General and his Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which we fully endorse.
The diversity of challenges associated with
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts requires the
contribution of a wide range of actors, including regional
and subregional organizations, civil society and the
private sector. As the dimensions of conflicts and crises
now outpace the United Nations response capacity, we
should adapt our approaches to respond to present and
future crises. Various regional organizations, such
as the African Union (AU), have become established
actors in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and
the United Nations should be able to support and make
use of the capabilities of those organizations. In that
regard, we value the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union and other regional and
subregional bodies on the continent. Turkey encourages
the expansion of the United Nations-AU partnership
so as to include the areas of institutional capacitybuilding, security sector reform, the protection of
civilians, human rights, gender mainstreaming and
combating organized crime. We must take stock of
the positive efforts of the international community to

S/PV. 8407

reform peacekeeping missions to fully restore peace
and tranquillity throughout the continent.
The ultimate objective of our missions in Africa
needs to be generating success stories of African
ownership and responsiveness in cooperation with
the international community and national authorities,
consistent with the concept of African solutions to
African problems. Somalia is a textbook example of the
partnership and collaboration of the United Nations,
the African Union and the European Union (EU). We
greatly appreciate the noble endeavour of the African
Union Mission in Somalia in the pursuit of bringing
peace and stability throughout that country. In that
regard, a special debt of gratitude should be extended for
the sacrifices made by the troop-contributing countries.
With that notion in mind, we also maintain our support
for Somalia in numerous areas through bilateral means.
We are particularly focusing on capacity-building for
Somali institutions in terms of military and policing in
close cooperation with our international partners.
Peace and security constitute important pillars
of our approach towards Africa. Turkey has allocated
resources to the activities of the Eastern African
Standby Force from its annual contributions to the
African Union. We are also working on providing
further support to the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises. Turkish peacekeepers continue
to serve in various United Nations, NATO and EU
missions across the globe, including in Afghanistan,
Africa, the Balkans and the Middle East, where they
contribute to the training of security personnel and
the capacity- and institution-building of military and
security forces and provide technical assistance to and
strengthen civilian and law enforcement institutions.
We will maintain our support, and we look forward
to contributing to upcoming debates on responding
to the multitude of challenges faced by international
peacekeeping today.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the Chinese presidency for organizing this open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General and the African Union
(AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security for sharing
their thoughts on further advancing the strategic
partnership between the two organizations with a focus
on peacekeeping operations.

18-3907467/68

S/PV.8407

Peace and security in Africa

We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We continue to underscore the primacy of Africa’s
leading role in resolving its own peace and security
issues. It is critical that the political peace processes
spearheaded by the African regional and subregional
organizations be duly factored into the mandate, design
and delivery of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations concerned. The positive impact of United
Nations-AU joint analyses of conflicts and earlywarning assessments, supported by joint visits and
statements, has been evident in both policymaking and
implementation. The issue of financing United Nationsauthorized African peace support operations has been
addressed in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Resolution 2378
(2017) reaffirmed the need for considering practical
steps for partly financing AU peace support operations
through United Nations assessed contributions on a
case-by-case basis.
It is imperative that the Secretary-General’s
constructive suggestions for United Nations-AU joint
action and funding be given due consideration at the
relevant legislative bodies, especially against the
backdrop of sustained resource mobilization for the
AU Peace Fund by African countries themselves. We
agree with the Secretary General that, in the case of
complex peacekeeping theatres in Mali, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan, the traditional structures of
peacekeeping operations need to be revisited through
a multidimensional and multi-stakeholder approach.
The threats posed by various non-State actors in those
contexts require further interface and coordination
between the United Nations and the relevant regional
and subregional entities deployed on the ground.
Bangladesh values its association with Africa and
cherishes a number of instances in which its engagement

68/68

20/11/2018

has played an instrumental role in achieving sustainable
peace on the ground. We reaffirm our readiness to
further cooperate with the AU, preferably through the
United Nations and in full respect for the AU’s ownership
of its mandated operations. In that connection, we wish
to make the following points.
First, the continued fatalities and casualties suffered
by United Nations peacekeepers in certain African
peacekeeping theatres remains a critical area of concern.
Unwarranted yet targeted attacks against United
Nations peacekeepers are tantamount to war crimes,
and there should be no impunity for perpetrators. It is
critical that further investment be made in improving
the capacity of the host States concerned in bringing
those responsible for such heinous crimes to justice.
Secondly, we maintain that it would be selfdefeating to engage United Nations peacekeepers in
direct counter-terrorism operations. In certain African
theatres, the United Nations peacekeeping mission may
provide support to the relevant State in strengthening
its counter-terrorism strategies and capabilities.
Thirdly, we attach importance to peacebuilding
support for the host States as part of peacekeeping
mandates in order to facilitate the smooth transition from
peacekeeping operations. The role of peacekeepers in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace is well recognized
and should be supported through needs-based, contextspecific priorities identified through consultation with
the host States in an inclusive manner.
Fourthly, sharing best practices with and training
interested African troop- and police-contributing
countries have always been one of Bangladesh’s
priorities, building on its three decades’ experience
of peacekeeping. We maintain our offer to organize
customized training programmes for African
peacekeepers, including female peacekeepers, in our
dedicated training institutes.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

18-39074
