S/2015/699

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 September 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force for the period from
29 May to 28 August 2015
I. Introduction
1.
The present report gives an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) during the past three months, pursuant to
the mandate contained in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and extended in
subsequent resolutions, most recently resolution 2229 (2015).

II. Situation in the area and activities of the Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic generally was maintained, albeit in a continuously volatile environment
attributable to the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and notwithstanding
a number of significant violations of the Agreement on Disengagement between
Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974, which are
set out below. The Syrian armed forces carried out military activities and security
operations against armed groups, often in response to offensives carried out by the
armed groups in the area of separation and the area of limitation on the Bravo side.
Inside the area of separation, the presence of the Syrian armed forces and military
equipment, as well as any other armed personnel and military equipment other than
that of UNDOF, is in violation of the Disengage ment of Forces Agreement. As
underscored by the Security Council in its resolution 2229 (2015), there should be
no military activity of any kind in the area of separation.
3.
A number of significant incidents occurred across the ceasefire line in
violation of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. On 13 June, United Nations
personnel at observation post 51 observed nine rockets being fired from locations in
the vicinity of Um Batinah and Mashara in the area of separation. The rockets
landed in the area south of the observation post, with at least two landing west of
the ceasefire line. The following night, on 14 June, four rockets were fired from a
location in Mashara, three of which landed across the ceasefire line. On 3 August,
United Nations personnel at the UNDOF operational base, Camp Ziouani, heard two
heavy explosions from a north-western direction. The following day, an Observer
Group Golan investigation team confirmed that at least one rocket had landed on the
Alpha side, approximately one and a half kilometres from Camp Ziouani. The
15-14901 (E)

110915

*1514901*

S/2015/699

results of the investigation suggested that the round was fired from the Bravo side.
Syrian authorities subsequently informed UNDOF that a Palestinian “terrorist cell”
had been responsible for the rockets fired across the ceasefire line on 3 August.
4.
In the early evening of 20 August, the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) informed UNDOF that the Israel Defense Forces had conveyed
to UNIFIL that two rockets had been launched from the Bravo side of the UND OF
area of operations across the ceasefire line with the Syrian Arab Republic into
northern Israel, impacting in the vicinity of Qiryat Shmona. Shortly thereafter, at
approximately 1830 hours, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that two
rockets fired by Palestinian Islamic Jihad from new Quneitra had impacted in the
vicinity of Qiryat Shmona. Approximately one hour later, UNDOF personnel on the
Alpha side heard three rockets launched from the north of Camp Ziouani, and
United Nations personnel at position 22 observed one rocket fired from an Israel
Defense Forces position in their vicinity. UNDOF personnel also observed a rocket
fired from the Alpha side moving in an easterly direction towards the Bravo side. At
the same time, United Nations personnel at observation post 51 observed two
projectiles impacting in the vicinity of Al Ba’ath. On 20 August, at 2330 hours,
UNDOF personnel observed six heavy explosions in the area of separation,
approximately 10 kilometres east of Buq’ata, followed by a s eries of continual
anti-aircraft gunfire from Khan Arnabah and Al Ba’ath. Shortly thereafter, UNDOF
personnel in observation post 51 heard a helicopter overhead and observed firing in
Khan Arnabah and Al Ba’ath in the central part of the area of separation, whil e at
the same time UNDOF personnel at United Nations position Hermon South and at
observation post 51 observed nine heavy explosions in Khan Arnabah. On the
morning of 21 August, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that it had fired
at a Palestinian Islamic Jihad position near new Quneitra in the area of separation in
response to the 20 August attack and to pre-empt further attacks. UNDOF was not in
a position to observe the alleged rocket firing from the Bravo side or ascertain the
points of origin or impact of the rockets. The Syrian armed forces informed UNDOF
that the rockets had not been fired from their positions. The Senior Syrian Arab
Delegate informed UNDOF that an Israel Defense Forces air strike had targeted the
headquarters of a Syrian armed forces brigade in Sa’sa’. Throughout these
developments, the Force Commander remained in contact with the Syrian
authorities and the Israel Defense Forces urging them to exercise maximum restraint
and prevent escalation of the situation.
5.
In addition, on 13 and 14 June, 6 July and 3 and 17 August, six incidents of
firing across the ceasefire line, including with heavy machine guns, anti -aircraft
machine guns and small arms, occurred as a result of the clashes on the Bravo side.
In the course of the fighting, several rounds of machine gun and small arms fire
impacted across the ceasefire line.
6.
Crossing of the ceasefire line by civilians, primarily shepherds, was observed
on an almost daily basis. On at least five occasions in June, United Nations
personnel at observation post 54 observed interactions between persons from the
Bravo side and the Israel Defense Forces at an Israeli technical fence gate, including
the transfer of persons, mainly on stretchers, from the Bravo to the Alpha side and
from the Alpha to the Bravo side. In addition, on 12 June, United Nations personnel
at observation post 73 observed an Israel Defense Forces patrol on the Alpha side
accompanied by two armoured personnel carriers and a bulldozer. The Israel
Defense Forces patrol met with a small group of armed persons from the Bravo side

2/11

15-14901

S/2015/699

west of the ceasefire line. Following the meeting, the Israel Defense Forces
personnel, along with the armoured personnel carriers and bulldozer, moved south,
after which the UNDOF personnel lost sight of them.
7.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed by the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line. UNDOF protested all fi ring
across the ceasefire line to the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate and the Israel Defense
Forces. All incidents of firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire
line, as well as the crossing by individuals of the ceasefire line, are violations of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. In his regular interactions with both sides, the
Force Commander continued to call upon both parties to the Disengagement
Agreement to exercise utmost restraint and prevent an escalation of the situation
across the ceasefire line.
8.
UNDOF observed and reported almost daily instances of transborder
movements of unidentified individuals, some of whom were armed and observed
firing occasionally at positions of the Syrian armed forces, between Lebanon and
the Syrian Arab Republic in the northern part of the area of separation.
9.
In the context of the Syrian conflict, after several months of relative quiet in
the northern parts of the areas of separation and limitation, intense fighting erupted
during the reporting period in Hadar, straddling the Bravo line, Jabbata, in the area
of separation, and Bayt Jinn, in the area of limitation. Armed groups attacked
positions of the Syrian armed forces to the east and north -east of Hadar. On 16 June,
armed groups operating in the Bayt Jinn enclave broke out of that area towards the
west and south-west in an apparent effort to link up with armed groups in Jabbata in
the area of separation. Initially, the armed groups took over positions of the Syrian
armed forces on a hill that dominates the surrounding terrain, 2 kilometres northeast of Hadar. The attack was supported with indirect mortar fire by armed groups
operating in the central part of the area of separation, south -west of Khan Arnabah.
In the days following the attack, Syrian armed forces engaged armed groups with
heavy artillery fire and air strikes as the armed groups approached their positions
from both the north and the south, in the vicinity of vacated United Nations
position 31, near a road junction linking Bayt Jinn with Jabbata. Clashes continued
between Syrian armed forces and armed groups to gain control of the hill situated
north-east of Hadar. From 19 to 21 June, UNDOF observed at least 27 air strikes
conducted by Syrian armed forces in the northern and central parts of the areas of
separation and limitation, primarily around the village of Hadar. Syrian armed
forces maintained their positions and retain control of the road network leading
north-east to Bayt Jinn. On a number of occasions during July and August, armed
groups attacked positions of the Syrian armed forces in the northern parts of the
areas of separation and limitation. Syrian armed forces continued to engage in direct
and indirect fire to contain armed groups in Jabbata, Trunje and Ufaniyah in the a rea
of separation and in Bayt Jinn, Mazra’at Bayt Jinn and Mughur al -Mir in the area of
limitation.
10. On 22 August, United Nations personnel at position Hermon Hotel observed a
group of five armed elements open fire on a Syrian armed forces patrol on Mo unt
Hermon in the northern part of the area of separation. Two Syrian armed forces
personnel were injured and three were detained by the armed group. United Nations
personnel at position Hermon Base observed the armed elements taking the detained

15-14901

3/11

S/2015/699

Syrian armed forces personnel towards the direction of Shab’a in Lebanon, leaving
the injured two on the scene, who were later evacuated by the Syrian armed forces.
11. In the central part of the areas of separation and limitation, the situation
remained largely unchanged. UNDOF observed intermittent exchanges of artillery,
mortar and heavy machine gun fire. During the clashes that occurred around Hadar,
on 17 June, armed groups launched simultaneous attacks targeting Tal al -Kurum in
the area of separation and Tal ash Shar, Tal al Bassaq and the town of Jaba in the
area of limitation, using direct and indirect fire. The attacks were repelled by Syrian
armed forces.
12. Armed groups continued to exercise control of most of the southern parts of
the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. The Syrian armed forces
targeted with artillery fire locations along the front line between them and armed
groups in Mashara, Kafr Nasij, Kafr Shams, Al Harrah, Zamrin and Simlin. On
3 June, UNDOF observed air strikes north-west of AlMuallaqah along the Bravo
line. In the southern part of the area of limitation, UNDOF observed intermittent
clashes in the vicinity of Al Magles, Abu Hasar, Lurkasi, Ain Dhakar, Tasil, Ash
Shajarah and Ain Nafiah. Although the United Nations does not have the means to
verify reports independently, several sources indicated that fighting continued
between the coalition led by Jabhat al-Nusra, a listed terrorist group and an affiliate
of Al-Qaida, and the Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade, which reportedly has pledged
allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant group.
13. As a reaction to the intense fighting in and around Hadar, which is a village
populated by members of the Druze community on the Bravo side, Druze residents
on the Alpha side organized several demonstrations related to the perception of an
increased threat to the Druze population on the Bravo side. The demonstrations took
place on 15 and 16 June in Majdal Chams on the Alpha side, an area close to United
Nations observation post 73. During the demonstrations on 16 June, approximately
50 vehicles and an estimated 300 demonstrators blocked the gate to United Nations
observation post 73. United Nations personnel were not the target of the
demonstrators. During the demonstrations of the Druze residents on the Alpha side
on 22 June in the vicinity of Majdal Chams, a group of Druze attacked an Israeli
military ambulance, which, on the basis of information provided by the Israel
Defense Forces, was transporting two wounded combatants from the Bravo side.
The demonstrators extracted the wounded from the ambulance and beat them,
killing one individual and critically injuring the other. An Israel Defense Forces
soldier was also injured during the incident.
14. Several incidents that jeopardized United Nations personnel and facilities
occurred. On 13 and 17 June, United Nations personnel at observation post 51 took
shelter on five occasions as a result of several rounds of fire having landed close to
the observation post, some of which also crossed the ceasefire line. There was no
injury to personnel and no damage to property at the post. On 14 June, armed
individuals fired 12 rounds of gunfire in the direction of six UNDOF personnel on
foot patrol in the Mount Hermon area, 3 of which landed close to the UNDOF
patrol. A reinforcement team was dispatched immediately to assist and recover the
patrol under fire. The incident did not result in injury to personnel or damage to
United Nations property. The investigation into the incident was unable to verify the
identity of the perpetrators. On two occasions during the reporting period, the
Sheraton Hotel in Damascus, which houses the temporary headquarters of UNDOF

4/11

15-14901

S/2015/699

and accommodates international staff members, came under mortar fire. On 27 July,
three mortars exploded in the parking area of the hotel, causing extensive material
damage to three UNDOF vehicles. No United Nations personnel were wounded. All
staff in the temporary headquarters remained in the designated shelter of the hotel
for one hour. On 3 August, one mortar hit the hotel compound without causing
injuries to any person or damage to United Nations property. Following the
incidents of 27 July and 3 August, the Sheraton Hotel in Damascus was assessed to
be a very high risk location. As a consequence, UNDOF is undertaking a
programme criticality review of the functions carried out at its headquarters and
representational office in Damascus and identifying options for relocation. UNDOF
continues to conduct regular security assessments of its locations to mitigate threats
to the safety and security of its personnel.
15. On 2 June, in two separate incidents, UNDOF observed stolen United Nations
armoured vehicles with scratched but visible United Nations markings in the area of
limitation on the Bravo side. One of the vehicles was seen moving between Sayda
and Brudjum, and the other was seen in Ghadir al-Bustan.
16. During the reporting period, the Syrian armed forces maintained their
positions in the area of separation, particularly around th e urban centres of Al Baath
and Khan Arnabah and the latter’s southern approaches, as well as in the area of
Al Wisiyah in the area of limitation, along the main road connecting Quneitra to
Damascus. Additional Syrian armed forces weapons, armoured vehicle s and artillery
weapons were observed in the surroundings of Hadar. The Syrian armed forces
generally deployed six tanks in the area of separation, including at their position at
Tal al-Kurum, and several others at locations immediately adjacent to the are a of
separation. During the fighting around Hadar on 4 August, UNDOF observed one
tank operating east of United Nations observation post 73, within the area of
separation. On 17 June, during the attack targeting locations south of Khan Arnabah,
armed groups were seen using at least two tanks in Um Batinah in the area of
limitation and five artillery guns that were deployed in Ruihinah. Units of Syrian
armed forces were seen using areas around the temporarily vacated United Nations
position 10 and observation post 71 as firing and observation positions.
17. UNDOF protested the presence of Syrian armed forces and equipment in the
area of separation and the firing into and inside the area of separation. The Force
Commander reiterated to the Syrian authorities the obligation of the Syrian armed
forces to halt military operations in the area of separation and to cease firing from
the area of limitation, stressing the importance of abiding by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and ensuring the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground.
18. On several occasions during the reporting period, UNDOF observed armed and
unarmed persons digging out and removing landmines from around United Nations
position 80 in the vicinity of the ceasefire line. On 19 July, United Nations
personnel at observation post 73 observed an explosion of an anti -personnel mine
close to the observation post. Prior to the explosion, two shepherds and a flock of
sheep were seen in the vicinity. After the explosion, the shepherds were observed to
be unharmed.
19. During the reporting period, UNDOF observed up to six different locations
where tents had been set up for internally displaced persons in the area of
separation. UNDOF observed around 75 tents north-west of Al Aishah village,

15-14901

5/11

S/2015/699

straddling the ceasefire line. Between 20 and 30 persons were observed in the camp
on a regular basis. Three tents were observed in the vicinity of Al Asbah and,
sporadically, UNDOF personnel observed persons present in the camp. In th e
village of Kudnaa in the area of limitation, six tents were observed. Another five
tents were seen in an area along the ceasefire line opposite the village of Braika.
Further south, 17 tents were observed. Between 10 and 15 tents were observed at a
location straddling the Bravo line north-west of the village of Ain Kadi. No
individuals were observed at those tented camps. Owing to the closure of the
established crossing between the Alpha and Bravo sides since late August 2014,
UNDOF is not currently in a position to facilitate, in cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross, humanitarian crossings, including for
students, between the Alpha and the Bravo sides.
20. In its current configuration, UNDOF has continued to carry out its mandate by
maintaining visibility, albeit limited, of the area of separation and the ceasefire line
from a number of positions it continues to hold in the area of separation. The Force
continued to maintain four positions on Mount Hermon in the northern part of t he
area of separation and position 80 in the southern part, as well as position 22 on the
Alpha side. UNDOF regularly conducted daily foot and vehicle patrols on Mount
Hermon. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers in
Observer Group Golan of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO), who maintained five fixed and four temporary observation posts on the
Alpha side. The focus of the activities of Observer Group Golan remained on
around-the-clock static observation, investigations and situational analysis. Through
Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly inspections of
equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side. Liaison
officers from the Alpha side accompanied Observer Group Golan inspection teams.
Inspections and mobile operations in the area of limitation on the Bravo side
remained suspended because of the security situation. As in the past, the Force faced
restrictions on freedom of movement, and its inspection tea ms were denied access to
some positions on the Alpha side.
21. During the reporting period, United Nations personnel observed 155 mm
artillery weapons on numerous occasions on the Alpha side within 10 kilometres of
the ceasefire line, in positions and on flatbed trucks. On 27 and 30 July, one
multiple-launch rocket system was observed being transported on a flatbed truck.
On 23 and 24 August, United Nations personnel observed an Iron Dome defence
system deployed at an Israel Defense Forces position on the Alpha side within
10 kilometres of the ceasefire line. Observer Group Golan members continued to
experience restrictions of movement on the Alpha side related to delays by the Israel
Defense Forces in opening the technical fence gate when military observer s enter
and exit United Nations observation posts 54 and 73, which are located east of the
Israeli technical fence. Access to United Nations observation posts from the Alpha
side, however, has improved since my last report. Of particular note, access to
observation post 73 is now granted on a daily basis, as required, although limited to
two gate openings per day. UNDOF peacekeepers remained deployed at observation
posts 54 and 73 to enhance protection of the military observers.
22. Since the temporary relocation of UNDOF from a number of its positions on
the Bravo side in September 2014, UNDOF, in consultation with the parties,
continued to review the situation in the area of separation. The ultimate goal of
UNDOF is to return fully to the area of separation when the situation permits. In

6/11

15-14901

S/2015/699

this connection, UNDOF assessed that the prevailing security situation in the area of
separation was not currently conducive to such a return. Planning on the basis of the
prevailing security developments in the area of sep aration and area of limitation on
the Bravo side and taking into consideration the financial and personnel resources
required, UNDOF remained focused on maintaining its operational effectiveness to
support and maintain the Force in its current configuratio n. UNDOF is in the
process of strengthening its positions and presence in the Mount Hermon area. In an
effort to enhance the ability of the Force to sustain the Mount Hermon positions,
UNDOF commenced the expansion of position 12 and the development of
position 12A. The Force reserve company, the heavy equipment platoon and other
contingents were deployed to support the construction of position 12A and clear the
site. Once the extension work has been completed, the positions will accommodate
an additional 50 troops. This will facilitate the sustainment of the Mount Hermon
complex during the winter.
23. In the meantime, UNDOF continued to engage the parties on practical
arrangements to be put in place to establish an interim configuration of the Force
that would allow it to continue to maintain the ceasefire, monitor, verify and report
on violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and exercise its critical
liaison functions with the parties in order to implement its mandate until the Force
can return fully to the area of separation. Discussions with both parties continued
with respect to agreeing on procedures for UNDOF personnel crossing between the
Alpha and the Bravo sides in the absence of an established crossing at Quneitra.
UNDOF also continued to engage with the parties on the use of technology to offset
the lack of situational awareness in the area of separation. In addition, discussions
with the Alpha side continued with respect to additional locations required to
establish temporary United Nations positions for observing the ceasefire line from
the Alpha side.
24. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon from
Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the Mount Hermon positions
are conducted on an almost daily basis in armoured vehicles and with an UNDOF
security escort, accompanied by a liaison officer from the office of the Senior
Syrian Arab Delegate. UNDOF continued to carry out contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and obs ervation posts and
to update its contingency planning for the relocation and evacuation of United
Nations personnel on both the Alpha and Bravo sides and in Damascus. UNDOF,
through its Force reserve company, conducted regular exercises and training. The
company remains at two UNDOF locations, Camp Ziouani and position 80.
25. The implementation of risk mitigation measures continued at observation
posts, positions, the operational base at Camp Ziouani and the temporary
headquarters in Damascus. A new reinforced roof was placed at observation post 54.
Additional sand-filled gabions were placed at various locations at Camp Ziouani
and positions 12 and 80. At position 12, two protected posts were added along the
perimeter wall. At Camp Ziouani, shatter-resistant film was applied to windows
exposed to the area of separation. At the temporary headquarters of UNDOF in
Damascus, mitigation measures were put in place to reinforce security doors and
access control at the entrance to the offices and accommodation. Aft er the mortar
incidents of 27 July and 3 August, additional precautionary procedures were put in
place to reduce the exposure of United Nations personnel. Movement of UNDOF
personnel on the Bravo side remains limited.

15-14901

7/11

S/2015/699

26. As at 26 August, UNDOF comprised 799 troops, including 24 women, from
Bhutan (1), the Czech Republic (3), Fiji (300), India (192), Ireland (141), Nepal
(160) and the Netherlands (2). In addition, 69 military observers from UNTSO,
including 3 women, assisted the Force in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
27. The Security Council, when deciding in its resolution 2229 (2015) to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a further period of six months, until 31 December 2015,
called upon the parties concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338
(1973) and requested the Secretary-General to submit, every 90 days, a report on
developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement that resolution.
The search for a peaceful settlement in the Middle East, in particular the efforts
made at various levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was dealt with in my
report on the situation in the Middle East ( A/70/353), submitted pursuant to General
Assembly resolutions 69/24 on Jerusalem and 69/25 on the Syrian Golan.
28. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict is further reducing the
prospects for their resumption and progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
29. I note with concern the serious violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that have taken place. The firing of rockets and gunfire from the Bravo
side and the Israel Defense Forces rocket fire and air strikes across the ceasefire line
jeopardize the long-term ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. The
developments of 13 and 14 June and 20 August across the ceasefire line are of deep
concern. Significantly, the alleged rocket fire into Israel on 20 August would be the
first such strike from the Syrian Arab Republic into Israel since the conclusion of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. It remains critical that the parties maintain
liaison with UNDOF in the first instance to prevent any escalation of the situation
across the ceasefire line. The mandate of UNDOF remains an important element in
ensuring the stability of the region. For its part, the United Nations will spare no
effort in ensuring that the long-held ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to hold.
30. I am gravely concerned about the continuing deterioration of the security
situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, its impact on the Syrian population and its
potential implications for the stability of the region. These developments have
continued to significantly affect the UNDOF area of operations. The presence of the
Syrian armed forces and unauthorized military equipment in the area of separation
are grave violations of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The increased use
of heavy weapons by both the Syrian armed forces and armed groups in the
continuing Syrian conflict, including the use of air power by gov ernment forces in
the area of limitation on the Bravo side, is disturbing. Armed opposition groups and

8/11

15-14901

S/2015/699

other armed groups continue to maintain control over significant sections of the
areas of separation and limitation in the southern part of the UNDOF are a of
operations and remain present along the section of the main road connecting the two
UNDOF camps. The established crossing between the Alpha and the Bravo sides
remains closed.
31. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other tha n those of
UNDOF. I note with concern the increasing presence and use of tanks and heavy
weapons by the Syrian armed forces and armed groups in the area of separation. I
urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to stop the use of air strikes. I call
upon all parties to the Syrian conflict to cease military actions throughout the
country, including in the UNDOF area of operations, and remove all military
equipment, Syrian armed forces personnel and armed personnel from the area of
separation. I urge the Israel Defense Forces to stop carrying out air strikes across the
ceasefire line. The continued presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in
the area of limitation on the Alpha side is of concern.
32. I call upon countries with influence to strongly and urgently convey to the
armed groups in the UNDOF area of operations the need to cease any actions in
violation of the Disengagement Agreement between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic that jeopardize the safety and security of United Nations perso nnel and to
accord United Nations personnel the freedom to carry out their mandate safely and
securely. I remain concerned about the incidents that have jeopardized United
National personnel and facilities. Any hostile act against United Nations personnel,
including threatening their physical safety, restricting their movement and direct and
indirect firing at United Nations personnel and facilities by anyone, is unacceptable.
The safety and security of United Nations personnel must be ensured. I reiterate that
all military activities in the area of separation conducted by any actor pose a risk to
the ceasefire and to the local civilian population, in addition to the United Nations
personnel on the ground. I call upon all parties to take all measures necessa ry to
protect civilians.
33. The primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations
personnel in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side rests with the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.
34. The continued presence of UNDOF in the area remains essential. Both Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and the presence of UNDOF. I call upon both
parties to actively assist UNDOF in achieving its interim configuration in structure
and deployment as quickly as possible to ensure that the mission is in a position to
effectively implement its mandate, until such time as the security situation allows
the Force to return fully to the area of separation. I note the assistance provided by
the Governments of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic in facilitating the provision
of essential supplies in support of the Force. The full return of UNDOF to the area
of separation remains a priority for the mission. In planning and preparing for this
full return, the safety and security of United Nations personnel remains the primary
consideration in determining the exact modalities.
35. It is equally critical that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to
bear on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate freely. It is essential that UNDOF continue to have at its disposal all the

15-14901

9/11

S/2015/699

means and resources necessary to allow it to return fully to the area of separation as
the situation permits.
36. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries in UNDOF
remain key factors for the mission’s ability to continue to carry out its mandate. I
am grateful to the Governments of Fiji, India, Ireland, Nepal and the Netherla nds
for their contributions. I am also thankful to the Governments of Bhutan and the
Czech Republic for delivering on their commitments of new contributions to
UNDOF. In addition, I am grateful to the Member States contributing military
observers to UNTSO.
37. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Purna Chandra Thapa, and the military and
civilian personnel serving under his leadership who continue to perform with
efficiency and commitment and under challenging circumstances the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council. I have full confidence that UNDOF will
continue to use its best efforts to carry out its mission.

10/11

15-14901

S/2015/699

Annex

15-14901

11/11
