A /68/PV.90

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

90th plenary meeting

Thursday, 5 June 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of a member of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/68/898)
The President: As indicated in document A/68/898,
as a result of the expiration on 31 December 2014 of
the term of office of Mr. Tadanori Inomata (Japan),
the General Assembly is required, during its current
session, to appoint a person to serve as a member of the
Joint Inspection Unit for a full term of office beginning
on 1 January 2015 and expiring on 31 December 2019.
In accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and having consulted with the regional
group concerned, I have requested that Jordan propose
a candidate to replace Mr. Inomata.
I would like to remind Members that, in accordance
with resolution 59/267 of 23 December 2004, the
candidate should have experience in at least one
of the following fields: oversight, audit inspection,
investigation, evaluation, finance, project evaluation,
programme evaluation, human resources management,
public administration, monitoring and/or programme
performance, as well as knowledge of the United
Nations system and its role in international relations.

As also indicated in document A/68/898, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I submit to the Assembly the candidature
of Mr. Rajab Sukayri (Jordan) for appointment as a
member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year
term of office beginning 1 January 2015 and expiring
on 31 December 2019.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint the candidate?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (h)
of agenda item 116.
Agenda item 34
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/868)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.47)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/68/L.47.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U‑0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-42094 (E)

*1442094*

A/68/PV.90

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Today I have the honour
to introduce the draft resolution entitled “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”, contained in document A/68/L.47,
under agenda item 34, “Protracted conflicts in the
GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development”, and to seek the
Assembly’s support for it. In fact, I seek its support for
a principle — a principle of morality and international
law; for a humanitarian cause; and in order to once again
affirm that it is unacceptable to use force to change
demography, redraw borders or deny a population its
right to return.
Today’s draft resolution is designed to reaffirm
the inalienable right of all forcibly displaced persons
of all ethnicities and religious beliefs evicted from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia, to return to their places of origin in
a voluntary, safe and dignified manner, and for their
property rights to be respected, in accordance with the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. Hundreds
of thousands of displaced persons, ethnic Georgians,
Abkhaz, Greeks, Estonians and Ossetians — Christian,
Jewish and Muslim — are still denied access to their
homes as a result of waves of displacement. We should
respond to their hopes and expectations. We should
support their dream of a day when they can return to
their homes to heal their wounds and restore their broken
neighbourhoods. We should attempt to vindicate their
sincere belief that resolute calls from the international
community will bear fruit.
In the report before us, Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon underscores that
“[i]t is essential to recognize return as both a
human right and a humanitarian issue that must
be addressed irrespective of any solution to an
underlying conflict” (A/68/868, para. 45).
We thank the Secretary-General for that reminder.
When introducing this draft resolution every year,
we leave politics aside and focus exclusively on the
humanitarian dimension of the problem. Its primary
focus on human rights is a deliberate choice in order
to avoid political speculation when the fundamental
rights of the displaced are at stake. Given the scale of
displacement and the amount of time that has passed,
the importance of arriving at a final response to address
the needs of the displaced is more urgent than ever.

2/8

05/06/2014

The draft resolution and the report of the
Secretary-General serve as the reference points for the
Geneva international discussions, which remain the
only platform between Georgia and Russia pursuant
to the six-point ceasefire agreement of 12 August
2008 for addressing the security and humanitarian
issues, with the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union present. The draft text, which was first adopted
in May 2008 (resolution 62/249), months before the
Geneva discussions were established, reinvigorates
and reinforces the Geneva format and complements
the work on humanitarian issues. It encourages the
participants in the Geneva talks to redouble their
efforts to ensure respect for human rights and create
favourable conditions for people’s safe, voluntary and
dignified return. It further confirms one of the main
principles, as underlined in the statement just quoted
from the Secretary-General’s report, that the political
dimension of the Geneva discussions should not hijack
the fundamental human rights of those concerned.
The draft resolution before us, therefore, is not
a political tool aimed at obstructing the ongoing
negotiations, as one delegation has repeatedly and
misleadingly suggested. On the contrary, it forms
a basis for respect for the human rights of all those
uprooted from the Georgian regions of Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali. Regrettably, the establishment of a
comprehensive timetable remains unresolved. To that
end, the Secretary-General calls on those involved in
the Geneva discussions to engage constructively on the
issue, building on international law and the relevant
principles. My Government is committed to those talks
and to the principle of the non-use of force. My country
has made that pledge unilaterally and reiterated it on
numerous occasions at the highest level. We still expect
the Russian Federation to reciprocate it.
The Government of Georgia continues its efforts
to remedy the plight of the internally displaced persons
(IDPs), in accordance with the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement, without prejudice to their right
to return. The implementation of the State strategy on
internally displaced persons and its updated action plan,
as well as the new law on internally displaced persons
from the occupied territories of Georgia, have brought
about significant improvements with regard to the issues
of providing appropriate living conditions to the IDPs,
financial assistance, proper registration, procedures
for the timely granting of IDP status to every affected
person, family reunions, ensuring the right of property
14-42094

05/06/2014

restitution, the provision of appropriate health care,
education and employment in a non-discriminatory
manner and so on.
Let me briefly update Members on the current
situation on the ground. The continuing installation of
barbed-wire fences and the expansion of the zone of
occupation have caused further displacement, cutting
off entire villages and dividing families living in the
adjacent areas. It is particularly alarming that some
representatives of the authorities in control in the
occupied regions, most recently in Abkhazia, have
periodically called for further discriminatory measures
against ethnic Georgians.
The gravity of the situation was also witnessed and
highlighted by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, who travelled to
Georgia last month. She made a clear reference to the
absence of any internationally mandated monitoring
mechanism and the almost complete isolation of those
regions. Referring particularly to the Tskhinvali region
as
“one of the most inaccessible places on Earth, with
no access permitted for international agencies,
except the International Committee of the Red
Cross”,
Ms. Pillay underlined the devastating consequences
of the so-called borderization activities along the
administrative boundary lines,
“further impeding the right to freedom of movement
for IDPs and the enjoyment of rights to property,
water, health, education and access to religious and
cultural sites”.
It is totally unacceptable that Ms. Pillay and Mr. Chaloka
Beyani, Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of
Internally Displaced Persons, were repeatedly denied
access to the occupied regions, contrary to the spirit of
the draft resolution, which calls for unimpeded access
for humanitarian activities.
Let me conclude my remarks with something
that we have said before. Each and every one of those
hundreds of thousands of people carries a dream in
their hearts — the dream of returning to the soil that
nurtured generations of their ancestors and of sharing
it with their children.
This year, the issue of security in the GUAM area
and the problem of forcible displacement worldwide
have topped the international agenda. In that light, I

A/68/PV.90

believe that today, the General Assembly will be even
more united, principled and decisive in its support
in affirming the fundamental principles enshrined
in the draft resolution. I hope that Members will add
their voice to strengthen this humanitarian cause and
vote in favour of the draft resolution and in support of
international law, the moral principles of humanity and,
ultimately, the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): As the
representative of the Republic of Moldova, I speak
also on behalf of Georgia, Ukraine and the Republic
of Azerbaijan — the countries of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM.
This is the seventh consecutive year that action is to
be taken on the draft resolution before us (A/68/L.47)
since its introduction to the General Assembly. It
is regrettable that many security, human rights and
humanitarian challenges in the Georgian regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia still remain unresolved.
The States members of GUAM are convinced that
the humanitarian concerns of the affected population,
including internally displaced persons, continue to be
a priority and that the issue must be addressed as soon
as possible. We are disappointed that no substantial
progress has been made in the areas of security,
human rights or the humanitarian field concerning the
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees from
Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia.
Moreover, since the adoption of resolution 67/109, the
situation has further deteriorated, creating additional
impediments to the rights of internally displaced
persons.
The matters of our particular concern remain the
continuing fencing activity along the administrative
boundary lines, as well as the continuing detentions
and occurrence of constant illegal and artificial
impediments to the freedom of movement, such as
denying the population access to their homes and
farmlands, the possibility of timely medical evacuation
and adequate access to schools. In that context, GUAM
views positively Georgia’s strategy for engagement
through cooperation, which aims to build trust and
confidence among the divided communities.
We, the States members of GUAM, reiterate
our well-established position that the way to resolve
the long-standing issues is through a negotiated and
mutually agreed approach on the basis of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia
within its internationally recognized borders. We

14-420943/8

A/68/PV.90

believe that the Geneva discussions are a important
forum for strengthening stability in Georgia and for
making progress on the security, humanitarian and
other remaining challenges, as the Secretary-General
himself puts it in his most recent report A/68/868 of
May 2014. Draft resolution A/68/L.47 calls for the
intensification of the current talks in order to create the
conditions for the safe and dignified return of internally
displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin.
We appreciate the role of the annual reporting by the
Secretary-General, pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions, as it is a useful tool for maintaining the
international community’s greatly needed involvement
in and attention to the issue of the internally displaced
persons. Only addressing it in an urgent manner,
including by the General Assembly, will contribute to
its solution.
The States members of GUAM stress their call
for unimpeded access for humanitarian actors to the
displaced population and those living in Abkhazia,
Georgia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia. We regret the absence of any internationally
mandated monitoring mechanism in those areas.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, made efforts during her visit
to Georgia to visit Abkhazia and South Ossetia, as my
colleague has said. Once again her access was denied,
thereby preventing any monitoring of respect for basic
human rights there. She expressed her concern about
the isolation and fencing of South Ossetia, in particular,
which further impedes the right to freedom of movement
for IDPs and the enjoyment of rights to property, water,
health, education and access to religious and cultural
sites. In recent weeks, two more villages have been
cut off from South Ossetia by the expanding barrier,
according to her report.
The draft resolution before us forms the fundamental
basis for restoring the human rights of all those evicted
from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions and aims to
encourage the participants in the Geneva talks to renew
their efforts to create the necessary conditions for
people’s voluntary, safe and dignified return. Freedom
of movement, property and access to basic services are
basic rights that do not impede or interfere with political
processes, but rather support a resolution process based
on respect for the rights of all parties involved.
Taking into account such principles and keeping
in mind that the main goal of the draft resolution is
respect for the right of the safe and dignified return of

4/8

05/06/2014

the IDPs and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia, the States
members of GUAM consider the draft resolution to be
humanitarian in nature and will vote in favour of it.
Our decision arises from our strong and long-standing
commitment to fundamental humanitarian principles,
including the right to return, property rights and
humanitarian access.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): Canada plays an active
role in promoting the rights and well-being of refugees
and internally displaced peoples, and we are committed
to continuing to work with the international community
to address both long-standing and emerging protection
challenges. Displacement is not only a humanitarian
concern; it is also a key human rights and development
issue. Identifying and implementing durable solutions
to protracted situations of displacement must remain
a high priority for all of us. Furthermore, all returns
of displaced persons must be guided by humanitarian
principles and be safe, dignified, informed and
voluntary.
(spoke in French)
The guiding principles with regard to the
displacement of persons within their own countries,
which form the key international framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons (IDPs),
establishes an essential structure for monitoring and
defending the interests of such people in order to meet
their needs for assistance and protection. Canada
adheres to the wording of the draft resolution in favour
of unimpeded access for humanitarian workers to
IDPs and refugees in all regions of Georgia affected
by conflict (A/68/L.47). Furthermore, we support the
appeals asking for all the participants in the Geneva
discussions to step up their efforts to establish
lasting peace, to commit to adopting the best possible
methods for building confidence and to establish
favourable security conditions for the voluntary, safe
and unimpeded return of IDPs and refugees to their
countries.
(spoke in English)
Canada continues to support Georgia’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty within its internationally
recognized borders. We denounce the Russian
Federation’s continued installation of fences and other
physical barriers along the administrative lines of the
breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Canada also strongly condemns Russia’s aggression in

14-42094

05/06/2014

Crimea and eastern regions of Ukraine. Those latest
violations of a sovereign nation’s territorial integrity
only further demonstrate Russia’s disregard for
international rule of law.
Canada is a strong supporter of freedom,
democracy, human rights and the rule of law. We will
continue to work with other like-minded countries and
the international organizations to ensure that those
around the world who have been forcibly displaced are
able to exercise those fundamental rights.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): While we align
ourselves with the statement made by the representative
of Moldova on behalf of the Georgia, Ukraine,
Azerbaijan, Moldova Group, I would like to make
several comments in my national capacity.
It is beyond any doubt that the issue of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), which we are considering
here today, deserves our utmost attention, as internal
displacement in the world is growing rapidly, according
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. As a principal policymaking body of
the United Nations, the General Assembly should be
actively engaged in tackling the problem of internal
displacement, both by preventing situations that
might lead to internal displacement and by dealing
effectively with operative factors that have already led
to displacement.
It has been seven years since the General
Assembly first took up the consideration of the draft
resolution before us today (A/68/L.47). While noting
with satisfaction that the efforts of the international
discussions in Geneva and the humanitarian engagement
of a variety of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, and other actors, have contributed to
some improvements in the security and humanitarian
situation on the ground, we regret to acknowledge that
security, humanitarian, human rights and development
challenges remain unresolved.
Regretfully, I have to acknowledge that the issue
of internal displacement has become relevant to my
country, Ukraine. The temporary occupation of Crimea
by Russia has resulted in the internal displacement
of more than 10,000 civilians; that number continues
to rise. The Government of Ukraine is taking all the
measures needed to address the humanitarian needs
of that new category of population in Ukraine, most
of whom were forced to leave their homes due to the

A/68/PV.90

Russian Federation occupation of Crimea and its current
destabilization activity in the eastern part of Ukraine.
Unfortunately, the number of IDPs in Georgia
is even higher, and their needs require the serious
attention of the United Nations. In that regard, I
would like to reiterate Ukraine’s firm support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders and express our
support for the draft resolution, the status of internally
displaced persons and refugees from Abhazia, Georgia
and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia. We
call on all Member States that have not yet done so to
reconsider their position and voice their support for that
important document.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Sweden,
and my own country, Estonia.
This is the seventh consecutive year that action
is taken on the draft resolution before us (A/68/L.47)
since it was first introduced in the General Assembly
(resolution 62/153). Unfortunately, no substantial
progress has been made so far in the areas of security or
human rights, or in the humanitarian field, with respect
to the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees
from Abhazia, Georgia and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia, Georgia. On the contrary, during the last
year, the situation has deteriorated, creating additional
impediments to the rights of the IDPs.
We note with profound concern the threats and
increasing activities by foreign security forces to
erect fences and other obstacles along administrative
boundary lines in Georgia, between the territory
administered by the Government in Tbilisi and the region
of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia,
Georgia. Such activities, which contravene Georgia’s
territorial integrity, create significant hardship for
residents on either side of the administrative boundary
lines and serious challenges stability and security in
those regions.
The draft resolution introduced today is humanitarian
in nature. Our decision to support and vote in favour of
it stems from our strong and long-lasting commitment
to fundamental humanitarian principles, including
the right to return, property rights and humanitarian
access. We believe that the issue of IDPs requires
continuing international attention, and only addressing
it in an urgent manner would contribute to the solution

14-420945/8

A/68/PV.90

of the conflict. Continued international attention can
have a significant impact on preventing similar threats
in the future in other nearby regions.
Ahead of the upcoming international discussions
scheduled to take place in Geneva on 17 and 18 June, we
wish to call upon all the participants in the discussions
to work together towards sustainable security and the
humanitarian situation-related arrangements. We would
also like to take this opportunity to reiterate our firm
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.47.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Yet again, the General Assembly has before
it a draft resolution on the status of internally displaced
persons and refugees in the Caucasus. Sadly, as in
previous years, its sponsors are by no means guided by
their stated noble humanitarian goals. This initiative
continues to be politically motivated and shortsighted
in its thrust. As in previous years, it does not take
into account the political and legal realities in the
region — specifically, the existence of two independent
States, Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
It is indicative that, for a number of years already,
the text of the draft resolution has been regurgitated,
unaltered in its substance, save for a few minimal
technical updates. Such a mechanical approach hardly
reflects a genuine concern for the plight of the thousands
of people who have had to abandon their homes as a
result of Tbilisi’s reckless policy. What we have is a
clear attempt by Georgia to again draw attention away
from the fundamental problems of internally displaced
persons and refugees, the main reason for which can be
attributed to the irresponsible actions of the Georgian
authorities leading up to the armed attack on Tskhinvali
in August 2008.
In practice, the Georgian delegation’s regular
submission of the issue of refugees and internally
displaced persons for consideration by the United
Nations hampers the discussion of that issue in the second

6/8

05/06/2014

working group of the Geneva discussions. Tskhinvali
and Sukhumi have repeatedly warned that this would
be the case if the Georgian side persued its policy of
discussing this issue at the General Assembly without
the participation of representatives from Abkhazia or
South Ossetia. Sadly, those arguments were not taken
on board by the draft resolution’s sponsors.
Georgia is thereby not only blocking an objective
discussion of important humanitarian issues, but
is also greatly hampering the entire process of the
Geneva discussions and hindering the search for
mutually acceptable solutions on issues of security and
humanitarian problems in the region. We have no doubt
that the Georgian initiative is counterproductive and
likely to further stall the complex talks taking place
in Geneva, which have been an extremely important
format for dialogue between the representatives of
Abkazia, South Ossetia and Georgia.
In his report (A/68/868), the Secretary-General notes
that the Geneva discussions provide an opportunity for
constructive interaction and are a single forum in which
the key stakeholders can discuss security, stability and
humanitarian issues, in particular in relation to the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
The repeated year-in, year-out calls on all participants
in the Geneva discussions to intensify their efforts to
establish a durable peace and to commit to enhanced
confidence-building measures seem rather clumsy
in the light of the stubborn reluctance of Tbilisi to
conclude, with South Ossetia and Abkhazia, binding
arrangements on the non-use of force.
In view of all of this, the Russian Federation calls
for a recorded vote on draft resolution A/68/L.47 and
will vote against it. We trust that other Member States
will also oppose this politicized initiative, which, in
practice, does nothing to help resolve the humanitarian
problems in the region.
Mr. Suazo (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to make a statement in explanation
of vote before the votin on draft resolution A/68/L.47,
on the Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia.
Honduras believes that the draft resolution refers
to the inalienable rights of refugees to return to their
homes and their lands and to enjoy access to their
places of origin. In our view, that is a fundamental,
internationally recognized and inalienable right.

14-42094

05/06/2014

Furthermore, the draft resolution is based on the
principles of international humanitarian law and the
norms and principles of international conventions and
agreements on the human rights of refugees.
We believe that the draft resolution is apolitical in
nature, as it deals with the specific situation of thousands
of individuals who have been directly affected by a
conflict, and that its text is purely humanitarian in scope.
It also highlights the case of some 500,000 internally
displaced persons and refugees of various ethnicities.
Finally, my delegation believes that the draft resolution
is also in line with the report of the Secretary-General
(A/68/868) and with the process of verification and
monitoring of the situation on the ground. This is the
sole and most appropriate mechanism we have to truly
monitor the situation. For those reasons, my delegation
will vote in favour of draft resolution A/68/L.47.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Central African
Republic, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominica, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia,
Liberia,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Cuba, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Viet Nam
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,

A/68/PV.90

Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Cyprus,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali,
Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, Suriname,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Zambia
Draft resolution A/68/L.47 was adopted by 69 votes
to 13, with 79 abstentions (resolution 68/274).
[Subsequently, the delegation of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia informed the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain; the delegation of Zimbabwe
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
vote against.]
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Brazil supports the
territorial integrity of Georgia and does not recognize
the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We
acknowledge the difficulties arising from the high
number of internally displaced persons and refugees
and from the humanitarian pressures since the conflict
with Russia in 2008.
We have once again abstained in the voting on
the resolution, since we believe that it could prejudge
issues that are subject to the Geneva process. We are
concerned that the resolution could interfere with the
negotiations in Geneva. Overcoming the challenges
faced by internally displaced persons and refugees
depends mainly on the creation of favourable political
conditions for their return and the absence of fear of a
resumption of conflict.
Brazil urges the parties to make efforts to identify
lasting solutions to the situation of Georgian internally
displaced persons and refugees, keeping in mind their
right of return in particular. The Brazilian Government
hopes that the dispute between Georgia and Russia
can be resolved through dialogue in as short a time as

14-420947/8

A/68/PV.90

possible. We believe that confidence-building measures
and cooperation are essential, and hope that every effort
will be made to seek improved understanding between
the parties, including in the framework of the Geneva
process.
Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): The consistency
of Sierra Leone’s votes on this issue reflects our
unshakeable commitment to the principles that underlie
resolution 68/274, just adoped. It also signals our
affirmation of the rights of internally displaced persons
and our support for those who are trying to resolve their
plight. When called on to do so, we feel it is our place to
support a system based on rules, rights and principles,
as the international system is, and we, as a country that
has been a beneficiary of that system, feel we should
stand up and be counted.
Internally displaced persons may deserve our
sympathy, and may get it; they may deserve our
empathy, and may get it; but at times they need us to
give our active and public support to their plight. We
stand with all those who seek to resolve what they
are going through, because we believe the concept of
displacement is not only physical but psychological.
We will remain by Georgia’s side, and when called on
will continue to express our support for the rights of the
internally displaced.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to briefly explain
our position. At the outset, I would like to reaffirm
Turkey’s commitment to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Georgia within its
internationally recognized borders. In that regard, we
are concerned that the conflicts in the Abkhazia and
South Ossetia regions of Georgia remain unresolved.
The situation has serious economic, social and
humanitarian consequences, primarily for the people of
Georgia but also for the peoples of the Caucasus region
as a whole.
Turkey supports all efforts aimed at achieving a
peaceful resolution of these conflicts. We invite all
parties to work towards a comprehensive and sustainable
peace that also provides for the return of internally

8/8

05/06/2014

displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. As a country
of the region and a neighbour of Georgia, we stand
ready to contribute to all efforts to that end. We support
the Geneva talks, which provide a valuable forum for
finding practical solutions to the challenges faced by
all parties and also address the issue of the voluntary,
safe, dignified and unhindered return for IDPs and
refugees. We call on all sides to engage seriously with
one another in a cooperative manner in order to build
confidence and move on to achieving tangible results.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is a country that has been significantly
involved, at the national and international level, in
promoting, protecting and defending human rights
and international humanitarian law. Commitment
to international law and the principles of peaceful
coexistence and territorial integrity has been a priority
of our foreign policy. We believe it essential that all
parties involved in these kinds of situations maintain,
enhance and respect, impartially and consistently,
the standards of international humanitarian law that
constitute the foundation of the protection of civilians.
Uruguay considers it vital that the Geneva talks
continue in order to reach a solution to the issues of
security, stability and the humanitarian situation of
the internally displaced persons and refugees in the
region. We trust that the discussions will result in a
positive outcome for those affected and establish the
necessary conditions for their voluntary return to their
homes, while respecting their human rights without
discrimination. We consider the talks to be a high
priority and we encourage the parties to make every
effort to ensure their success. My delegation therefore
considered it appropriate to abstain from voting on
resolution 68/274.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 34?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

14-42094
