A /77/PV.21

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

21st plenary meeting

Thursday, 27 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 137
Programme budget for 2022
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/77/535)
The President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Fifth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is no
proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I
take it that the General Assembly decides not to discuss
the report of the Fifth Committee that is before the
Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote or position. May I remind
Members that, in accordance with decision 34/401, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
or position only once, that is, either in the Committee
or in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote or
position in plenary meeting is different from its vote
or position in the Committee, and that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.

The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6
of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Revised estimates on United Nations activities
to mitigate global food insecurity and its humanitarian
impact”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 77/3).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
Ms. Freiin von Uslar-Gleichen (Germany):
Germany would like to extend its condolences following
the passing of Judge Cançado Trindade. He will be
sorely missed.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union
(see A/77/PV.20).
Germany would like to highlight the pre-eminent
role of the International Court of Justice as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations. Its judgments
in contentious proceedings, as well as its advisory
opinions, provide the most prominent authority in
the world for the determination and application of
international law. As such, the International Court of
Justice, together with the International Criminal Court,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-65677 (E)

*2265677*

A/77/PV.21

27/10/2022

the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the
Permanent Court of Arbitration and other international
and hybrid courts, is of fundamental importance for the
rules-based international order, with international law
at its core. That is further illustrated by the steadily
rising number of cases brought before the Court.

and its general efficiency as a mechanism for settling
disputes beyond any single case and the substantive
law in question. The decisions by the Court, as the
highest authority of international law, offer welcome
guidelines for the application and interpretation of
international law.

Therefore, we deem it of paramount importance
to recall that the Court’s jurisdiction is based on the
principle of consent. Broad consent to the jurisdiction
of International Court of Justice should therefore be
a goal for all States seeking to strengthen the role of
international law in international relations and to
increase the trust in that institution for the judicial
settlement of disputes. In that regard, Germany calls
on all States to consider accepting the jurisdiction
of the Court as compulsory and to make a general
declaration under Article 36, paragraph 2, of the
Statute of the Court, as we did in 2008. Conversely,
parties cannot be subject to the International Court of
Justice’s jurisdiction without their consent. A deviation
from that principle would gravely endanger acceptance
of the Court’s role and thereby ultimately threaten
to compromise its effectiveness. Therefore, the line
between the two functions of the Court must not be
blurred, and the International Court of Justice should
not submit to attempts to make what is essentially a
dispute between two States into an abstract question of
law. Furthermore, wherever States have accepted the
Court’s jurisdiction, they must respect and follow all
decisions of the Court in a given proceeding.

Germany commends the Court for its important
work and remains a staunch supporter of the Court’s role
in settling international disputes by peaceful means.

The Court can be an effective guardian of the
international legal order only if its rulings are respected
and implemented across the board. The importance of
compliance with the rulings of the Court, according
to Article 94 of the Charter of the United Nations,
cannot therefore be overstated. On 5 September 2022,
Germany submitted a declaration of intervention
according to Article 63, paragraph 2, of the Statute
of the International Court of Justice in the case of
Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide
(Ukraine v. Russian Federation). With regard to that
case, Germany would like to stress once again that the
orders on provisional measures by the International
Court of Justice are legally binding on the parties to
a dispute, and the Russian Federation, as ordered by
the International Court of Justice, is therefore under
an international obligation to immediately suspend
its military operations in Ukraine. Failure to comply
with a judgment undermines respect for the Court
2/27

Mr. Pereira Sosa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I take this opportunity to express, on behalf of my
delegation, our sincerest thanks to Judge Joan E.
Donoghue for her leadership as President of the
International Court of Justice. I also extend my
greetings to the judges of the Court. We also appreciate
the report of the International Court of Justice (A/77/4),
which covers the period from August 2021 to July 2022.
My country attaches great importance to the
International Court of Justice, the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. We welcome the work of the
Court and commend its solid reputation as an impartial
institution that exercises its function in accordance with
the highest legal standards. We recognize the important
work of the Court during the period in question, with
judgments and orders representing issues relating to
different geographical areas and topics, such as the
interpretation and application of treaties and conventions
on the elimination of all forms of discrimination, the
prevention of genocide and the financing of terrorism,
the jurisdictional immunity of States, the environment
and maritime delimitation, among other topics. The
sheer volume and diversity of the cases before it is a
testament to the Court’s importance to the rule of law
and a multilateral rules-based order.
We highlight the important contribution of the Court
in the peaceful settlement of disputes, a practice that
helps us to strengthen the rule of law at the international
level. Similarly, we value the jurisprudence of the
Court’s judgments, which have a general impact in their
use as guidance for the interpretation of international
law. We firmly believe in a rules-based multilateral
system in which the constructive participation of States
in the pursuit of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
the maintenance of international peace and security is
necessary. In that regard, we call on States that have
not yet done so to consider accepting the jurisdiction
of the Court. Respect for the decisions, judgments
and rulings of the Court is fundamental to ensuring
the success of international justice, including a rules22-65677

27/10/2022

A/77/PV.21

based international order. In the broader framework of
international law, we must not lose sight of the fact that
the ultimate beneficiaries of international law are the
people, and therefore humankind as a whole.

taken to return to its pre-pandemic working methods,
including a return to in-person and hybrid public
hearings and the holding of the private meetings of the
Court, with effect from 1 June.

The Republic of Paraguay accepts international
law and conforms to the general principles that govern
its international relations. In that regard, we reiterate
our commitment and unlimited respect for the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, in particular the
settlement of international disputes by peaceful means
and refraining from the threat or use of force. Paraguay
accepts the compulsory jurisdiction of the International
Court of Justice under the condition of reciprocity for
all disputes provided for in Article 36, paragraph 2,
of the Statute of the Court. With respect to both the
print and digital versions of the publications issued
by the Court, the Republic of Paraguay encourages
the Court to continue that work, in particular issuing
the publications in all the official languages of the
United Nations.

Cyprus is a strong supporter of the Court as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations and has
full confidence in its impartiality and effectiveness. As
a country that cherishes international law and effective
multilateralism, Cyprus adheres to the principles of
the Court and attaches great importance to all peaceful
means of dispute settlement pursuant to Article 2,
paragraph 3, and Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations. I would like to reiterate that my country
recognized the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court in
1988 in accordance with Article 36 of the International
Court of Justice Statute, and we strongly encourage all
Member States to do the same.

In conclusion, we wish to congratulate the judges
of the Court on their work during the current period
and on their future work and to recognize the important
contribution of the Court to international law. We
also pay tribute to Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado
Trindade for his contribution to international law.
Mr. Chrysostomou (Cyprus): Cyprus fully
subscribes to the statement made by the representative
of the European Union (see A/77/PV.20) and would like
to make a few additional remarks.
At the outset, I would like to thank President
Donoghue for her introduction of this year’s report
of the International Court of Justice (A/77/4) and to
welcome the high level of activity of the Court during
the reporting period, which included the handing down
of four judgments and 15 orders, as well as the seizure
of four new contentious cases. During the reporting
period, the cases submitted to the Court involved a
wide range of issues, including territorial and maritime
delimitation, violations of sovereign rights and maritime
spaces, human rights and international humanitarian
law, genocide, reparation for internationally wrongful
acts, environmental protection and, more generally,
the interpretation and application of international
treaties and conventions. As stipulated in the report,
the geographical spread of the cases brought before the
Court and the diversity of their subject matter illustrate
the universal and general character of the Court’s
jurisdiction. We commend the Court for the steps

The contribution of the Court’s jurisprudence to the
protection of the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially with regard to the development of the
concept of the crime of aggression and the prohibition
of the use of force, cannot be overstated. Furthermore,
we note the fact that the International Court of Justice
is seized with several maritime delimitation disputes
that are governed by the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which forms customary
international law. As President Donoghue noted in her
recent speech on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary
of UNCLOS, jurisprudence plays an important role in
identifying and solidifying the rules that apply not only
to States parties to UNCLOS but also to States that are
not party to the Convention. I take this opportunity to
underscore that my country has on several occasions
expressed its readiness to engage in negotiations with
any relevant country with a view to reaching a peaceful
settlement in good faith of any maritime dispute in the
Eastern Mediterranean, in full respect of international
law, including the settling of any such dispute before
the International Court of Justice.
Finally, this year’s reporting period was marked
by the tragic loss of the Honourable Judge Antônio
Augusto Cançado Trindade, one of the Court’s most
towering figures, a prolific scholar and jurist who
will be sorely missed. The election to fill the vacancy
in the International Court of Justice caused by the
irredeemable loss of Judge Trindade will be held in
the General Assembly and the Security Council in a
few days. In that regard, Cyprus would like to reiterate
the importance of selecting the most prominent jurists

22-656773/27

A/77/PV.21

27/10/2022

of high merit and international recognition from all
regions of the world and from diverse legal traditions to
serve as judges of the Court.

as a positive indication that the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes is expanding into all aspects of
international relations.

Mr. Rhee (Republic of Korea): At the outset, let
me express my gratitude to President Joan E. Donoghue
for her comprehensive report (A/77/4) on the judicial
developments and activities of the International Court
of Justice (see A/77/PV.20). We express our appreciation
and support for the Court’s achievements during the
period under review. We would also like to extend our
deepest condolences on the passing of the late Judge
Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade, whose invaluable
contribution to strengthening the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes as a member of the Court
will long be remembered. We note with appreciation
that the Court has successfully performed its tasks
during the period under review, despite the uncertain
situation it was faced with. In that context, we welcome
the fact that the Court took steps in June to ease the
measures it had taken during the coronavirus disease
pandemic, including a return to in-person hearings. We
are confident that the Court will quickly overcome any
remaining challenges posed by the pandemic.

We note with interest that the trust fund for
the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the Court is
gaining broader support. We hope that the trust fund
can contribute to enhancing regional diversity within
the Fellowship Programme, which is indispensable
for fostering the next generation of international
law experts.

Since earlier this year, the international community
has also been faced with a serious challenge to the
fundamental principle of the prohibition of the use of
force, which is enshrined in Article 2, paragraph 4, of
the Charter of the United Nations and has the status
of jus cogens. We would like to once again emphasize
that States must resolve their disputes through peaceful
means and refrain from resorting to force. In that vein,
the role of the Court is more important than ever.
During the reporting period, the Court delivered
four judgments and issued two orders of provisional
measures. The Court’s rendering of provisional
measures on 16 March, which was done in an
expeditious and timely manner, within 10 days after
the Court began its deliberation, is a clear reflection of
the urgent need to protect the important legal interests
at stake. We take this opportunity to reiterate that the
provisional measures ordered by the Court are binding
on the parties concerned and must be complied with.
We also note that the subject matter of the
16 cases currently pending before the Court is
significantly diverse, ranging from maritime and
territorial delimitation to human rights, the protection
of the environment, diplomatic relations, sovereign
immunities and economic relations. The increasing
diversity of the cases brought to the Court may be seen
4/27

In conclusion, I reaffirm that the delegation of
the Republic of Korea will continue to be a steadfast
supporter of the work of the Court.
Ms. Silva Walker (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20) and would
like to add the following remarks in its national capacity.
Our delegation wishes to highlight the importance
of the International Court of Justice as an international
jurisdictional body that works to settle disputes of major
concern to the international community, in accordance
with international law, through peaceful means and
in good faith. We reiterate our commitment to the
strict application of international law and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. We would also like
to acknowledge the work of the International Court
of Justice since its establishment. The decisions and
advisory opinions of the Court have been especially
important, not only with regard to the cases submitted
for its consideration but also for the development of
international law. In that regard, Cuba is grateful for
the presentation of the report of the International Court
of Justice (A/77/4) for the period from 1 August 2021 to
31 July 2022.
The volume of cases brought before the Court,
many of which deal with issues in Latin America
and the Caribbean, reflects the importance that the
international community attaches to the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Cuba appreciates the work of
peacefully settling disputes, in accordance with Article
33, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations, and
has voluntarily declared its acceptance of the Court’s
jurisdiction. In that regard, we note with concern the
refusal of some countries to acknowledge judgments
that are unfavourable to them, which undermines the
United Nations mechanisms responsible for enforcing
those judgments. Cuba believes it would be useful for
22-65677

27/10/2022

the Court to conduct a serious review to examine its
relations with the other organs of the United Nations,
in particular the Security Council. The situation
also shows that the United Nations system should be
reformed in order to provide greater guarantees to
developing countries vis-à-vis the more powerful
countries, which should also apply to the International
Court of Justice.
Strengthening the rule of law at the international
level would be impossible without the indispensable
support of the work of the Court through its rulings and
advisory opinions. Cuba would like to thank the Court
for the publications it makes available to Member States
and for its online resources, which provide valuable
material for the dissemination and study of public
international law, especially for developing countries,
some of which often find themselves deprived of
information on the progress made in international
law. That situation is even worse for Cuba owing
to the obsolete and absurd economic, commercial
and financial embargo policy that the United States
of America imposes on our country, preventing us
from accessing a significant number of websites and
restricting our use of the Internet.
The International Court of Justice has heard many
prominent cases. In that regard, Cuba attaches great
importance to the unanimous advisory opinion of 8 July
1996 on Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex). We also urge full respect for the
advisory opinion of 9 July 2004 on Legal consequences
of the construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see A/ES-10/273) and call on all States
to ensure respect for the Court’s decisions on that
important issue. We would also like to draw attention
to the importance of adhering to the Court’s advisory
opinion of 26 April 1988 on Applicability of the
obligation to arbitrate under section 21 of the United
Nations Headquarters Agreement of 26 June 1947. The
Court concluded in that advisory opinion that the United
States, as a party to the Headquarters Agreement, was
obliged to comply with section 21 of the agreement
and submit to arbitration in the settlement of disputes
between the United States and the United Nations.
And the Court recalled the fundamental principle that
international law prevails over domestic law.
Cuba also attaches great importance to the
allocation of the necessary budgetary resources for the
International Court of Justice so that it can adequately
carry out its work to achieve the peaceful settlement of

A/77/PV.21

disputes under its jurisdiction. We call for efforts to be
made to ensure that those resources reach the Court in
a timely and appropriate manner.
Finally, we reiterate once again that the Republic
of Cuba has been committed to peace, has respected
international law and has always faithfully complied
with its international obligations arising from the
international treaties to which it is a party.
Ms. Cicéron Bühler (Switzerland) (spoke in
French): Switzerland thanks the President of the
International Court of Justice for presenting the report
on the Court’s activities (A/77/4). We thank her for her
efforts and dedication. And we also thank the other
judges of the Court.
At the end of a year of intense activity for the Court,
Switzerland would like to reiterate its full support for
the Court. Year after year, the Court has continued to
hear a large number of cases, which are very diverse
and of vital importance, thereby contributing to the
peaceful settlement of disputes. The Court has also
adapted to new challenges and the urgency of situations
that have arisen. It was particularly effective in handing
down four judgments, rendering 15 orders and holding
six hearings during the period under review. The Court
was also flexible, allowing hybrid hearings to be held
in various cases that it heard this year. The Court also
demonstrated that it remains an essential organ, hearing
four new cases during the period under review.
My delegation wishes to stress two points in this
statement: the importance of acknowledging the Court’s
authority and the binding nature of its decisions.
Switzerland has long supported the Court’s efforts.
That support is in line with our foreign policy, which
aims to encourage the peaceful settlement of disputes
in order to bolster the rule of law and international
law. Switzerland unequivocally recognized the
Court’s authority in 1948. In order to further increase
that support, which benefits the Court, Switzerland
encourages all States that have not yet done so to
acknowledge the jurisdiction of the Court. Prior
recognition of the Court’s jurisdiction is an essential
precondition for international peace and security.
The authority of the Court is a vital precondition of
international peace and security. Allowing the Court
to step in before conflicts erupt gives peace a chance.
That is no guarantee against armed conflict, but it is
our duty pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations
to save future generations from the scourge of war. We

22-656775/27

A/77/PV.21

need to do our utmost to achieve that result. To that end,
the International Court of Justice plays a pivotal role.
We must recall that many States, including
Switzerland, published in 2014 the Handbook on
accepting the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice, which provides useful indications on how
all States can consent to the jurisdiction of the Court.
It contains practical advice, including models that can
be adapted to particular circumstances. Therefore,
whether a State wishes to recognize the jurisdiction
of the Court through the ratification of a treaty, a
unilateral declaration or an ad hoc approach with
regard to a certain case, it will receive specific concrete
support. The handbook is available in all the official
United Nations languages on the Court’s website. The
consent of States is vital to allow the Court to carry out
its mandate. We therefore regret that no new State has
recognized the jurisdiction of the Court since 2019, but
we are hopeful that the handbook may help to remedy
the situation. It is also in that context that Switzerland
associated itself in 2021 with Romania’s initiative
seeking to strengthen the Court’s jurisdiction.
Switzerland would also like to emphasize that the
Court’s decisions are not recommendations but, on the
contrary, are legally binding. On that point we must call
for strengthened cooperation between the Court and
the Security Council, which could benefit international
peace and security. The Court in fact allows a neutral
party to intervene to enable a law-based solution to
be developed among the various States involved. In
doing so, the Court also legitimizes the rule of law in
international law for all citizens. In that regard, the
Court’s contribution is invaluable.
Mr. Colas (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would like to thank the President of the
International Court of Justice for her presentation of
the report on the activity of the Court (A/77/4) and to
pay tribute to the memory of Judge Antônio Augusto
Cançado Trindade, who passed away in May. France
would like to recognize his service to the Court and his
contribution to international law. And we also thank the
delegation of Brazil for its moving homage to him this
morning (see A/77/PV.20).
The report on the Court’s activity shows the Court’s
importance in the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States. As the list of cases on the Court’s docket
shows, the Court’s litigation activity has increased over
the past few decades. France would like to reaffirm its
deep commitment to the International Court of Justice,
6/27

27/10/2022

whose contribution to the peaceful settlement of
international disputes is essential to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Court’s decisions
contribute to calming relations between States and help
them reach solutions when other means of peaceful
settlement of disputes do not suffice. Recourse to the
International Court of Justice is contingent on the
consent of States, which can be expressed through
the various methods of accepting its jurisdiction, in
accordance with the provisions of the Court’s Statute.
For example, France has agreed to be party to a large
number of treaties containing arbitration clauses that
provide for the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. In addition, France is the only State to have
implemented the forum prorogatum rule by agreeing
to allow the Court to consider a demand for which its
jurisdiction was not initially established, pursuant to
article 38, paragraph 5, of the Rules of Court.
The Court’s activity this year was marked by the
case Allegations of Genocide under the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation). France
recalls that States are bound to respect the judgments
and orders on provisional measures that the Court has
rendered in the framework of its litigation activity. It
is a matter of respect for the rules-based international
legal order. The Court also plays an important role
through its advisory functions. Although its rulings
are not binding on States and their function differs
from that of its orders, which they do not replace,
advisory opinions allow for a better understanding of
international law, and therefore strengthen the authority
of international law.
Finally, France would like to recall the importance
that it places on the Court’s various languages and
cultures, as that diversity contributes to the quality of
its work and the authority of its jurisprudence. France
also recalls the importance of bilingualism at the Court,
pursuant to Article 39 of its Statute, which states that the
official languages of the Court are French and English.
Given the current challenges to multilateralism, the
International Court of Justice remains a vital institution
for peace and the international legal order. That is why
I take this opportunity, on behalf of France, to reiterate
to the Court and all its members and staff our deep
appreciation for the work it has done.
Ms. Ceceros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
begin by extending my country’s greetings to the
22-65677

27/10/2022

President of the International Court of Justice, the
Honourable Justice Joan E. Donoghue.
Chile fully aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see A/77/PV.20), and I will now make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
Chile welcomes the report to the Assembly on the
work of the International Court of Justice (A/77/4) for
the period from 2021 to 2022. We wish to highlight our
special interest in the development of international law
and in the range of issues considered by the Court in
its jurisdictional and advisory capacities alike, which
is a testament to its intense and valuable work. We note
that the Court’s increased volume of work is a strong
reflection of the trust that States have placed in its strong
institutionalism, in particular by voluntarily referring
cases to the Court. States also value the jurisprudence
of the Court, which is the subject of increasing interest
to academic centres all over the world. To strengthen
its competencies, it is key for States to be fully aware
of the impartiality and independence of the Court,
which are all values and principles that are reflected in
its efforts. Chile reaffirms its confidence in referring
the most relevant international matters to the Court for
its consideration and rulings. Indeed, as we know, the
case concerning the Dispute over the status and use
of the waters of the Silala (Chile v. Bolivia) is being
deliberated by the Court.
During the reporting period, the Court handed down
four rulings and nine sets of provisional measures for
disputes brought before it and convened hybrid hearings
in six cases. Chile lauds the significant management
efforts despite the complex pandemic situation that
affected its work. My delegation would like to point out
that the average time between the conclusion of Court
proceedings and the issuance of a ruling or an advisory
opinion does not exceed six months, which should be
highlighted and commended. Despite the complexity
of the cases in question, the Court has managed not to
extend that period and continues to operate speedily,
which simply reaffirms its excellent work.
We recognize the heavy responsibility of the
International Court of Justice and its mission. Indeed,
it reaffirms the validity of international law, which
flows from the legitimacy of the system of settling legal
disputes. As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the Court plays a key role in the interpretation
and application of international law, as an instrument
that is intended to strengthen the peaceful coexistence

A/77/PV.21

of States. In that context, the full and total adherence
in good faith to international obligations arising
from its decisions, which are binding on parties that
have referred a dispute to the Court for its ruling, is
something that Chile honours and fully supports.
We would like to highlight in particular the efforts
of States and the measures adopted by the Court to
enable it to carry out its functions.
Chile wishes to highlight the Court’s commitment
to the young people of developing countries, ensuring
that they participate in its work through the Judicial
Fellowship Programme, which allows universities to
select candidates from among its recent law graduates
to continue their legal training at the Court for a period
of 10 months. It is a very important initiative, which is
financed by a trust fund that was established in 2021
and managed by the Secretary-General. We believe
that awarding fellowships to candidates selected from
developing countries, who attended universities in
those countries, ensures the programme’s geographic
and linguistic diversity. We encourage the Court to
continue that important programme.
My country would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Justice Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade,
who, sadly, passed away this year. Justice Trindade
always put the victims of human rights violations at
the heart of all international action, and his leadership
was decisive in the consolidation of the inter-American
system for the protection of human rights. Without a
doubt, his passion for the study of law is reflected in his
work, along with his commitment to carrying out his
judicial duties. His love of justice and his work will be
a source of inspiration for future generations.
Finally, my country reiterates its support for the
International Court of Justice as a key pillar of the
international rule of law. We trust that, as has been the
case so far, the United Nations, with the Court as its
principal judicial organ, will continue to provide the
human and material resources necessary for the Court
to carry out its functions with due care so that those
crucial functions can be fully discharged.
Mr. Elgharib (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Egypt aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20).
We once again welcome Judge Joan E. Donoghue,
President of the International Court of Justice, and
express our sincere thanks for her comprehensive

22-656777/27

A/77/PV.21

report (A/77/4) on the work of the Court for the period
from 1 August 2021 to 31 July 2022 (see A/77/PV.20).
We also take note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the trust fund to assist States in the settlement of
disputes through the International Court of Justice
(A/77/204). We express our condolences on the death of
Justice Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade on 29 May
and our appreciation for his valuable contribution to the
work of the Court.
The establishment of a global and inclusive judicial
entity with general competence truly represents a turning
point in the history of civilization and humankind. It
has marked the international community’s decision to
uphold the principles of law, justice and equity at the
international level and renounce the use of force in
international relations. What promotes the value of that
historical change is the genuine commitment of States,
given that litigation mechanisms and the settlement of
international disputes rely on their will and the principle
of consent. That historical and important development
must not be undermined by those international
disputes that are not settled by peaceful means. The
International Court of Justice remains a platform for
all those who wish to refer cases to it. Therefore, we
welcome the Court’s significant work during the period
covered by the report, and we are pleased that the cases
under its consideration have wide substantive scope
and originate in countries from all regions. There are
more than 300 bilateral and international conventions
under the Court’s jurisdiction, and all of them are true
testament to the global nature and the general judicial
competence of that unique international judicial entity.
The report mentions that resorting to the Court
remains an economical choice for litigating parties as
compared with other choices. However, at the same time,
we welcome the efforts of the trust fund to assist States
in the settlement of disputes through the Court. Egypt
welcomes the creation of the Court’s trust fund for the
Judicial Fellowship Programme, which seeks to provide
adequate funding for the legal personnel in developing
countries to benefit from the programme. The trust fund
will contribute to the popularization of international law
and its better understanding, as well as to building the
institutional professional legal capacity of all countries
and the strengthening of the rule of law in general at the
international level. We believe that we should continue
intensifying efforts to ensure the development of the
professional legal capacity of developing countries so
that they can participate on a par with other countries
in the activities of international forums concerned with
8/27

27/10/2022

international law and the settlement of international
disputes, including the International Court of Justice.
Mr. Wallace (Jamaica), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Egypt encourages all countries to optimize the
benefits of the Court’s jurisdiction and its rulings in their
disputes with other countries. In that regard, and owing
to our belief in the peaceful settlement of international
disputes, Egypt declared in 1957 that it was committed
to the jurisdiction of the Court on the Suez Canal and
to the arrangements related to its work, in accordance
with Article 36, paragraph 2, of the Court’s Statute.
Egypt has joined many international conventions that
recognize the Court’s ruling in disputes about the
interpretation and application of those conventions.
We also stress the importance of the advisory
opinions of the Court and encourage relevant
organizations and organs to resort to the Court with a
view to benefiting from its outstanding legal expertise
and substantial interactions with a number of legal
systems. That will undoubtedly contribute to clarifying
the position of international law with respect to new
and sensitive topics that emerge and gain momentum
alongside the steady development witnessed
by humankind.
In conclusion, Egypt reiterates that it is keen to
continue its active cooperation with the Court. We
believe in its pivotal role in consolidating and applying
the principle of the rule of law at the international level.
Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
would like to thank the President of the International
Court of Justice, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, for her report
on the work of the Court (A/77/4). Malaysia would also
like to convey its deepest condolences on the passing of
Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade on 29 May.
Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM)
(see A/77/PV.20).
We note that, during the reporting period, the
Court continued to experience a high level of activity,
which is a clear expression of the continued confidence
of States in the Court. As a strong believer in the rule
of law and international legal order, Malaysia continues
to be an avid supporter of the International Court of
Justice. We demonstrated that point in relation to two
cases of sovereignty that were submitted to the Court.
22-65677

27/10/2022

Malaysia also believes that the Court’s advisory
opinions contribute to the clarification and development
of international law, as well as to maintaining and
strengthening peaceful coexistence among Member
States, since despite having no binding power, they
carry strong legal weight and moral authority. A case
in point is the Court’s advisory opinion of 8 July 1996
on Legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons
(A/51/218, annex). For the first time in history, the Court
recognized that the threat or use of nuclear weapons
is generally contrary to the rules of international law
applicable in armed conflict, in particular the rules
and principles of humanitarian law. The Court further
declared unanimously that there exists a legal obligation
to pursue in good faith and bring to a conclusion
negotiations leading to nuclear disarmament in all its
aspects under strict and effective international control.
With that opinion, the Court set legal parameters
whereby the use of nuclear weapons indeed ignores
customary international law and international treaties.
In that regard, since 1996, Malaysia has annually
submitted to the First Committee and the General
Assembly a draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on
the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons”. We
invite member States that have not done so to support
and co-sponsor the draft resolution at this session of the
First Committee.
Malaysia also echoes the call by NAM to honour
the advisory opinion on Legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see A/ES-10/273). The Court rendered its
conclusion that the construction of the wall is contrary
to international law. The international community must
uphold that advisory opinion, as it serves as a crucial
link in halting the belligerent illegal settlement activity
carried out by the occupying Power, which began in
1967. Malaysia reiterates its call for the organs of the
United Nations, especially the Security Council, to take
advantage of the Court’s issuance of advisory opinions,
as stipulated in Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter of
the United Nations. We support the recommendation by
the Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including East Jerusalem, and Israel that the
General Assembly should request an advisory opinion
on the legal consequences of Israel’s continued refusal
to end its occupation of the occupied Palestinian
territory. The international community must also hold
the perpetrators accountable for the inhuman atrocities

A/77/PV.21

committed by the occupying Power and illegal settlers
in the territory.
As the principal legal organ of the United Nations,
the International Court of Justice is well equipped
to play an important role in the collective efforts of
maintaining international peace and security. The
utilization of the Court in the peaceful settlement of
disputes ought to be given greater recognition and be
taken advantage of. Malaysia believes that the Court
should be provided a fresh purpose in the New Agenda
for Peace by the Summit of the Future in 2024.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): First, let me join others
in expressing our condolences for the loss of Judge
Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade. Judge Cançado
Trindade was a very well-respected international
lawyer and a passionate scholar who dedicated his life
to the cause of international law. We pay tribute to his
service to the work of the International Court of Justice
and will honour his memory and legacy.
This year’s debate is taking place against a
backdrop of the tenth anniversary of the declaration of
the high-level meeting on the rule of law at the national
and international levels. In that regard, Liechtenstein
underscores the crucial role of the International
Court of Justice in safeguarding the rule of law at the
international level, which has come under increasing
and unprecedented attack. As the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, the International Court of
Justice continues to settle significant disputes between
States and provide important advisory opinions. We
applaud the Court’s significant contribution to the
progressive development of international law and to
strengthening the rule of law. We support its central
role in the international legal framework, which we will
continue to work to reinforce.
The current mandate to settle disputes between
States is based on a model of consensus jurisdiction.
It is therefore only when States are willing to accept
the Court’s jurisdiction that it can play its full role
in the peaceful settlement of disputes. However, only
73 member States of the Assembly have accepted the
Court’s compulsory jurisdiction, which means that
nearly two thirds of United Nations members have yet
to do so. We therefore reiterate our call on all States
to recognize the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction in
order to strengthen its reach and impact, in line with
the declaration led by Romania last year on promoting
the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.
We also believe that given the important relationship

22-656779/27

A/77/PV.21

between the Court and the Security Council, all States
aspiring to serve as elected members on the Council or
that serve permanently on it should lead by example by
accepting the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction.
The importance of the International Court of
Justice is also mirrored in the relevance of its pending
cases. In that respect, we particularly emphasize the
case concerning the Application of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar), as well as the
case relating to Allegations of Genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation).
Those cases deal with two of the world’s most serious
situations with respect to peace and security and the
protection of civilians, which are core tasks of the
United Nations. Liechtenstein would like to remind the
Assembly that the Court’s provisional orders are legally
binding, and that since Myanmar’s military coup in
February 2021, various parts of the United Nations
have been inconsistent on the question of Myanmar’s
representation. We understand that the decision of
the United Nations Credentials Committee should be
applied consistently across the United Nations system,
in line with resolution 396 (V).
Through its advisory function, the International
Court of Justice can also provide us with much-needed
clarity regarding complex questions of international
law. This tool offers States important authoritative
guidance with respect to the application of international
law. Liechtenstein is therefore encouraged that States
are increasingly requesting advisory opinions from
the Court, not least because it further consolidates the
role of the General Assembly as the key initiator in the
clarification of international legal questions. It is in
that regard that we are actively engaged in the initiative
led by Vanuatu to pursue an advisory opinion from the
Court on the issue of climate change. Climate change is
a complex topic that affects us all in various ways and
raises many difficult questions. Let us remember that
it is the existential threat of the century. We therefore
need clear and well-reasoned legal answers to be able
to address its challenge appropriately, which is why we
should bring the topic to the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the European Union (see A/77/PV.20), and I
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity.
10/27

27/10/2022

I thank the President of the International Court
of Justice, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, for her report
on the work of the Court (A/77/4). I would like to
reiterate Luxembourg’s indefatigable support for
the International Court of Justice and its role as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations according
to the Charter of the United Nations.
The Court is tasked with ruling on the legal
disputes referred to it in accordance with international
law. In that regard, the Court therefore makes a tangible
contribution to the peaceful settlement of international
disputes by applying the provisions of the Charter to the
matters brought before it. It works to resolve conflicts
between States through judicial settlement. Today it is
more important than ever to uphold the principles and
values enshrined in the Charter and international law.
The growing number of new cases brought before the
Court, which are varied both in their subject matter
and the regions they cover, are testament to the Court’s
universality and the crucial role it plays in promoting
the rule of law.
Luxembourg believes firmly that broader
acceptance of the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court
would enable it to more effectively fulfil its mandate
by allowing it to go beyond issues of competence
and consider matters of substance more rapidly.
Luxembourg was one of the first States to recognize
the jurisdiction of the Court as compulsory under
the declaration signed on 15 September 1930 by the
Permanent Court of International Justice. According
to the President Donoghue’s annual report, 73
member States have declared that they recognize the
compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. Luxembourg also
aligns itself with the declaration led by Romania on
promoting the jurisdiction of the Court. Recognizing
the Court’s jurisdiction is in everyone’s interests,
including those of Member States and the Court itself.
It enables States to better assert their rights before
the Court, while strengthening the judicial functions
of the Court. Bringing a case before the Court is an
effective way to peacefully settle a dispute in question.
When the Court is seized of a case it can also help to
break a diplomatic deadlock and prevent a dispute from
becoming a conflict.
With its 16 March order, the Court delivered
provisional measures in the case of Allegations of
Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Ukraine
v. Russian Federation). It ruled that Russia must
22-65677

27/10/2022

immediately suspend the military operations it began
on the territory of Ukraine on 24 February. However,
Russia has not complied with the order. It has
intensified and extended its military operations on the
territory of Ukraine and has therefore exacerbated the
dispute before the Court. On 13 October, Luxembourg
submitted a declaration of intervention, pursuant to
article 63 of the Statute of the Court. The considerable
number of declarations of intervention before the Court
are testament to the importance that the international
community attaches to accountability, respect for
international law and the principle of good faith as
the foundation of mutual trust, which is crucial to
international relations.
Luxembourg believes that intervening in the current
case allows States parties to the Genocide Convention
to reaffirm their collective commitment to respecting
their rights and obligations under the Convention,
including by supporting the essential role of the Court
in delivering its rulings as the principal judicial body
of the United Nations, and has implications for the
international community as a whole. The declarations of
intervention before the Court are especially important
in the context of multilateral instruments, given that
the interpretation of the Court with respect to a dispute
before it sets a precedent for other parties. The role of
the Court is even more essential when it comes to rules
of a peremptory nature that involve the integrity of the
entire international legal order. It is therefore logical
in such situations that States that are not parties to the
dispute but that have an interest in compliance with the
norms of international law in question can intervene
before the Court.
The Court’s contribution to the development
of international law is undeniable. However, its
contribution to the judicial settlement of disputes can
only be effective if the parties to the dispute ensure
immediate and full implementation of the judgments
and orders of the Court. Selective enforcement is a
setback to the rule of law. Luxembourg therefore urges
all States whose disputes are submitted to the Court
to comply with the judgments and with any order of
the Court indicating provisional measures. We would
like to emphasize that obligation in particular in the
context of the war of aggression waged by Russia
against Ukraine.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks the President of the International
Court of Justice, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, for presenting

A/77/PV.21

the annual report of the Court (A/77/4). We also wish to
express our condolences on the passing of Judge Antônio
Augusto Cançado Trindade. He will be remembered
not only as an outstanding jurist of the inter-American
human rights system, but also for having been Director
of the Inter-American Institute of Human Rights and
Judge of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, for
his time serving at the International Court of Justice as
well as for his contributions concerning human rights,
stateless persons and their vulnerability. The Court has
lost a great jurist, academic and humanist.
In an increasingly complex and vulnerable
world, international justice and cooperation are more
important than ever. The Court, as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations, contributes to the
goal of world peace through the peaceful resolution of
international disputes in a formal judicial setting. It is
the only Court with a legal basis in the Charter of the
United Nations, and it is open to all Member States. Its
jurisdiction covers a number of important issues and a
wide geographical range, reflecting the confidence of
the international community in the Court’s role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes. To support the Court
is to support peace as a fundamental human right. It is
also the search for legal certainty, within the possible
interpretations of the norms, principles and legal values
that make up public international law. Our support is
not unwarranted — rather, it stems from our interest
in seeking the best for coexistence among nations.
Through its advisory opinions and orders, Costa Rica
recognizes that the work of the Court brings legal
clarity to the norms of international law and their
correct application. We support and emphasize the
advisory role of the Court, both in strengthening the
rule of law and in supporting the role of the General
Assembly as the central decision-making body of the
United Nations.
Costa Rica supports Vanuatu’s initiative to request
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on climate change. This opinion comes at a
decisive moment. The Tribunal’s advisory opinion,
in this case, will have a definitive impact on the
future of human life on this planet. Human rights
are at the heart of the issue of climate change and
the environment. The General Assembly has already
made this intimate link explicit by recognizing, by a
resounding majority and with no opposition, the right
to a clean, healthy and sustainable environment as a
human right (resolution 76/300). In recognizing that
right, the General Assembly is now committed to

22-6567711/27

A/77/PV.21

shifting from declaration to implementation. Without
a human rights-based approach, it will not be possible
to achieve climate justice. Costa Rica will engage with
a constructive spirit of solidarity and sense of urgency
in the process of clarification by the Court of the
obligations and responsibilities of Member States, and
of the minimum action required to protect the rights of
people and future generations from the greatest threat
facing humankind. It will also help strengthen existing
mechanisms and processes that address the climate
crisis, such as the Sustainable Development Goals.
An advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice would be the most inclusive, authoritative and
constructive avenue available for independent judicial
clarification of the legal implications of climate change
under international law.
Costa Rica is located in one of the most biodiverse
regions of the world. According to the United Nations
Environment Programme, approximately 60 per cent
of the world’s terrestrial and aquatic life is found in
our region. Latin America is a leader and contributor
in international legal matters, both environmental and
otherwise, and we stress the importance of access to
remedies and to the judicial process in languages other
than French and English to improve the lives of those
hidden behind the language barrier.
In conclusion, Costa Rica reiterates its recognition
and support for the work of the International Court of
Justice and its judges, whose rulings help to provide
clarity and legal certainty in sensitive areas between
States and to promote the supremacy of and respect for
the rule of law at the international level, resulting in the
realization of peace and security between States, one of
the pillars on which this Organization is built.
Ms. Aagten (Netherlands): Let me first thank Her
Excellency, Judge Joan E. Donoghue, President of the
International Court of Justice, for her presentation of
the report of the Court (A/77/4).
As the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
the Court has an essential role in the maintenance of
peace and security. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
would like to commend the Court’s continued
performance in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
especially considering the increase in caseload and
the wide variety of the legal questions before it. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains, as ever, proud to
be the host country of the Court.
12/27

27/10/2022

To enable the Court to continue to resolve legal
disputes between States peacefully, it is important that
all Member States of the United Nations accept the
compulsory jurisdiction of the Court. In that light, my
Government would again like to encourage all Member
States of the United Nations that have not yet done so
to accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court by
making a declaration under article 36, paragraph 2
of the Statute, and to do so with as few reservations
as possible. The Netherlands regrets to note that,
since early 2021, no additional State has issued such
a declaration. In that context, I would like to recall
that my Government has eliminated limitations to the
jurisdiction of the Court in contentious cases involving
the Kingdom of the Netherlands as far as possible. Our
only reservation to the jurisdiction is temporal, in that
the Netherlands will accept all disputes arising out of
situations or facts that took place no earlier than 100
years before the dispute is brought before the Court.
The Netherlands calls on other States that have accepted
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court to review
their declarations with a view to eliminating as many
limitations as possible to the Court’s jurisdiction. As
long as universal acceptance of the Court’s compulsory
jurisdiction is pending, my Government recognizes the
importance of compromissory clauses in any treaty to
provide for the jurisdiction of the Court. These clauses
may, however, limit the jurisdiction to such an extent as
to force the Court to declare itself without jurisdiction
when a legal dispute is complex, or may force the Court
to consider only part of a dispute. It is my Government’s
view that these situations should be avoided.
In its report, the Court refers to the current issues
related to the premises of the Court, the Peace Palace
in The Hague. As the host country to the Court, a
first priority for the Kingdom of the Netherlands is to
ensure the safe and effective functioning of the Court,
which includes a safe working environment for all staff
members. The Netherlands shares the Court’s concerns
on the safety of the premises and that the implementation
of the necessary renovations is a matter of urgency. In
that regard, my Government wishes to re-emphasize its
full commitment to resolving these issues. The delay
incurred in that process, as referred to in the report of
the International Court of Justice, is due to an amended
approach to addressing the issues. Instead of a full
renovation of the Peace Palace, the focus will be on
maintenance and, where necessary, asbestos removal.
This new approach aims, among others, to address the
concerns expressed by the users of the Peace Palace with
22-65677

27/10/2022

regard to their temporary relocation. Circumstances
permitting, the new approach should allow the users to
remain in the building during the maintenance work.
A preparatory asbestos investigation of the Peace
Palace will be executed as soon as possible, after which
the presence of asbestos can be addressed in a more
structural manner. The Netherlands will consult and
involve the Court, as well as the other users of the
Peace Palace, throughout this process.
On a final note, my Government would like to
reiterate its support to the trust fund for the Judicial
Fellowship Programme of the International Court
of Justice. The Trust Fund is of crucial importance
for many young jurists, as it provides them with the
opportunity to gain professional experience at the
Court and to deepen their understanding of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in which the Court plays a vital
role. My Government finds it important that legal
talent from around the globe, in particular developing
States, gets a chance to see how the International Court
of Justice operates. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has therefore proudly contributed €100,000 to the trust
fund in 2022.
Mr. Martinsen (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, my delegation wishes to thank President
Donoghue not only for presenting her report (A/77/4)
this morning (see A/77/PV.20) but also for the quality
of the work that the Court has carried out under her
leadership. We also wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the trust fund to assist States
in the settlement of disputes through the International
Court of Justice (A/77/204).
My delegation also expresses its condolences for the
passing of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade.
His invaluable contribution and the humanitarian
dimension of his work will continue to nourish the legal
traditions of Latin America and the world.
Since its establishment in 1946, the International
Court of Justice has played a fundamental role in
the promotion of the rule of law, the defence of
international law and the preservation of international
peace and security through the peaceful settlement of
disputes. The Court is the only international court for
the settlement of inter-State disputes of a universal
character and with general jurisdiction.
Over the past 20 years, the workload before the
Court has increased considerably. That seems to be
a trend that is likely to increase in the future. That

A/77/PV.21

demonstrates that the Court is a trusted and necessary
institution. In terms of efficacy, there is no doubt that
the Court occupies a preeminent place among the
organs of the United Nations system. The vast majority
of the rulings of the Court are implemented by the
parties to disputes and are recognized by third party
States. That high level of compliance is largely the
result of the immense confidence that States place in
the Court and reflects a virtuous circle that will lead to
a growing number of countries bringing their disputes
before the Court’s jurisdiction. That trust in turn fosters
a close relationship with the very high academic and
professional qualifications that are required for judges
in the Court. It also depends on the efficiency and
excellence of the Court’s Secretariat, which has gone
above and beyond its duties, especially in the light of
the significant increase in its workload.
In that regard, it is extremely important, as
established by the Statute of the Court, that the persons
elected to the Court fulfil specific requirements
and that, overall, the major civilizations and main
legal systems of the world are represented. For such
purposes, it is extremely important that we promote the
principle of rotation to ensure that elected judges do not
always come from a limited number of States. It is also
interesting that Spanish-speaking countries are parties
to 6 of the 16 cases currently under consideration by the
Court. It is also very interesting and noteworthy that,
in the last eight years, the Court has not had a single
Spanish-speaking judge among its members. This is a
situation that could be resolved rather quickly, as the
Assembly well knows.
Moreover, it should be highlighted that States have
recently also submitted cases on areas of international
law that previously did not come before the Court, such
as human rights and protection of the environment. In
the future, we hope that this diversification will continue
to grow. Not only has the Court dealt successfully
with complex matters, but it has also established very
productive jurisprudence that has led to the progressive
development of standards and principles in these areas.
As with any international institution, the Court is
facing ongoing challenges. There is still a great deal
that can be improved in terms of acceptance of its
jurisdiction, implementation of its judgments and the
question of multilingualism. Nevertheless, there is no
doubt that the Court provides a very important service
to the international community and is making a unique
contribution to peace and security.

22-6567713/27

A/77/PV.21

Turning to the Secretary-General’s trust fund
to assist States in the settlement of disputes through
the International Court of Justice, it is worrying
that contributions have not been made in the period
under review and the three previous periods. We are
deeply grateful for those efforts being undertaken
by certain States, including those just announced by
the speaker from the Netherlands, who preceded me.
The high costs involved in Court proceedings can
dissuade some developing States from taking this
judicial path. We wish to once again highlight the
adoption of resolution 75/129, by which the General
Assembly decided to establish the trust fund for the
Judicial Fellowship Programme of the International
Court of Justice, which is managed by the SecretaryGeneral and which institutionalizes a mechanism
that will allow universities in developing countries to
appoint candidates from among recent law graduates
to continue their training for nine months at the Court.
The increase in opportunities that future international
law professionals find in the Court and the opportunity
learn from the Court’s judges serve to strengthen the
rule of law and help to support the fundamental role the
International Court of Justice plays in the promotion of
international peace and security.
In conclusion, the Argentinian delegation
reiterates its commitment and support for the valuable
contribution of the International Court of Justice, and
we hope that all delegations will continue to defend and
ensure respect for international law.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): The delegation of Sierra
Leone associates itself with the statements delivered on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and
the core group of States on the International Court of
Justice advisory opinion on climate change (see A/77/
PV.20).
Sierra Leone thanks Judge Joan E. Donoghue,
President of the International Court of Justice, for the
presentation of document A/77/4, entitled “Report of
the International Court of Justice”, on the activities of
the Court from 1 August 2021 to 31 July 2022. We take
note of the report contained in document A/77/204 on
the Secretary-General’s trust fund to assist States in the
settlement of disputes through the International Court
of Justice.
In this debate, Sierra Leone joins the international
community in expressing deepest condolences to
the family, the Court and the State of nationality, the
Republic of Brazil, on the passing of late Judge Antônio
14/27

27/10/2022

Augusto Cançado Trindade, who passed away on
29 May.
Sierra Leone hereby restates its unwavering
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as engrained in the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. The International Court of Justice
is the pre-eminent adjudicative body for the peaceful
settlement of disputes at the international level. As a
court of justice and, moreover, the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, it occupies a special
position: the only international court of a universal
character with general jurisdiction. As such, the
Court should always aim to promote the rule of law
in its adjudicative work on contentious cases and in
delivering advisory opinions in accordance with its
Statute, which is an integral part of the Charter of the
United Nations, and thus contributes to promoting
and clarifying international law and strengthening the
multilateral international legal order.
We welcome the judicial activities of the Court
in the reporting period, with its significant level of
activity, including the handing down of four judgments,
rendering of 15 orders and holding of six public
hearings. The significant level of activity, including
the Court being seized of four new contentious cases,
the 15 cases entered in the Court’s general list as of
31 July and their geographical spread, is demonstrative
of a universal reaffirmation of States’ confidence in the
Court, assured of its ability to resolve disputes referred
to it.
We take note with appreciation that the cases
submitted to the Court involve a wide range of issues.
The diversity of subject matter indeed further illustrates
the universal and general character of the Court’s
jurisdiction. Although Sierra Leone has not referred nor
intervened on any matter within the reporting period,
we wish to underscore the importance of the clarity
the Court will bring to bear on the important issues of
concern to the international community, including on
environmental protection.
As reported, during the period under review, the
Court received no requests for advisory opinions. As
stated by the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Vanuatu this morning (see A/77/PV.20):
“A core function of the International Court of
Justice, one of the six main organs of the United
Nations, is to render advisory opinions on legal
questions put to it by the General Assembly in
22-65677

27/10/2022

accordance with Article 96 of the Charter of the
United Nations”.
The importance of the advisory opinion on legal
questions referred to the International Court of Justice
cannot be overstated in the pursuit of peaceful settlement
of legal disputes in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, as the particular
case may be. The Court has responded to requests in the
past to render an advisory opinion on important legal
questions, including the legality of the threat or use of
nuclear weapons and decolonization. The delegation of
Sierra Leone, in equating its importance, submits that
the time is ripe for the International Court of Justice
to have an authoritative view on legal questions on
climate change, given that it is a defining challenge of
our time and poses a grave threat to humankind as a
whole and an existential threat to the most vulnerable.
For small island developing States, sea-level rise
threatens habitation in low-lying island nations and
parts of coastal developing States and coastal African
States like Sierra Leone.
Climate-induced weather events and other impacts
have already resulted in immense global grief. As
submitted, while the international community has
recognized the urgency of the climate crisis, progress
to date has fallen short of achieving the level of climate
action necessary to prevent environmental catastrophe.
Accordingly, Sierra Leone is pleased to be part of the
core group of States to table a draft resolution in the
General Assembly requesting an advisory opinion
from the International Court of Justice and for the
Court to render its view on climate change as it
specifically affects small island developing States and
other developing countries particularly exposed to the
adverse effects of climate change. Fully respecting
the rules and working methods of the Court, Sierra
Leone will appeal to the Court to adopt the same level
of efficiency, rigor and judiciousness with which the
Court treated the request by the General Assembly
pursuant to its resolution 71/292.
Sierra Leone uses this opportunity to express
appreciation for the Court’s commitment to improving
young people’s understanding of international
law and the Court’s procedures through its annual
Judicial Fellowship Programme. Indeed, until 2021,
participation in the Judicial Fellowship Programme
required financial support from each sponsoring
university. That requirement precluded nominations
by less well-endowed universities, particularly those in

A/77/PV.21

developing countries. My delegation joins the Court in
welcoming the establishment in 2021 of the trust fund
for the Judicial Fellowship Programme of the Court
following the adoption by consensus, on 14 December
2020, of General Assembly resolution 75/129. We
commend the stated aim of the Programme, which is to
guarantee the geographic and linguistic diversity of the
participants with the grant of fellowships to candidates
who are nationals of developing countries and from
universities based in developing countries.
We further welcome the fact that, of the 15
candidates selected by the Court to take part in the
Programme in 2022 and 2023, three are nationals
of developing countries who were nominated by
universities located in developing countries. That
certainly is not optimal, but it is a good start. We thank
all those who have made contributions to the trust fund
for the Judicial Fellowship Programme and call on all
others who are in a position to contribute to do so.
In conclusion, Sierra Leone reiterates its full
confidence in the Court as the principal judicial organ
of the United Nations, the fulcrum of the United Nations
Charter principle of the settlement of disputes through
peaceful means. We thank the devoted judges for their
contributions to the Court, for discharging its important
mandate and for ensuring the sound administration
of justice.
With respect to our world Court, it is important
for my delegation to note that, although during the
period under review the trust fund to assist States in
the settlement of disputes through the International
Court of Justice did not receive any new applications
from States, nor were any voluntary contributions made
to the fund, the idea and purpose of the trust fund is
still highly relevant and necessary. We agree that the
absence of any contributions during the reporting
period, as well as in the three prior reporting periods,
is concerning. We encourage States, international
organizations, national institutions, non-governmental
organizations and natural and juridical persons who
are in a position to contribute to the fund to do so,
substantially and on a regular basis.
Mr. Tun (Myanmar): At the outset, I wish to thank
the President of the International Court of Justice,
Judge Joan E. Donoghue, for the comprehensive report
(A/77/4) and her presentation (see A/77/PV.20). I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the trust fund to assist States in the settlement of

22-6567715/27

A/77/PV.21

disputes through the International Court of Justice
(A/77/204).
Myanmar aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20).
Since the establishment of the United Nations more
than 75 years ago, the International Court of Justice has
been the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.
While its main responsibility is to bring about peace
and stability in the world and the settlement of disputes
between States through legal and peaceful means, it is
encouraging to witness the Court’s endeavour to fulfil
and discharge its mandate throughout these years.
Moreover, given the upward trend in the volume of the
Court’s caseload over the years, the Court’s efforts to
ensure its sound functionality in meaningful ways is
also welcomed. That clearly shows the Court’s ambition
to continue to strengthen the sustainable administration
of justice, and my delegation therefore values the
important role of the Court.
We are of the view that the Court’s work delivered
fruitful outcomes during the term under review.
Accordingly, we envision that States will continue to
refer to the Court cases of disputes for peaceful settlement
in the future, as that will directly and indirectly
complement the revitalization of multilateralism and
the United Nations architecture as a whole. However,
we also note that the Security Council requested only
one advisory opinion from the Court in the 1970s and
none thereafter. Therefore, our delegation joins other
Member States in encouraging the Security Council
to make greater use of the Court’s advisory opinions
within the scope of its activities.
Moreover, we welcome the Court’s decision
to establish the Judicial Fellowship Programme
particularly for developing countries. We highly
anticipate that youth from our country will also have
this great opportunity to participate in the Programme
after the successful reversal of the illegal military coup
and the end to the military dictatorship in Myanmar.
As mentioned by the President of International
Court of Justice in her statement, the Court delivered
on 22 July its judgment on the preliminary objections
in the case concerning Application of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide (The Gambia v. Myanmar). In that regard,
the National Unity Government of Myanmar issued a
statement expressing its appreciation for the judgment.
16/27

27/10/2022

The Court’s judgment, which sweeps aside the illegal
military junta’s spurious objections, clears the way for
substantive hearings on the atrocities directed against
the Rohingya during military operations in 2016
and 2017. The hearing on those objections need not
have proceeded. On 10 February, the National Unity
Government, as the proper representative of Myanmar
in the case, communicated to the Court that it accepted
the Court’s jurisdiction and withdrew all preliminary
objections. Accountability and reparations for the
Rohingya must remain the driving imperative. We will
continue to extend our full cooperation to the Court in
the case.
Moreover, Myanmar has informed the International
Criminal Court (ICC) of the acceptance of its jurisdiction
over the territory of Myanmar in accordance with
article 12 (3) of the Rome Statute.
However, the military continues without abatement
to commit such crimes against humanity and other
atrocities throughout Myanmar. Let me inform the
Assembly of the two recent barbaric acts committed by
the fascist military against innocent civilians.
On the afternoon of 16 September, 13 people,
including seven children, were killed in air attacks
by the Myanmar military on a school in Lat Yat Kone
Village, Depayin township, in Sagaing region. Those
children were as young as seven years old. It is heartbreaking to see the dead children wrapped in cloth
and abandoned school bags in blood. Those innocent
children studying in school had no chance to learn that
international legal protection even existed. They have
been killed. They will never know.
On the evening of 23 October, terrorist military
fighter jets bombed and attacked civilians at a music
concert held in A Nang Pa, Hpakant, Kachin state,
to celebrate the sixty-second anniversary of Kachin
Independence Organization Day. It reportedly resulted
in the death of approximately 100 people, including
artists, women and children. Many were also injured.
Many women were among the victims. Those injured
are in need of urgent emergency medical care. If they
do not receive such assistance in time, the death toll
will unavoidably increase. Sadly, we have no clue when
such medical assistance will reach those injured.
In conclusion, we have high hope that the
international justice system will continue to play an
important role in stopping ongoing atrocities across the
globe and preventing the reoccurrence of such crimes
22-65677

27/10/2022

in the future. However, at the same time, it is dangerous
if the international justice system is seen to undermine
democratic forces in a conflict State. That may cast
doubt on the credibility of international law. I therefore
urge the International Court of Justice and the ICC to
listen to the voices of the people of Myanmar and bring
justice to the victims.
Mr. Pasichnyk (Ukraine): I would like to provide
a brief overview of the state of play and the most recent
developments regarding the two cases Ukraine has
brought against Russia in the International Court of
Justice (Application of the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism and of
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination (Ukraine v. Russian
Federation) and Allegations of Genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation)).
The cases represent the centrepiece of Ukraine’s
overarching and multifaceted legal response to the
unjustified and unprovoked military aggression that
Russia has waged on my country starting in 2014. Since
then, when Russia tried to commit a brutal land grab of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Ukrainian
city of Sevastopol, my country has had recourse to
instruments of international law in seeking to protect
its rights and legitimate interests.
First, on 16 January 2017, after lengthy, timeand effort-consuming pretrial settlement procedures,
which were begun almost at the start of the Russian
aggression, Ukraine filed its first application instituting
proceedings in the International Court of Justice. The
application is based on allegations that Russia violates
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism of 1999 and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination of 1965. In essence, Ukraine claims
that Russia has failed to prevent the financing of
terrorism in Ukraine, including by providing Russian
weapons to groups engaged in terrorism — such as
supplying the Buk missile that was used to shoot down
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 — and is engaged in a
systematic campaign of cultural erasure in the occupied
Crimea against the Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian
ethnic communities.
On 19 April 2017, the Court issued an order on
Ukraine’s request for an indication of provisional
measures. The order required Russia, among other
things, to

A/77/PV.21

“[r]efrain from maintaining or imposing limitations
on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to
preserve its representative institutions, including
the Mejlis” and “ensure the availability of education
in the Ukrainian language”.
The first date of the three that I would like to ask
the Assembly to remember is 19 April 2017. On
8 November 2019, the Court issued the decision that
it had jurisdiction to hear this case on its merits. By
then the parties had already held the first round of
exchanges in written documents and a second round
had been found necessary. The Court therefore fixed
8 April 2022 for the reply of Ukraine and 8 December
2022 for the rejoinder of the Russian Federation.
Despite the Russian forces’ full-scale and still ongoing
invasion of Ukraine, which began on 24 February, we
pulled ourselves together and showed resilience in
lawfare as well as warfare. We requested an extension
and filed our reply just three weeks after the original
deadline. The Russian rejoinder is due on 19 January
2023. It is notable that shortly after the 24 February
invasion, the international legal team, led by Mr. Alain
Pellet, that was defending Russia in the case resigned,
at least publicly.
Secondly, on 26 February, just two days after the
start of Russia’s invasion, Ukraine filed its second
application to the International Court of Justice. That
case concerns Russia’s accusation of genocide against
the Russian-speaking population in Ukraine under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide. At the same time, Ukraine filed
a request for an indication of provisional measures.
On 16 March, the Court issued an order that required
Russia, among other things, to
“immediately suspend the military operations that it
commenced on 24 February 2022 in the territory of
Ukraine” and “ensure that any military or irregular
armed units which may be directed or supported by
it, as well as any organizations and persons which
may be subject to its control or direction, take no
steps in furtherance of the military operations
referred to in point (1) above”.
So the second date I would like to ask the Assembly
to keep in mind for a short time is 16 March. Ukraine
filed its memorial in this case on 1 July, almost
three months ahead of the established deadline. On
3 October, Russia submitted its preliminary objections
on jurisdiction. But between those two dates there
occurred an unprecedented event in the history of

22-6567717/27

A/77/PV.21

the International Court of Justice, when 17 States
from various parts of the world filed interventions
in the case. They are Australia, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, New Zealand, Poland, Romania, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.
In October alone, five more countries were added
to that honourable list — Austria, Croatia, Greece,
Luxembourg and Portugal, so that as of now the total
number of interventions in the case stands at 22. And
we know that more are coming. On behalf of Ukraine’s
legal team, which I am representing here, I would like
to express our sincere gratitude to the countries that
have decided to stand beside us in the world Court. We
will continue working together on this case. Besides
that, I strongly encourage countries that believe in the
rule of law and are party to the Genocide Convention to
consider intervening in our case. Together we can form
a coalition that upholds a world order that is based on
rules, not force. Only a rules-based order can ensure
the peace and prosperity of States that are equal in their
sovereignty and independence. Ukraine sees no viable
arguments against interventions and stands ready to
assist in every possible way.
Before I conclude, I would like to remind members
of two of the three dates I asked them to keep in mind,
19 April 2017 and 16 March 2022. More than five and
a half years have passed since the first, and more than
eight months since the second. That is exactly the
amount of time that the Russian Federation has been
in violation of the binding orders of the International
Court of Justice. Five and a half years, and more than
eight months. Just hours after the International Court of
Justice delivered its order on preliminary measures in
the case concerning Allegations of Genocide under the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation),
the official spokesman for the Kremlin publicly and
unequivocally declared that Russia was not going to
abide by the order. That came as no surprise to us, as at
the time Russia had been ignoring the previous order for
almost five years. They must have accidentally spilled
ink on the page containing Article 41 of the Statute of
the Court.
The third and final date I would like to ask the
Assembly to keep in mind is the day when Russia finally
complies with the orders of the International Court of
Justice. On that day we shall all be one step closer to
the rules-based order, to peace, to equality and to the
fulfilment of the aims of this Organization. Whether
18/27

27/10/2022

that day arrives sooner or later depends on everyone
here, whom I ask to keep that day in mind and keep
working on it.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): My delegation thanks
the President of the International Court of Justice, Her
Excellency Judge Joan E. Donoghue, for her report
(A/77/4) providing a summary of the Court’s extensive
judicial activities over the last reporting period
(see A/77/PV.20). Seventy-six years in, the Court’s
heavy workload and ever-growing docket demonstrate
that it is as strong, reliable and necessary as ever. We
assure the Court of our full support with respect to its
key role in promoting the rule of law and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes in order to maintain
international peace and security. We also take note of
the Secretary-General’s report on his trust fund to
assist States in the settlement of disputes through the
International Court of Justice (A/77/204).
Before I say more on the report of the Court, I would
like to express our deepest condolences to the friendly
people of Brazil and all the members of the Court for
the sad demise of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado
Trindade on 29 May. I also express our appreciation for
his great contribution to the work of the International
Court of Justice. We honour his memory and legacy.
We underscore the importance of upholding the
Court’s standing as the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations, and of making greater use of its
competence to de-escalate tension and prevent conflicts
among Member States. We reaffirm the universal
character of the Court’s jurisdiction. We recall the
General Assembly’s call on Member States to accept
the Court’s jurisdiction in accordance with its Statute.
We would also like to emphasize that cooperation
from Member States, including those involved in
specific proceedings, in the implementation of Court’s
judgments and orders remains absolutely critical. In
keeping with our constitutional commitment to the
peaceful settlement of international disputes, we have
worked to resolve our maritime boundary disputes with
our neighbours through international judicial means,
and in that regard, we continue to follow with interest
the Court’s work on territorial and maritime disputes as
well as the conservation of natural and living resources.
We also recognize the importance of the Court’s
important jurisdiction in issuing advisory opinions
that contribute to the clarification and development
of international law and thereby to strengthening the
peaceful settlement of disputes. In that regard, we are
22-65677

27/10/2022

pleased to align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Vanuatu this
morning (see A/77/PV.20) on behalf of the group of
like-minded countries that are going to submit a draft
resolution to the General Assembly seeking an advisory
opinion clarifying the rights and obligations of States
under international law as it pertains to the adverse
effects of climate change.
As a nation with an unequivocal commitment to
the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through
recourse to international law, Bangladesh greatly
values the judgments and orders of the International
Court of Justice. We recall in that regard the ongoing
proceedings against Myanmar instituted by the Gambia
under the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in relation to
the treatment of the Rohingya in Myanmar. In its order
dated 23 January 2020 indicating provisional measures
(Application of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (The Gambia v.
Myanmar)), the Court recognized the Rohingya as a
protected group within the meaning of article II of the
Genocide Convention and acknowledged the presence
of a real and imminent risk of irreparable prejudice
to the rights of the Rohingya in Myanmar. We call for
compliance with the order in letter and spirit. More
recently, on 22 July, the Court rejected the preliminary
objections raised by Myanmar and found that it has
jurisdiction, on the basis of article IX of the Convention,
to entertain the application filed by the Republic of the
Gambia and that the said application is admissible. As a
country that has been hosting the persecuted Rohingya
for decades, we welcome the orders of the Court and
remain committed to providing full cooperation to the
Court as and when required.
Let me conclude by reiterating the unwavering
commitment of Bangladesh to the work of the
International Court of Justice. We also reiterate our
commitment to extending every possible form of
cooperation to the Court in its functions.
Mr. Smyth (Ireland): Ireland would like to thank
the International Court of Justice for its annual report
(A/77/4) and President Donoghue for her presentation
today (see A/77/PV.20), which details a particularly
high level of judicial activity over the past year.
At the outset, I too would like to echo the sentiments
expressed by others and extend our condolences to the
Government and people of Brazil, and to his colleagues
on the Court, on the untimely passing of Judge Cançado

A/77/PV.21

Trindade in May. He was an outstanding jurist who left
the Court a lasting legacy.
The Charter of the United Nations declares the
International Court of Justice to be the principal
judicial organ of the Organization. It therefore plays
a central role in the maintenance and strengthening
of an international order based on the rule of law. We
strongly believe that the Court’s role in determining
disputes between States that might otherwise lead to
conflict should not be underestimated. In addition,
the Court has an important role to play in resolving
conflicts that threaten international peace and security.
Acceptance of the Court’s jurisdiction as compulsory
aligns with a commitment in the Constitution of Ireland
to the peaceful settlement of international disputes by
international courts and tribunals. We believe that
Ireland’s commitment to an international order based
on international law is also bolstered by our acceptance
of the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction. We urge all
Member States that have not yet done so to consider
making a declaration accepting the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court.
The Court’s busy docket is a clear acknowledgement
of the confidence that the international community
places in the Court’s integrity, independence and
expertise. It is also testimony to the increased recourse
of States to international law in the settlement of
international disputes. In that regard, we would like to
recall that under Article 94 of the Charter every Member
State of the United Nations is required to comply with
the decisions of the Court in any case to which it is
a party, including any provisional measures indicated
by the Court. That is a legal obligation. We also attach
high importance to the advisory opinions issued by the
Court, which provide authoritative guidance on the
interpretation and application of international law.
As one of the six principal organs of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice plays an
indispensable role within the broader institutional
framework of the Organization in developing
international law and peacefully settling international
disputes. However, we believe that there could be
greater cooperation between the Court and other United
Nations organs, in particular the Security Council. As an
elected member of the Council for the 2021–2022 term,
we have seen first-hand that the range of tools available
to the Council for peacefully settling international
disputes remain underutilized, and that includes the
tools offered by the International Court of Justice. At a

22-6567719/27

A/77/PV.21

27/10/2022

time when increasing numbers of conflicts are raging
throughout the world, the Council should, in our view,
consider availing itself of the range of tools available to
it to prevent and resolve international disputes.

arbitration awards, to name a few. Peru also appreciates
the geographic diversity of the States that resort to the
jurisdiction of the Court, which demonstrates the vital
importance of its judicial activity.

Before concluding, I want to once more reiterate
Ireland’s strong support for the Court and its place in
the international system.

Peru emphasizes that the countries of the Latin
America and Caribbean region have a solid legal
tradition in the peaceful settlement of disputes.
They have traditionally resorted to arbitration and
international jurisdictional proceedings as a constant
in their external involvement and friendly relations
with other States. In that regard, it is significant that
in the past 20 years almost a quarter of the total cases
resolved by the Court have originated in Latin America
or the Caribbean, in a demonstration of the Court’s
importance to our region. Having itself resorted to the
jurisdiction of the Court in contentious matters, Peru
can testify to its effectiveness in resolving disputes
between States. Peru fully recognizes that compliance
with international judgments handed down by a
competent, independent and impartial court such as the
International Court of Justice helps to ensure friendly
and peaceful relations between peoples.

Mrs. Falconi (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru, a
country committed to multilateralism and international
law, welcomes the report (A/77/4) presented today by
Judge Donoghue, the President of the International Court
of Justice, to the General Assembly (see A/77/PV.20).
The report details the work of the Court between
August 2021 and July 2022.
Peru expresses its heartfelt condolences on the
passing of Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade.
The world has lost a great jurist, teacher, brilliant
legal scholar and international judge. He will always
be remembered for his legacy in the development
of international law and his record in the defence of
human rights.
My delegation would like to highlight the
fundamental role played by the International Court
of Justice as the principal judicial body of the United
Nations in the system for the peaceful settlement of
disputes established in the Charter of the Organization.
The Court is essential in the work of the peaceful
settlement of disputes and rules-based governance. It
therefore contributes to the maintenance of international
peace and security and is a fundamental element in
strengthening multilateralism and promoting the rule
of law at the international level.
Peru notes with great appreciation the high level
of activity maintained by the Court. It should be noted
that in the period covered by the report, the Court
pronounced four rulings. In that framework, the Court
has helped to crystallize and clarify international law
in various areas, such as the law of the sea, territorial
and maritime delimitation, the prohibition of the use
of force in international relations, and human rights
and humanitarian law. My delegation notes that the 16
pending contentious cases mentioned in the report in
the period under review relate to disputes in the areas
of treaty law, obligations derived from the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, the prohibition of
the use of force and the principle of non-intervention,
the law of the sea, immunities from criminal
jurisdiction, the legal validity and binding effect of
20/27

Peru would like to point out that in addition to its
function in contentious cases, in accordance with Article
96 of the Charter the Court can also issue advisory
opinions at the request of the General Assembly, the
Security Council or other authorized bodies of the
United Nations and specialized agencies. In both those
areas of competence, the International Court of Justice
can contribute to the promotion and clarification of the
scope of international law through rulings, orders and
opinions. The Court fulfils its functions impartially
and diligently, enabling disputes to be settled between
States for the sake of an international society where the
principle of good faith prevails and friendly relations
between nations are fostered. For that reason we
reaffirm the importance of respecting its decisions
and rulings, and we encourage States that have not
yet done so to consider the possibility of accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court.
Peru would like to recognize the work done by the
eminent judges who make up the Court, their efficiency
in the face of the flow of new cases of a varied nature,
and the number of cases decided, demonstrating both
the institution’s dynamism and the excellence and
responsibility that the judges show in their work. We
are also grateful for the intense and valuable work of
the Registry. Peru welcomed the successful launch
of the Trust Fund for the Court’s Judicial Fellowship
22-65677

27/10/2022

Programme, which enables the award of fellowships
to candidates from developing countries and from
universities based in developing countries. We want
to highlight that important initiative with a view to
promoting the development of international law and
the training of legal professionals from developing
countries, and we urge States and other organizations
to contribute to the Trust Fund so that the number of its
beneficiaries can increase in the next reporting period.
In the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
my delegation recognized the measures adopted by the
Court that made it possible to continue its activities
while containing the spread of the virus and protecting
the health and well-being of its judges and officials.
We also want to highlight the Court’s recent rapid
resumption of its pre-pandemic work methods with its
restoration of public hearings and private in-person
sessions. We appreciate the Court’s hard work and
flexibility in that regard, as well as its responsiveness
in continuing its work as efficiently and safely as
possible. Peru also reiterates its appreciation to the host
State of the Kingdom of the Netherlands for its ongoing
commitment and support to the work of the Court.
Peru values the Court’s publications as an
instrument for disseminating and understanding
its important work. We are aware of the financial
difficulties involved in enabling its publications, which
are currently produced only in French and English,
to be produced in the other four official languages of
the United Nations, but we encourage their gradual
translation into all six official languages, taking into
account the fact that resort to the Court’s jurisdiction is
becoming more and more universal.
I would like to conclude by once again emphasizing
Peru’s steady support for the work of the International
Court of Justice in defending a rules-based international
order. Peru believes firmly that the Court will continue
to play an essential role in ensuring that the international
community can resolve its international disputes
peacefully and therefore deal effectively with our
serious global challenges and threats to international
peace and security.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20) and would
like to add the following in its national capacity.

A/77/PV.21

We would also like to express our appreciation to
the President of the International Court of Justice for her
report (A/77/4) on the Court’s activities (see A/77/ PV.20)
and to commend the Court for its efforts to uphold the
rule of law at the international level.
As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice can play a
prominent role in the international community, not only
in fostering the sound administration of justice, but
also in the peaceful settlement of inter-State disputes
in contentious cases, which ultimately helps to prevent
hostilities and mitigate crises. The Islamic Republic
of Iran reaffirms its commitment to strengthening and
supporting the Court to ensure that it can discharge its
duty to work for the peaceful settlement of disputes
submitted to it within the confines of its jurisdiction.
It should be emphasized that the consensus basis
of the Court’s jurisdiction is not only the cornerstone
of the activities of the International Court of Justice,
but also underlies the activities of other international
judicial bodies. That notwithstanding, the Islamic
Republic of Iran is of the view that Article 36, paragraph
3 of the Charter provides a legal basis for the Court to
act if and only if both parties explicitly declare their
consent. The Court’s judgment dated 3 February 2006
concerning Armed Activities on the Territory of the
Congo (New Application: 2002) (Democratic Republic
of the Congo v. Rwanda) is worth mentioning in that
regard. The mere fact that rights and obligations erga
omnes or peremptory norms of general international
law are at issue in a dispute cannot in itself constitute an
exception to the principle that the Court’s jurisdiction
always depends on the consent of the parties.
My delegation reiterates its support for legal-judicial
diplomacy as a determinative apparatus in international
relations in strengthening the rule of law, preserving
international order and tackling unilateral and arrogant
actions in international relations. Based on that
understanding and belief, during the past six years the
Islamic Republic of Iran has brought two contentious
cases before the Court that are currently pending and
that I would like to briefly touch on.
Due to the adoption of a number of legislative,
executive and judicial measures in the United States in
flagrant violation of principles of general international
law and lex specialis, immunity from jurisdiction and
enforcement has been removed against Iran and certain
Iranian entities and the separate juridical status of
State-owned Iranian companies has been undermined.

22-6567721/27

A/77/PV.21

That has led to cases being filed in United States courts
against the Islamic Republic of Iran, certain Iranian
entities and companies and State officials, as well as
to the blocking of Iranian assets, including those of the
Central Bank of Iran. As a result, the assets of certain
Iranian entities and State-owned companies, among
them the Central Bank of Iran, totalling approximately
$1.8 billion, were subject to execution in order to satisfy
a default judgment against the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Nevertheless, in the light of the illegal nature of that
legislative, executive and judicial policy of the United
States against a sovereign State, its entities, companies
and their properties, my delegation firmly believes
that such asset blocking and enforcement proceedings
against the Central Bank of Iran and certain other
Iranian companies and banks in the United States are in
violation of multiple provisions of the Treaty of Amity,
Economic Relations and Consular Rights of 1955. In
February 2019, the Court found that it had jurisdiction
to rule on the application of the Islamic Republic of Iran
in the case concerning Certain Iranian Assets (Islamic
Republic of Iran v. United States of America). The
hearings on the merits were conducted between 19 and
23 September. The case is currently under deliberation.
I would now like to turn to the other case. Following
the United States’ unilateral withdrawal from the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and its unlawful
decision to reimpose in full effect and enforce a series
of unilateral coercive and restrictive measures directly
or indirectly targeting Iran and Iranian companies and
nationals, contrary to its obligations under the 1955
Treaty of Amity, the Islamic Republic of Iran filed an
application instituting proceedings against the United
States with regard to a dispute concerning violations of
multiple provisions of the Treaty.
At the same time, the Islamic Republic of
Iran requested that the Court indicate provisional
measures. The Court then issued a unanimous order
on provisional measures requiring the United States
to remove any impediments to the importation of
foodstuffs and agricultural commodities, medicines
and medical devices, as well as spare parts, equipment
and associated services necessary for the safety of civil
aviation. It also ordered the United States to ensure that
the necessary licences and authorizations are granted,
and that payments and other transfers of funds are
not subject to any restriction insofar as they relate to
the aforementioned goods and services. Regrettably,
the United States has so far failed to comply with the
Court’s order, and moreover, by imposing new rounds
22/27

27/10/2022

of sanctions, especially during the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, has deliberately violated
its obligation to comply with that order.
It is noteworthy that in paragraph 100 of its order, the
Court reaffirmed that its orders on provisional measures
have binding effect and thus create international legal
obligations for any party to whom the provisional
measures are addressed. The failure to comply with the
Court’s orders is a practice by which the United States
commonly violates and ignores its rulings. As a result,
the Islamic Republic of Iran has brought the United
States’ non-compliance with the order to the Court’s
attention on several occasions. Needless to say, that
continued non-compliance of the United States with this
order is a violation of its international responsibility.
That said, Iran welcomes the Court’s initiative to
amend the resolution concerning the internal judicial
practice of the Court by adding a new article 11 for
the purpose of monitoring the implementation of
provisional measures through an ad hoc committee.
We legitimately and respectfully expect that the ad
hoc committee will facilitate the implementation
of the Court’s order on provisional measures in the
pending case. The Court has rejected the preliminary
objections raised by the United States and held that it
has jurisdiction to entertain the application filed by the
Islamic Republic of Iran and that the said application
is admissible. The United States has filed its countermemorial and the Islamic Republic of Iran is preparing
its reply, which should be filed on 21 December.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize once again
the vital importance of the Court’s role in clarifying,
recognizing, crystallizing and developing the rules
of international law, ultimately contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security
through the peaceful settlement of inter-State disputes
and the preservation of the international legal order.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): I would like to begin by
paying a heartfelt tribute to the late Judge Antônio
Augusto Cançado Trindade, who made enormous
contributions to the work of the International Court
of Justice as a distinguished scholar and jurist of
international law. I would also like to express my
appreciation to President Donoghue for her dedicated
leadership and comprehensive report (A/77/4) on the
Court’s activities over the past year (see A/77/PV.20).
Japan commends the members of the Court and the
Registry for their contributions to the effective and
efficient functioning of the Court.
22-65677

27/10/2022

The role of the Court in maintaining international
peace, stability and prosperity has never been more
important. Today we are facing a variety of challenges
in critical areas ranging from the prohibition on the use
of force and territorial and maritime delimitation to
humanitarian law and human rights law, to name just
a few. The steady volume of the Court’s caseload and
the variety of cases and subject matter brought before
the Court demonstrate the continued confidence of
States in the role of the Court in settling disputes. That
confidence is founded on the Court’s long-standing
jurisprudence based on the consideration and application
of the existing rules of international law. We trust that
the Court will continue to take a balanced approach
to interpreting treaties and customary international
law, which will enable it to maintain the high level of
confidence that the international community has placed
in it.
As Prime Minister Kishida emphasized in his
address to the General Assembly (see A/77/PV.5),
Japan attaches great importance to the rule of law in
the international community. The prohibition of the use
of force and the observance of international law in good
faith are fundamental principles required for the rule of
law, and the United Nations and Member States must
cooperate in that regard. We believe that the Court,
along with other international judicial institutions,
constitutes an indispensable pillar of an international
order based on law.
Today it is more necessary than ever to peacefully
settle disputes. That is the main role of the Court, and
it cannot be achieved unless parties to a dispute abide
by not just the Court’s decisions but also its orders
on provisional measures. In that regard, I would like
to recall the Court’s order indicating the provisional
measures of 16 March regarding the case brought by
Ukraine against Russia. Japan supports that order and
strongly demands that Russia comply with it.
We believe that acceptance of the Court’s
compulsory jurisdiction by the broadest possible
number of States enables the Court to most effectively
fulfil its role. Japan once again calls on all Member
States that have not yet accepted the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court to consider doing so.
In conclusion, I reiterate Japan’s steadfast
support for the role of the Court in maintaining and
strengthening the rule of law through the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. As an incoming
member of the Security Council from next January,

A/77/PV.21

Japan is determined to redouble its efforts to defend the
Charter and fortify the rule of law in the international
community, together with the International Court of
Justice as an indispensable partner in this field.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): I would like to thank the
President of the International Court of Justice, Judge Joan
E. Donoghue, for the comprehensive report (see A/77/
PV.20). Albania strongly supports the work delivered
by the Court under the able stewardship of its President,
especially under the challenging circumstances created
by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The International Court of Justice is a pillar of the
international rule of law, and its value only increases
at a time when fundamental norms and rules are being
transgressed. The Russian aggression against Ukraine
is a serious test of the rules-based world order, and we
must pass this test successfully if we are not to drift
towards a lawless world. That is why we welcome the
provisional measures issued by the International Court
of Justice on 16 March requesting Russia to immediately
suspend the military operations that it commenced on
24 February in the territory of Ukraine. We call on
the Russian Federation to abide by the preliminary
measures of the Court, to retreat from Ukraine without
conditions and to honour its international obligations.
In that spirit, we reiterate the call made by the General
Assembly through resolution 76/117, of 9 December
2021, for all States to accept the jurisdiction of the
International Court of Justice.
We need the Court to resolve disputes peacefully
and based on law, to pursue world peace and security
through legal means and adjudication. Indeed, the Court
has delivered important rulings on cases ranging from
territorial and maritime delimitation, human rights, the
interpretation and application of international treaties
and conventions concerning the prevention of genocide
and the elimination of racial discrimination. These
wide-ranging cases demonstrate that States make
good use of the Court and show the need for a strong
world court. That is why we welcome and support the
establishment of a trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship
Programme, which will help train the next generation
of jurists, the guardians of international law.
We fully support the new strategic plan of the
Court for the period 2021 to 2025, which is aimed at the
continued development and implementation of human
rights law with an emphasis on accountability, access
to justice and strengthening the role of an independent
judiciary and bar. We must do our part to ensure a

22-6567723/27

A/77/PV.21

well-governed world where law and courts determine
disputes, not might and force, a world where impunity
becomes history and equal rights reign supreme
everywhere. That is why we believe that an enhanced
cooperation between the General Assembly and the
International Court of Justice will only benefit the
promotion of world peace and security.
Mr. Al Shehhi (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to deliver this statement on behalf of the
Sultanate of Oman’s delegation in the context of the
discussion of the report of the International Court of
Justice (A/77/4) by the General Assembly during its
seventy-seventh session. My country attaches great
importance to that issue given the Court’s role and
status in the international system.
In that regard, the delegation of the Sultanate of
Oman wishes to endorse the statement delivered by the
representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20), where
it supports the competence of the Court as the main
judicial organ of the United Nations. We emphasize the
need to settle disputes peacefully and the non-use or
threat of use of force, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We sincerely thank the Secretary-General for
his report entitled “Secretary-General’s trust fund to
assist States in the settlement of disputes through the
International Court of Justice” (A/77/204). We also
thank the President of the Court for her thorough
presentation of the activities of the Court for the period
under review.
The International Court of Justice is a pillar of
the international system based on the provisions and
principles of international law. For decades, the Court
has proven itself capable of carrying out its mandate
with integrity and has earned the trust that States place
in it. Its judgments and advisory opinions also reinforce
the primacy of the rule of law. The fact that States
are resorting increasingly to the Court to settle their
disputes is a recognition and acceptance of the Court’s
jurisdiction.
The Sultanate of Oman stresses its support for
the international law. We encourage States to resort
to the Court and other international courts and legal
bodies, in accordance with their competencies, to settle
differences between States peacefully, as per the United
Nations Charter. That demonstrates our conviction
that settling differences in a spirit of consensus and
24/27

27/10/2022

tolerance constitutes civilized behaviour that will lead
to better results, rather than through conflict.
The Sultanate of Oman reiterates its commitment to
the principles of the United Nations and its Charter. Our
legal code emphasizes the State’s policies, including its
observance of international and regional treaties and
conventions as well as rules of international law leading
to the achievement of peace and security among States
and peoples.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the pivotal
and important role played by the International Court of
Justice in promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes
and resolving them by peaceful means in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter. The Sultanate of Oman reiterates its position
in support of the Court’s contribution to maintaining
international peace and security and ensuring that our
world is safer and more stable.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): Indonesia aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of the
Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (see A/77/PV.20).
At the outset, allow me to express our condolences
on the passing of Judge Antônio Cançado Trindade. We
lost a staunch proponent of justice and the rule of law.
His legacy will always be remembered.
We express our appreciation to the President of the
International Court of Justice, Judge Joan E. Donoghue,
for her comprehensive report (A/77/4).
It is encouraging to see the high level of activities
during the period covered by the report. That is
evidenced by the number of judgments, orders, public
hearings and cases undertaken by the Court. It also
demonstrates the vigour of the institution. The variety
of issues and subject matter submitted to the Court
were also diverse. Moreover, the geographical diversity
of cases filed before the Court demonstrates that States
continue to have trust in it. That reflects the universal
recognition of its jurisdiction.
Our world today is in a worrisome state. In pursuit
of narrow self-interest, violations of international
law are often seen. Unfaithful interpretation of laws,
or even a complete ignorance of international law, is
often disregarded by the international community.
We must work to stop that. We must work hard to
revive a strong spirit for the respect of international
law. Finding peaceful solutions must be the only way
22-65677

27/10/2022

to settle differences and disputes. In that context, the
Court plays an important role. To that end, allow me to
emphasize a few points.
First, the Court must at all times defend its judicial
independence and integrity. That will ensure the delivery
of justice that is fair, transparent and impartial to all
countries, irrespective of power, influence or authority.
In the exercise of its judicial function, the Court must
be the master of itself, operate independently and act
only on the basis of the law.
Secondly, it is important for the Court to maintain
legal certainty, given that the Court’s jurisprudence
impacts virtually all areas of contemporary international
law. That is because the Court’s judgments are generally
considered as authoritative pronouncements on the
law. Moreover, the Court’s decisions and advisory
opinions contribute to the progressive development and
codification of international law. It is also important
to emphasize that the Court must be adaptive. The
Court must be able to respond to future dynamics and
challenges by making international law relevant within
the context of justice.
Finally, we welcome the Court’s efforts to promote
greater understanding of international law, particularly
among younger generations. Greater comprehension
by the public of the Court’s judgments, opinions and
processes is important and must be continuously
strengthened. In that context, we encourage the
Court to consistently promote its work and activities,
including through direct teaching, seminars, workshops
and publications.
Indonesia also supports the implementation of the
trust fund for the Judicial Fellowship Programme. We
call for a larger proportion of the Fellowship fund to
be directed to nationals of developing countries, while
ensuring the geographical and linguistic diversity of
participants in the Programme.
Indonesia reaffirms its support for the Court
and recognizes the significance the international
community places on the Court’s work.
Mr. Alajeeli (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we welcome Judge Joan
E. Donoghue and express to her our thanks and
appreciation for her valuable briefing (see A/77/PV.20).
We wish her good health and every success.
The United Arab Emirates expresses its firm
support for the work of the International Court of

A/77/PV.21

Justice as the main legal organ of the United Nations.
The role of the Court has become more important
than ever today with respect to the settlement of many
disputes among Members of the United Nations and
the international community as a whole. The United
Arab Emirates underscores that Member States should
fully implement the legal framework for the peaceful
settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations. The peaceful settlement of a dispute
is the responsibility of the parties to that dispute, as is
their acceptance of the Court’s jurisdiction. The Court
plays an important role in resolving disputes.
The diversity of States parties and the issues
considered by the Court, as well as its advisory opinions,
give the Court a greater role in the maintenance of
international peace and security by peacefully resolving
such disputes. In addition, the Court plays a key role
in enabling States to access international justice by
defending their rights and interests in accordance
with international law for matters that fall under the
Court’s competence. Consequently, we call on the
United Nations, the Security Council and the General
Assembly to promote cooperation with the Court.
Our annual discussion of this issue has special
importance, as it gives us an opportunity to take note
of developments in the Court’s work. It also allows
Member States to manifest their support for the Court,
in accordance with Article 1, paragraph 1, of the Charter,
which calls for “peaceful means, and in conformity with
the principles of justice and international law, adjustment
or settlement of international disputes or situations which
might lead to a breach of the peace”.
In that context, we would like to reiterate the
appreciation of the United Arab Emirates for the Court’s
flexibility and swiftness in modifying its working methods
to respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic, including
by using technological methods in continuing to carry
out its judicial functions and convening hearings through
video communication. That is an extremely positive step
towards the Court’s continuous work during the most
difficult circumstances.
Given the use of technology for increased access to
justice and the lessons learned during the pandemic, as
well as our common desire to anticipate challenges, the
United Arab Emirates encourages the Court to continue
adopting new measures and modifying current procedures
in order to promote its ability to carry out its functions,
especially during crises.

22-6567725/27

A/77/PV.21

We also underscore the importance of promoting the
principle of multilingualism in the work of the Court. We
are aware of the administrative burden imposed by the
inclusion of additional languages, but we believe that the
burden is minimal when one weighs it against the benefits
that can accrue from the Court being able to communicate
directly, clearly and precisely with all parties concerned
across the world on internationally important issues
considered by the Court.
The United Arab Emirates appreciates the efforts of
the Court in disseminating awareness about international
law and expanding its scope through the Court’s
publications and reports.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
its appreciation to the International Court of Justice, its
President and all its judges and staff for their valuable
contributions. We look forward to the upcoming election
to fill the vacancy on the Court following the demise of
Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade, whose legacy
on the Court we value.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes the report of the International Court of Justice
(A/77/4), which we have studied with great interest.
We note with deep regret the passing of Judge Antônio
Augusto Cançado Trindade, and we offer our condolences
to his loved ones and his beloved country.
We also wish to congratulate Judge Hilary
Charlesworth and wish her all the best in her work.
The International Court of Justice, together with
the Security Council and the General Assembly, form
the key organs of the architecture that we have in place
to pursue the principles of peace and justice in relations
between States that underpin the Charter of the United
Nations. Let us recall the Preamble of the Charter,
which declares the determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to establish
the conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained.
The report we are debating today confirms a
positive trend that has been developing over the past
few decades, namely, that there is a greater willingness
on the part of States to refer disputes to the Court,
making it a truly international Court engaged in the
pursuit of justice. During the period under review, it
delivered judgments on merits in three cases and a
judgment on preliminary objections in one case, as
26/27

27/10/2022

well as delivering orders. It was seized with four new
contentious cases, bringing the total number of cases
entered onto the Court’s general list to 15. The report
notes that this high level of activity involves a wide
range of international law issues that reminds one of
the contents page of an international law handbook:
territorial and maritime delimitation, human rights,
reparation for internationally wrongful acts, protection
of the environment, the jurisdictional immunity of
States and treaty interpretation and application.
Furthermore, it is heartening to see the geographical
spread of the cases before the Court. Cases emanate
from all regions of the United Nations. Those factors
confirm that the International Court of Justice is a
truly international court duly exercising its mandate to
strengthen and promote the peaceful resolution of disputes
between States and uphold the international rule of law.
The Court’s advisory opinions allow the organs of the
United Nations with the mandate of the maintenance of
international peace and security to utilize the Court as an
avenue to settle international disputes peacefully and to
promote compliance with international law. Unfortunately,
it appears that this important tool that we have before
us remains underutilized at the present moment.
Turning to more practical matters, we believe that
the management of the Court deserves praise for the way
in which its working methods have adapted to the new
reality of the coronavirus disease pandemic, allowing
the Court to proceed with its judicial activities by means
of hybrid sessions. We also note with appreciation the
developments around the budget of the Court as proposed
for 2023. There are some welcome developments in
that regard, at a time when more must be done with
less, both domestically in our countries as well as in
international organizations.
We are confident that this managerial resilience will
allow the Court to continue with its work without any
interruption when the peaceful atmosphere of the Peace
Palace will be disturbed next year by the activities of
moving companies when it has to relocate to temporary
accommodation for the overdue maintenance of the
building, which has been occupied by the Court for
more than a century. We wish the judges, management
and all staff all the best with that endeavour.
Mr. Dang Hoang Giang (Viet Nam): I would like to
extend Viet Nam’s commendation to the President of the
International Court of Justice for her informative report
on the activities of the Court (see A/77/PV.20). We also
22-65677

27/10/2022

highly appreciate the tireless dedication of the judges of
the International Court of Justice to the work of the Court.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to Judge Antônio Augusto Cançado Trindade, one of the
leading international law scholars and jurists, who served
the Court with distinction before his passing in May.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
(see A/77/ PV.20).
Over the years, the International Court of Justice
has played an indispensable part in international life.
It has promoted the peaceful settlement of disputes
and friendly relations among States. It continued to
do so in the past year, with a particularly high level of
activity, including the handing down of four judgments
and 15 orders, as the latest report elaborated (A/77/4).
We very much share the Court’s assessment that
the geographical spread of the cases brought before
the Court and the diversity of their subject matters
illustrate the universal and general character of the
Court’s jurisdiction. Moreover, this has demonstrated
the trust that Member States have in the Court’s role
in solidifying international law as a foundation for
peaceful coexistence among nations. To that end, in
addition to the promotion of the role of the Court, it is
equally important that all Member States strictly adhere
to their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. Such obligations require
States to implement in good faith orders and judgments
by international courts and tribunals, including the
International Court of Justice, in accordance with
international treaties to which States are parties.
In addition to the dispute settlement function of the
Court, we would like to highlight another core function
of the International Court of Justice, which is to render
advisory opinions in accordance with Article 96 of the
United Nations Charter. Advisory opinions contribute
significantly to the elucidation of international law,

A/77/PV.21

including the legal aspects related to major issues of
international concern. One such issue is climate change.
It is the issue of today and tomorrow, of our present
generations and of our future generations. Climate
change particularly poses an existential threat to many
low-lying nations and small island countries, as well as
coastal areas of many countries.
Climate actions have been made. Net-zero
commitments have been issued. But they are not enough.
More ambitious and urgent actions therefore are sorely
needed. They include seeking an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice clarifying States’
obligations under various treaties, including the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the
Paris Agreement and the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, among others. It will help shed light on
unresolved legal aspects regarding climate change. It will
reinforce our collective efforts to combat climate change.
It will further strengthen the role of the Court, as the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, on a matter
of long-term magnitude for the future of humankind.
Viet Nam therefore associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Vanuatu (see A/77/PV.20)
on behalf of the core group of States working on a draft
resolution with a view to requesting an advisory opinion
of the Court on climate change. As with other members
of the core group, we look forward to working closely
with and receiving the support of other United Nations
Members in our common endeavours to combat climate
change for our planet and our future generations.
The Acting President: We have heard the
last speaker in the debate on this item. We shall
hear the remaining speakers on Wednesday,
2 November in the afternoon after the consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 72 and item 131 in this Hall.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 70.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

22-6567727/27
