United Nations

A/RES/57/131

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 February 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 80

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/57/524)]

57/131. Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations 1 and the action taken by the Special Committee in respect of that
information,
Having also examined the report of the Secretary-General, 2
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it
requested the Special Committee to study the information transmitted to the
Secretary-General in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United
Nations and to take such information fully into account in examining the situation
with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling also its resolution 56/65 of 10 December 2001, in which it requested
the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of timely transmission by the administering Powers
of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to
the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the Territories
concerned,
1.
Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly
itself that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self_______________
1

A/57/23 (Part II), chap. VIII. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftyseventh Session, Supplement No. 23.
2
A/57/74.

02 54690

A/RES/57/131

government in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the
administering Power concerned should continue to transmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter with respect to that Territory;
2.
Requests the administering Powers concerned to transmit or continue to
transmit to the Secretary-General the information prescribed in Article 73 e of the
Charter, as well as the fullest possible information on political and constitutional
developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six months
following the expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate
information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with the
preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned;
4.
Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with established
procedures.
73rd plenary meeting
11 December 2002

2
