146

General Assembly-- Thirty-eighth Session

1. Notes with satisfactwn the further constructivc
development of the activities of the United Nations University in research, training and the disscmination of
knowledge under the medium-term perspective, using
multidisciplinary and integrative approaches designcd. in
accordance with the Charter of the University. to promote
greater understanding of urgent and pressing global
problems and provide ideas for solving them;
2. Welcomes the initiation of a new programmc planning process at the University Centre. designed to facilitatc
the participation of the Unitcd Nations University's networks of collaborating scholars, and, as part of this process, the creation of a planning and evaluation serviccs
unit;
3. A/so welcomes the adoption by the Council of the
United Nations University ofthe initial statute ofthe University, in accordance with its Charter, on the basis ofthe
experience gained by the University since its establishment;
4. Notes with satisjaction that progress has been made
towards the establishment of the first three research and
training centres of the United Nations University, which
will be concemed with development economics, natural
resources in Africa and biotechnology, respectively, and
the further development of the work of the University in
helping to strengthen existing institutions in developing
countries through the extension of its networks of associate
and co-operating institutions and in placing increased
emphasis on its post-graduate training through fellowships
relevant to the development ofresearch, training and institution-building;
5. A/so notes with satisfaction the further expansion of
the co-operative activities of the United Nations University with the United Nations, its bodies and the spccializcd
agencies, particularly United Nations research and training
institutions, and the increasing collaboration of the University with the intemational academic and scientific community;
6. Recognizes that the United Nations University
needs to build up its Endowment Fund and other contributions in order to increase its core income, to which end a
number of Member States have already extended positivc
co-operation;
7. Earnestly appeals to all Member States to take cognizance of the important developments at the United
Nations University and to contribute urgently and generously to its Endowment Fund and, additionally or altematively, to make operating contributions to the University
to enable it to fulfil its mandate effectively, in accordance
with its Charter and with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions.
102nd plenary meeting
19 Dccember 1983

38/179. Unified approach to development analysis
and planning
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969, containing the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, 3409 (XXX) of 28 November 1975, conceming a unified approach to development analysis and
planning, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 197 4, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on
the Establishment of a New Intemational Economic
139 N38/62.

Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 Deccmber 197 4, containing the
Charter of Economic Rights and Dutics of States, 3362 (SVll) of 16 Septembcr 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation. 35/56 of 5 December 1980.
thc annex to which contains the lntemational Dcvelopment Strategy for thc Third United Nations Devclopment
Decade. and 37 /202 of 20 December 1982, conceming the
revicw and appraisal ofthc implementation ofthe lntemational Development Strategy for thc Third Unitcd Nations
Dcvclopmcnt Dccadc.
Bcaring in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 1747 (LIV) of 16 May 1973, which contains recommcndations conceming a unificd approach to devclopment
analysis and planning.
Believing that development is an integral process,
cmbodying both cconomic and social objectives.
Further believing that a unified approach to analysis and
planning of development at the national level is a possiblc
and effective too! for promoting economic, social and
human development and for providing increasing opportunities to ali peoplc for a better life.
Reaffirming that each State has the sovereign and
inalienable right to choosc its cconomic and social system
in accordance with the will of its pcople and without
outside interference,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
conccming the status of replies received from Govemments on the experience acquired in applying a unified
approach to the process of socio-economic developmcnt; 139
2. Reajfirms its decision 36/405 of 19 November 1981
to continue consideration of the question of a unified
approach to development analysis and planning, taking
into account its importance for the process of development, as stressed in the Intemational Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade;
3. Invites intercsted countries to send information to
the Secretary-General on the experience acquired in applying a unified approach to the process of socio-economic
development at the national level;
4.

Requests the Secretary-General:

(a) To continue to study the question of a unified
approach to the analysis and planning of development, in
order to make available to ali States the national and international experience gained in this field;
(b) To prepare, on the basis of the information offered
by interested countries. a report on the application by
Govemments of a unified approach to development analysis and planning, taking into account both the experience
gained in this field in the United Nations economic and
social organs concemed and the results of the first review
and appraisal of the implementation of the Intemational
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade;
(e) To submit the report to the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1985, and to the
General Assembly for consideration at its fortieth session,
with a view to its utilization as an input in the future
reviews and appraisals of the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade.
102nd p/enar_v meeting
19 Decembcr 1983
