S/PV.7376

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7376th meeting

Thursday, 5 February 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mrs. Jakubonė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (S/2015/37)

15-03221 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1503221*

S/PV.7376

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

current configuration for six months, which could be
renewed.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2015/37)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Ghana,
Guinea-Bissau and Timor-Leste to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His
Excellency Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota, Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/37, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Trovoada.
Mr. Trovoada (spoke in French): I thank the
Council for the opportunity to present the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/37) on recent developments
in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS).
Since the most recent update of the SecretaryGeneral to the Council (S/2014/805), some noteworthy
developments have been observed, including the
holding of a summit of Heads of State and Government
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Abuja, on 15 December 2014, where it
was decided that the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) would be extended in its

2/8

05/02/2015

Regarding the reform of the defence and security
forces, the incumbent Minister of that sector has
introduced new amendments to the legislation on the
creation of the special pension fund. She has also
presented the Prime Minister with a list of personnel
eligible for demobilization and retirement, which is
being analysed.
In January, the Minister of Justice led the review
and validation of the proposed programme of reform of
the judiciary. The validated document will incorporate
all the proposals to be submitted by the Government to
the round table of international partners, scheduled for
25 March in Brussels. That will be another important
step towards the establishment of an accessible,
transparent and credible system of justice in GuineaBissau.
Also in January, the Human Rights Council
undertook the second universal periodic review of
Guinea-Bissau. It made recommendations, particularly
in terms of strengthening the protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity and human rights
violations committed in the past. It also recommended
the country’s accession to a number of legal instruments
and the ratification of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court.
On the social front, the Government has been able
to continue providing basic services to the population
and to ensure an acceptable level of prevention against
the Ebola outbreak. Overall, the actions and decisions
taken indicate that neither the desire for change nor the
support of partners has wavered.
Let me draw the Council’s attention to the
direction in which the Government intends to move. In
accordance with its programme for the next four years,
unanimously approved by the National Assembly, the
Government has defined a strategy and priorities for the
Brussels round table, which is of special importance to
UNIOGBIS. As for the first goal — the consolidation of
the rule of law, promoting good governance and reform
of State institutions — there has been encouraging
progress in strategic planning and the drafting of
legislation, particularly in the fields of defence, security
and justice. With a view to strengthening national unity,
the National Assembly has reactivated the commission
to promote national dialogue and established the
structures necessary to do so.

15-03221

05/02/2015

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Despite these efforts, the situation remains fragile
because, as the Secretary-General often says, there
can be no lasting peace without development and no
development without lasting peace. It is certain that
there will be neither one nor the other without the
primacy of the rule of law and respect for human rights.
In this regard, the United Nations system in GuineaBissau welcomes the adoption by the Government of
an integrated approach ensuring the complementarity
of efforts towards poverty eradication and economic
development with good governance, thereby creating
the potential for the promotion of social progress.
The priorities announced by the Government to
the strategic assessment mission show that the return
to constitutional order, as positive as it has been, has
not yet made it possible to address the root causes
of instability in Guinea-Bissau. This means that the
socio-political environment is characterized by a
climate in which hope for a future free of uncertainty
coexists with a sense of stability that remains precarious.
Guinea-Bissau continues to need support, including in
strengthening democratic institutions, restructuring
the defence and security sector, strengthening the
judicial system, improving the functioning of the public
administration, and increasing its capacity to fight
impunity and transnational crime, among others.
Accordingly, the Secretary-General recommends
the strengthening of the good offices of his Special
Representative in order to contribute to the promotion
of an environment of peace and stability while
encouraging dialogue towards national reconciliation.
Trust among the political leaders of the country remains
unquestionably an essential element of stability.
Similarly, UNIOGBIS should continue to promote
the strengthening of cooperation between GuineaBissau and its international partners by providing a
coordinated response to the country’s reform efforts. In
that respect, special attention must be paid to deepening
the partnership with ECOWAS, the African Union, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the European Union, given the regional, continental,
international and cultural dimensions of the issue of
development in Guinea-Bissau.
Let me stress a third aspect by reaffirming that
Guinea-Bissau needs ECOMIB and that ECOMIB
needs the support of the international community and
in particular the Security Council. The deployment
of a regional force is an exceptional measure taken
by ECOWAS, whose primary task as a regional

S/PV.7376

economic community is to promote the socioeconomic
development of its member States with a view to short-,
medium- and long-term integration.
It is clear that the assistance provided by the
international community to Guinea-Bissau cannot last
forever. In this perspective, the philosophy that must
inspire the strategy of partnership between the country
and the international community in the context of
development assistance must seek to create, both for
the people of Guinea-Bissau and for their partners,
conditions that will allow Guinea-Bissau to do without
international assistance. The United Nations is striving
for that objective by taking initiatives and promoting
actions to arrive at the point at which the country will
no longer need either a political mission or a foreign
military force on its soil.
The challenges are vast, numerous and complex,
but they are not insurmountable. The consolidation of
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau, a prerequisite
for development, requires joint efforts, patience and
perseverance. In this context, the commitment of the
Security Council and the international community as a
whole to that country has never been more necessary,
important and urgent in ensuring that the achievements
won to date are consolidated and the excesses of the
past are forever consigned to history.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Trovoada for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Patriota.
Mr. Patriota: Let me thank you, Sir, for the
invitation to address the Security Council this
morning in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Miguel Trovoada for his
insightful presentation and for sharing a vision of the
progress, challenges and opportunities that GuineaBissau faces today. I am particularly grateful for
his readiness to cooperate with the Peacebuilding
Commission towards our shared objective of providing
the best support to the authorities and the people of
Guinea-Bissau.
Two weeks ago, the PBC Guinea-Bissau configuration
held its first meeting of the year, to which we invited
Special Representative Trovoada and Prime Minister
Simões Pereira to brief from Bissau. We also invited
the Department of Political Affairs to debrief on the

15-032213/8

S/PV.7376

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

strategic assessment mission that the Council requested
of the Secretary-General through resolution 2157
(2014), of 29 May 2014.
I would like to take this opportunity to attest to the
commendable achievements since the new authorities
came into power in Guinea-Bissau last June. I was able
to witness that first-hand last fall when I travelled to
Bissau. The careful analyses heard from the Prime
Minister, the Department of Political Affairs and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
during our last PBC meeting, and again today from
Mr. Trovoada, are all in agreement. As the PBC engages
this year in an important review of the peacebuilding
architecture, I believe that Guinea-Bissau provides some
valuable lessons about the difference that a legitimate,
competent and inclusive Government can make when
combined with committed political accompaniment by
international partners.
What is different today from any other time in
the modern history of Guinea-Bissau is that, despite
the existing challenges posed by rampant poverty and
the legacy of decades of unsatisfactory governance, a
better and more stable future for the country and its
population seems to be within reach. With modest,
timely and well-thought-out efforts, the new authorities
of the country have put Guinea-Bissau on a promising
track, while showing their willingness to overcome the
dysfunction of the past and to do things in a democratic
and inclusive results-oriented manner. In the seven
months since the new authorities have been in power,
politics has been conducted wisely and courageously,
including on thorny issues such as the reform of the
defence and security apparatus, the need to rebuild
the social contract through national dialogue and
reconciliation, and improving the justice system.
This new era of progress has also been marked by the
delivery of basic services to a greater number of people.
I am pleased that the Council is considering the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s recent
assessment, which provides a thorough and honest
diagnosis of how Guinea-Bissau’s ills from the past could
be overcome. The report (S/2015/37) also emphasizes
the risks that lie ahead. It places responsibility on the
authorities to own and lead the reforms, paving the way
towards democratization and prosperity. However, we
know that, although this predisposition is essential, what
is also required now more than ever is that our words
of support translate into deeds. Our solidarity should
catalyse long-term sustainable engagement. I should

4/8

05/02/2015

like, therefore, to urge regional neighbours, friends and
partners of Guinea-Bissau to actively participate and
ensure the success of the round table for Guinea-Bissau
to be held on 25 March in Brussels. Let me remind
the Council that we are dealing with a comparatively
small-scale challenge. If we cannot succeed in GuineaBissau, how are we to contemplate success with regard
to more complex and bigger problems?
We have come a long way in a short time with
respect Guinea-Bissau, and opportunities to consolidate
peacebuilding gains rarely present themselves in as
promising a way as they do right now in the country. To
build the State sustainably, the country will still require
strong support from United Nations, especially the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
The situation we are witnessing presents fertile ground
for both bodies to cooperate and focus international
support on the Government’s priorities. That means
that we should continue supporting the work done by
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), and thus welcome
the renewal and update of its mandate for one year.
We also recognize the valuable work done by the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) in securing institutions
and advancing security sector reform in the country,
and we believe that the Security Council should
politically endorse it. Both UNIOGBIS and ECOMIB
are trusted partners of the Bissau-Guineans and have
shown solidarity, understanding and the ability to make
a significant difference during difficult times. Now that
the situation is improving, their assistance will be more
valuable than ever. Both institutions therefore require
the Council’s continued loyal support.
I would also like to emphasize the need to reinforce
the role of civil society, especially of women and youth,
in decision-making processes designed to change the
paradigm of poverty and underdevelopment in GuineaBissau. It is time to start changing the long-held view
that Guinea-Bissau is a chronic case of corruption,
impunity and drug trafficking. We should favour an
approach that maximizes the potential and promises of
a nation full of youth, energy and desire to turn the
page on its darkest history. For that, the State must
foster dialogue across society, leading by example
in ensuring that political actors continue to put their
differences aside with a view to advancing the interests
of the nation. We must redouble efforts, international
partners and Bissau-Guineans alike, to ensure that

15-03221

05/02/2015

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

sustainable progress and stability become the new
reality henceforth.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Patriota for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of GuineaBissau.
Mrs. P. D’Alva (Guinea-Bissau): First, I would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of February 2015.
I also thank all Council members for allowing my
delegation to come to the Council table.
At the outset, my delegation would like also to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Guinea-Bissau, His Excellency Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, for the briefing he just gave on developments
in our country and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), as well as for all his dedication and
commitment to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau since
his appointment. We commend the work of UNIOGBIS
and welcome the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to extend its mandate for 12 additional months.
Allow me also to express my country sincere
appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador António
de Aguiar Patriota, Permanent Representative of
Brazil and Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his commitment
and personal engagement and for his clear advocacy
for concrete solutions for the consolidation of the
peace process in Guinea-Bissau. The PBC GuineaBissau configuration has been an important partner
for my Government because of its fundamental role on
consolidating efforts by the international community to
support and assist Guinea-Bissau.
We also extend our gratitude to Her Excellency
Ambassador Sofia Mesquita Borges, Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste, for the statement
she will make later on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) and for the
willingness of the Community to support our country
on the new challenges for future.
After my country’s long and struggle-filled road
since the restoration of constitutional order, I confess
to the Council that today I feel very optimistic as I take
the floor here. As underlined by the previous speakers,
the efforts and progress made by the democratically
elected authorities of Guinea-Bissau have contributed

S/PV.7376

tremendously to the improvement of the political
and socioeconomic situation in the country. An
environment with open communication, collaboration
and understanding among the main elected institutions
of the country also played an important role in the
positive results been seeing in Guinea-Bissau today.
Since assuming office, the new Government has
outlined three phases as part of a strategy to deal with
challenges of the country, as reflectd in the Emergency
Plan, the Contingency Plan and the Medium-Term
Development Plan. When the Government took office,
it was confronted with multitude of socioeconomic
problems, including salary arrears, strikes by
education and health-care professionals and difficulties
in providing basic services such as electricity and
drinking water. In addition to all those challenges, the
subregion confronted by the Ebola epidemic, for which
Guinea-Bissau needed to take preventive measures.
The Government’s Emergency Plan was aimed at
focusing on tackling those immediate issues. Today
we can proudly say that the Government was able to
substantially reduce the arrears due civil servants,
save the school year, significantly improve electricity
and drinking water services and keep the health-care
system functioning, including maintaining the level of
no reported cases of Ebola in the country.
Within the framework of the Contingency Plan,
the Government has created a national commission
to verify all contracts previously drawn up by the
transition Government concerning exploration of the
country’s natural resources, in the light of their legal
legitimacy as well as their benefits for the country. The
Government will submit its medium-term development
plan to the international community at the international
donor conference scheduled to take place on 26 March
in Brussels.
The authorities and people of Guinea-Bissau
are fully aware that the sustainability of peace and
the development of our country are our primary
responsibility. However, as a fragile country that has
struggled with enormous difficulties and challenges
for years, we are in serious need of the international
community’s support and financial assistance if we are
to stay on the path to development. We need engagement
on the part of our partners more than ever now so that,
like the rest of the world, we can finally focus on our
sustainable development goals. In that regard, we hope
that all our partners and friends will stay with us on
our new course and participate in the aforementioned

15-032215/8

S/PV.7376

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

donor round-table conference. We appreciate and
commend the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the CPLP, the International
Organization of la Francophonie and all of GuineaBissau’s other bilateral partners for their involvement
in the preparatory process for the conference.
Our Government is fully engaged in the process
of reform, and as Prime Minister Domingos Simões
Pereira reassured the International Contact Group for
Guinea-Bissau at its last meeting, here in New York in
November, Guinea-Bissau remains strongly committed
to implementing all the reforms necessary to enable
the country to continue to move ahead. While we
are working on many important reforms, reform of
the security sector remains one of the Government’s
priorities, and in fact has already begun, though slowly,
with contributions and support from ECOWAS and
other bilateral and multilateral partners. President
José Mário Vaz’s appointment in September of a new
chief of the armed forces, the creation of a national
security-sector steering committee, the Government’s
engagement through the Ministry of Defence and
the recent handover of our military infrastructure,
including four army barracks that are being refurbished
under the country’s defence and security-sector reform
programme by the ECOWAS Commission, show that
reform is indeed under way.
For all those efforts, we commend and thank Ghana,
the current Chair of ECOWAS, for all its efforts and
for all that ECOWAS has been trying to do to maintain
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. However, for
those efforts to really be sustainably implemented,
Guinea-Bissau is counting on financial assistance
from all its bilateral and multilateral partners to enable
it to secure and maintain its pension fund for retired
military personnel.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that all the problems that GuineaBissau has faced have been repeatedly reported on
in the Council and in various international forums
over the years. We believe the time has now come for
concrete action, and that is what the people of GuineaBissau expect from the international community and all
those present here. Guinea-Bissau has so much to give
to the world, and with the support of the international
community and the will and perseverance of its humble
people, that will be possible.

6/8

05/02/2015

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ghana.
Mr. Kanda (Ghana): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate China on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and on its
distinguished leadership. I would also like to affirm the
appreciation and continued support of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and
Ghana for the Council’s work towards world peace and
security for sustainable development.
On 18 November, the tenth meeting of the
International Contact Group for Guinea-Bissau was
held at here at United Nations Headquarters, under the
leadership of the Foreign Ministers of Ghana and TimorLeste, in order to explore effective ways of coordinating
and harmonizing international interventions for the
best possible results in our efforts to ensure GuineaBissau’s political stability and economic recovery.
Our deliberations were not oblivious to the scarcity of
available resources for urgent and competing global
needs. Yet the need for us to strive hard to sustain and
make progress kept us resilient, in the belief that with
the Council’s support we will be able to give the people
of Guinea-Bissau hope for the future.
Since then, some progress has been made by
the Government of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS, the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and the
United Nations towards sustaining the gains necessary
for Guinea-Bissau’s political stability and economic
recovery. I would therefore like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report dated 19 January (S/2015/37)
on developments in the country and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau. We urge all partners to continue
to support Guinea-Bissau. ECOWAS supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation for the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau to be extended for a period of
12 months, until 29 February 2016.
For its part, ECOWAS will continue to support
efforts to consolidate peace, stability and security as
well as to promote sustainable development in GuineaBissau. Consequently, we have extended the mandate
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB)
beyond 31 December 2014 for another six months,
retaining the existing force strength despite the impact
of the Ebola virus disease on West Africa’s fragile
economies. United Nations support for ECOMIB’s

15-03221

05/02/2015

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

work is indeed essential to maintaining the progress
that has so far been made in the country.
In view of the current political challenges facing
the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, the Government has put
together a three-phase reform programme encompassing
emergency, contingency and development plans, and
has urged its development partners to help with the
process. At its 33rd meeting, the ECOWAS Mediation
and Security Council recommended, among other
things, that international partners participate actively
in the Guinea-Bissau international donor conference,
intended to help finance the country’s proposed reform
programme. To that end, Ghana will host a preparatory
meeting in Accra on 9 February.
In conclusion, I wish to urge our international
partners to continue to support Guinea-Bissau in its
efforts to sustain the gains made in consolidating peace,
democracy and economic development by effectively
participating in the donor pledging conference
scheduled to take place on 25 March in Brussels.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Timor-Leste.
Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this very important meeting. I also congratulate you,
Sir, on the Chinese delegation’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month, and
we wish you well. I also want to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Miguel
Trovoada, for briefing us on the recent developments,
and Ambassador Patriota in his capacity as Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
I am honoured to address the Council this morning
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose members are Angola, Brazil,
Cabo Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe and, my
own country, Timor-Leste.
Under the steady leadership of the newly elected
authorities, Guinea-Bissau has made significant
progress in recent months. They have taken the first
steps to implement security sector reform, reinforce
the judicial system, improve the management of State
revenues and enhance the delivery of basic social
services and utilities, with a particular focus on the
education sector and Ebola prevention.

S/PV.7376

With regard to security sector reform, the new
Armed Forces Chief of Staff has been reshuffling the
leadership of various units since his appointment, and
the Minister of Defence has established a committee
to review the list of military personnel to demobilize
through retirement. We thank the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) for the continued
maintenance of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB). We recognize the critical role it has played
in maintaining stability, protecting the authorities and
institutions and engaging in efforts aimed at security
sector reform. Those efforts must continue in a
sustainable way as part of a holistic programme and
in coordination with other international partners that
envisage resuming cooperation in that area, including
CPLP countries.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/37)
points to the many challenges that lay ahead for GuineaBissau. We therefore encourage the Government
to continue the State reforms aimed at greater
political stability and socioeconomic development,
at consolidating the rule of law and at protecting and
promoting the civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights of all Bissau-Guineans. However,
despite those accomplishments, Guinea-Bissau remains
a post-conflict State with fragile institutions and
scarce financial resources. It is therefore vital that the
international community support the reform efforts
in their technical and financial aspects, including by
guaranteeing stability to enable the national authorities
to implement the necessary reforms.
The CPLP and its member States remain deeply
committed to supporting the people and authorities
of Guinea-Bissau. On 29 October, an extraordinary
meeting of the Council of Ministers of the CPLP
reaffirmed the relevant role the Community can play in
providing technical assistance to the country, drawing
on the common language, administrative model and
experience of its member States in cooperating with
Guinea-Bissau.
As previously mentioned by the representative
of Ghana, in November, our respective Ministers for
Foreign Affairs, as Chairs of ECOWAS and the CPLP
respectively, hosted a very successful and fruitful
meeting of the International Contact Group, where His
Excellency Prime Minister Domingos Simões Pereira
shared the Government’s main reform priorities. The
Group highlighted the need for ECOMIB to continue its
mission. The Group also called upon all international

15-032217/8

S/PV.7376

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

partners to actively participate in the Guinea-Bissau
international donor conference scheduled for March 25
in Brussels.
On behalf of the CPLP, I want to assure GuineaBissau of the full support of all of the Community’s
member States to the donor conference, and that we will
continue to seek the full engagement of all international
partners. At this crucial juncture, it is imperative that
the international community support the ongoing and
planned reform efforts of the authorities of GuineaBissau and that all stakeholders align themselves with
the priorities set by the Government and approved by
the National Assembly.
The CPLP and its member States remain engaged
in coordination efforts with the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the African Union and the European Union.
The Peacebuilding Commission, its Guinea-Bissau
configuration and the International Contact Group are
well-suited platforms to deepen that cooperation in

8/8

05/02/2015

support of the priorities identified by the Government
of Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, we recognize the crucial role of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. In that regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent report on
Guinea-Bissau and its recommendations, which we
fully support, particularly the extension of UNIOGBIS
for a period of 12 months and the Council’s endorsement
of ECOMIB as a guarantor of stability and a partner in
security sector reform.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-03221
