S/PV.7863

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7863rd meeting

Tuesday, 17 January 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-01167 (E)
*1701167*

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, India, Indonesia, Iraq, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Maldives, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey,
Uzbekistan and Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Security Council invite the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining us today via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following individuals to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Dian Triansyah Djani,
Vice-Chairman, Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: I report to the Security Council
today in the aftermath of the appalling truck-ramming
attack on 8 January that killed four Israelis and injured
17 others in Jerusalem. Such attacks can never be
justified and must be universally condemned. This act
of cowardice was neither courageous nor heroic. Such
terrorist attacks must be unequivocally condemned by
2/52

17/01/2017

all. It is regrettable that some Palestinian factions and
leaders have chosen to praise the attack, to glorify it or
simply to ignore it.
Despite the relative tranquility of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict compared to developments in the
region, the spectre of violence is always near. Leaders
on all sides have a responsibility to reduce tensions
and provide a political horizon to their people. Most
importantly, we all have a responsibility to prevent the
conflict from being engulfed in the nexus of violent
extremism and religious turmoil that is sweeping across
the Middle East.
In this first briefing to the Security Council in 2017,
I would like to begin by honouring the critical efforts
of the United Nations country team on the ground.
The United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
which work in a challenging security and political
environment, deserve our full support and recognition.
Every day, the United Nations provides free basic
education to over 300,000 students in 350 schools and
family health services to almost 1.7 million people in
64 health centres. Every month, we deliver an average
of 780,000 litres of fuel to sustain health, water and
sanitation, and municipal services. Every quarter, the
United Nations provides food assistance to 1 million
Palestinian refugees in Gaza and the West Bank.
Yet, we also plan for the future. The United
Nations in Palestine implements programmes that
will bring about sustainable solutions to the economic
challenges facing Palestinian households. United
Nations programmes have supported the Palestinian
Government in the creation of approximately 14,000
businesses and 45,000 jobs for people who were
previously reliant on humanitarian assistance. We
help strengthen Palestinian institutions and prepare
them for the future. The United Nations facilitates
emergency preparedness and regional disaster-risk
cooperation between Jordanian, Israeli and Palestinian
emergency authorities.
The services that we provide to Palestinians touch
thousands of lives across the West Bank and Gaza. This
vital work would have been impossible without the
cooperation and support of both Israeli and Palestinian
authorities and our counterparts. On behalf of the
teams on the ground, I would like to thank the Security
Council and all Member States for their invaluable and
continuing support.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the Council, I have repeatedly warned that
the failure of leaders on both sides to reverse the
current negative trajectory will ensure that Israelis
and Palestinians continue to live as prisoners of
fear, trapped in a perpetual cycle of conflict. On
23 December, the Security Council adopted resolution
2334 (2016). It reiterated some of the key obstacles to
achieving a negotiated two-State solution that were
also identified in the July 2016 report of the Middle
East Quartet, namely, the construction and expansion
of illegal settlements; continued acts of violence and
terrorism; and incitement.
The international community has clearly said that
both sides must do their part in creating the necessary
conditions to launch final status direct negotiations. It
has called on Israel to demonstrate its commitment to
the two-State solution by ceasing settlement activities
and by implementing policy shifts consistent with prior
agreements. It has called on the Palestinian leadership
to demonstrate its commitment to a peaceful two-State
future by clearly condemning all acts of terrorism
and taking significant steps to curb incitement. Such
steps by both sides would have a powerful and positive
impact on the prospects for peace. The Middle East
Quartet has been calling for such steps — a call that the
Security Council and the international community has
now welcomed. In the aftermath of the vote, emotions
on the ground have been heightened. Calls have been
made for the annexation of parts of or the whole of
Area C. Such divisive positions risk destroying the
prospects for peace. All stakeholders must avoid any
unilateral action that would prejudge a negotiated final
status solution.
Last weekend in Paris, France hosted over
70 countries and international organizations, not to
impose conditions on Israelis and Palestinians but
to reaffirm our collective support for the two-State
solution and our readiness to support both parties in
returning to meaningful negotiations. In particular, I
note and appreciate the participants’ welcoming of the
Quartet recommendations.
While these political developments were unfolding
abroad, important events were taking place on the
ground. After a relative lull, during the reporting
period Israel conducted 24 demolitions, resulting in
the displacement of 167 persons in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. Yesterday the Israel Defense
Forces fatally shot a 17-year-old Palestinian during
clashes near Bethlehem. I reiterate that live fire should

S/PV.7863

be used only as a last resort in situations of imminent
threat of death or serious injury. Such incidents where
use of force has resulted in death or injury must be
properly investigated.
Turning to internal Palestinian developments, the
reported revocation in December of the parliamentary
immunity of five Fatah-bloc members in the Palestinian
Legislative Council (PLC) renewed debate about the
legality of the decision to lift parliamentary immunity
in the absence of regular PLC meetings. Palestine
has come a long way on its path towards building
State institutions. Safeguarding their independence
and checks and balances is vital to maintaining the
public’s trust.
Much-needed preparations have begun on holding
a regular session of the Palestinian National Council,
which was last convened some two decades ago. I
encourage all factions to seize this opportunity to
achieve genuine reconciliation on the basis of the
Palestine Liberation Organization principles. Russia’s
recent initiative in Moscow, which provided a forum for
Palestinian factions to hold open discussions, is also a
welcome effort in that direction.
In Gaza, I remain greatly concerned by increasing
tensions exacerbated by the continued closures and the
protracted humanitarian and development situation. I
am particularly concerned by Hamas’ crackdown on
recent peaceful protests after 2 million Palestinians
were left with just a couple of hours of electricity per
day in the middle of winter. The right to freedom of
expression, peaceful protest and assembly in Gaza
must be respected fully by all. While the immediate
electricity crisis has been averted thanks to the
generous and timely support of the State of Qatar, the
responsible authorities must find a suitable, long-term
solution to resolve the chronic electricity shortage. The
United Nations is working to support such efforts.
Against that backdrop, there have also been some
positive developments. Israel has increased the entry
of critical construction materials into Gaza in recent
weeks, but donor funds for shelter remain critically
low. The current $300-million reconstruction gap is far
too large. Less than half of the $3.5 billion that were
committed two and a half years ago at the Cairo Gaza
pledging conference have been disbursed.
Turning to Lebanon, the formation of a Government
on 18 December 2016 was a positive development. It
sustained the momentum of the appointment of Saad

17-011673/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Hariri as Prime Minister on 3 November and the election
of President Aoun on 31 October. The President visited
Saudi Arabia in early January at the invitation of King
Salman. The visit paves the way for new engagement
and support for Lebanon’s stability and security. Both
sides have described the meeting as successful and as
opening a new page.
The Government has outlined its priorities and
vision for the country, reflecting its determination to
tackle Lebanon’s urgent challenges. These moves signal
cautious optimism and the potential for consolidating
Lebanese institutions. Meanwhile, the Lebanese Armed
Forces successfully foiled an attack and arrested
11 members of a terrorist cell in Tripoli that was linked
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and the
Al-Nusra Front.
On the Golan, the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic has continued to affect significantly the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
area of operation. The ceasefire between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic generally has been maintained,
albeit in a highly volatile security environment. The
Secretary-General calls on all parties to prevent
tensions or their escalation, and to strictly abide by
international law, particularly in respect of territorial
integrity and sovereignty of all countries of the region.
Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated
their continued commitment to the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement. The full return of UNDOF to the
area of separation remains a priority for the Mission.
The long, bloody history of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has offered us many lessons, some of which
we have learned but too many that we have not. One
lesson that we should all have learned by now is that
opportunities to advance peace are rare and must be
seized. Making the necessary compromises will never
be easy. In recent weeks, the international community
has expressed its continued commitment to the twoState solution, but resolutions and communiqués
alone will not achieve a just and lasting peace. What
is required is action, first and foremost on the part of
the parties themselves. The United Nations remains
committed to supporting Israelis and Palestinians on
the difficult road ahead.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
4/52

17/01/2017

Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of the State
of Palestine, I extend our warm congratulations to the
friendly country of Sweden on its election to the Security
Council, and we thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate under Sweden’s presidency. We
thank the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing at the outset of this debate. I also extend
our sincere congratulations to the other newly elected
members of the Council — Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and
Kazakhstan — and wish them all success, confident in
their commitment to upholding their responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations. We also renew
our deep appreciation to the countries and delegations of
Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and Venezuela
upon the completion of their Council terms, during
which they served with exemplary dedication and skill,
contributing to the Council’s efforts to address the many
critical issues on its agenda, including the question of
Palestine, as most recently reflected in the important
action taken by the Security Council, on 23 December
2016, with the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
which, inter alia, reaffirms in unequivocal terms the
principles that are at the heart of Palestinian-Israeli
peace and are a matter of international consensus.
In the few weeks since its adoption, much has been
said about resolution 2334 (2016). Analysis has emerged
from all corners of the globe, both on the resolution’s
content and the broader circumstances leading to its
adoption by the Council with near unanimity. While
widely viewed as long overdue, it has been deemed
extremely necessary.
The majority have stressed the resolution’s
significance, politically and legally, and the chance
it provides for rectifying course to salvage the twoState solution on the 1967 lines and to open a path
towards ending the Israeli occupation that began in
1967, justly resolving the question of Palestine in all
aspects and ultimately making Palestinian-Israeli
peace a reality. That is at the core of the unanimous
welcome for the resolution, with the exception of Israel
and a few of its supporters, to whom it must be again
clarified: resolution 2334 (2016) is not anti-Israel; it
is anti-settlements, anti-violence, anti-human rights
violations. As such, resolution 2334 (2016) is clearly
pro-peace, pro-international law and pro-two-States,
and thus pro-Palestine and pro-Israel. Moreover,
resolution 2334 (2016) cannot by any sense of reason be
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

characterized as one- sided. The law — on which the
resolution is firmly based — is universal and fair and
can never be biased. That is a fact and the lifeline of our
international system.
In that way, the Council’s adoption of the resolution
has not only revived hope in peace prospects but has,
more broadly, revived convictions in international
law and the Council’s own credibility. That is no
small feat against a backdrop of crises undermining
belief in international law, especially among younger
generations. For them, ongoing injustice and the failure
to bring them peace, security and prosperity only
further deepen despair and anger and heighten their
vulnerability to radicalizing forces.
The opportunity to underscore the law’s
applicability and strengthen its respect must therefore
not be lost in the commotion of noise by Israel, the
occupying Power, or its intimidation of those seeking to
uphold it, as heard so aggressively in this Chamber on
23 December (see S/PV.7852) and thereafter by Israeli
officials, who have reacted to resolution 2334 (2016)
with extreme hostility and rejection. The stakes are too
high — the possibility of peace in the present, but also
our collective future — and must be prioritized.
We believe it is precisely for that reason that the
grounding of resolution 2334 (2016) in the law and its
commitment to peace has been so widely and strongly
welcomed. Yet that is also the very same reason that the
Israeli Government, which has always sought to impose
might over right, has so fiercely opposed the resolution,
preferring instead to persist with its empty rhetoric
and legal acrobatics to justify its continuing illegal
colonization of the Palestinian land and oppression of
the Palestinian people, in flagrant contempt of the law
and the international community.
The will of the Council, and of the international
community as a whole, to stand by the resolution and
implement its provisions will be an indicator of whether
the two-State solution can be saved or not and whether
peace will be possible or not.
To the few appalled by the fact that the Security
Council dared to adopt resolution 2334 (2016), we
say: read the resolution and its clear call for peace.
Read the Charter of the United Nations, beginning
with the purposes and principles defined in Article 1,
including the maintenance of international peace and
security in conformity with the principles of justice and
international law and upholding the right of peoples

S/PV.7863

to self-determination, and Article 2, stipulating, inter
alia, that all Members shall abide in good faith with
the obligations assumed under the Charter and shall
give the United Nations every assistance in any action
it takes in accordance with the Charter. Recall also
Article 6, which states that a Member persistently
violating Charter principles may be expelled from
the Organization. Compliance with Security Council
resolutions is thus clearly obligatory, regardless of
whether it is under Chapter VI or VII.
The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) represents
a turning point. It is a moment of truth. Israel, the
occupying Power, must choose between occupation
and peace. They are mutually exclusive and cannot
coexist. It is time for Israel to choose whether the twoState solution will become reality or whether history
will be set on a different course. In that regard, the
international community has repeatedly affirmed
that settlement activities are illegal, are destroying
the two-State solution and call into question Israel’s
commitment to achieving a just, negotiated peace.
Resolution 2334 (2016) has made clear once again that
the law cannot accommodate unlawful policies and
schemes; on the contrary, it is Israel that must change
and must comply with the law. The absurd notion being
entertained by some quarters in Israel, including by the
Prime Minister and his Cabinet, that instead of abiding
by the law, the law can be twisted and distorted to bless
Israel’s illegal actions must be exposed and dismissed.
It must be firmly stated that halting settlement
activities should never be seen as a concession or
precondition; it is about fundamental respect for the
law. The law prohibits all activities aimed at altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
occupied territory, all of which resolution 2334 (2016)
unequivocally reaffirms. The demand on Israel to cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and abide by its
legal obligations is explicit. Settlement construction
and expansion, the construction of the wall, the
displacement of Palestinian civilians and all other such
illegal actions must stop and be reversed. That must take
effect immediately. Salvaging the two-State solution is
dependent upon it, as is the prospect for peace.
It is time for the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and all of its provisions. Follow-up must
begin immediately and all must uphold their obligations,
including each and every member of the Security
Council. It is their resolution, and it is their duty to

17-011675/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

ensure that it is fully implemented. The demands and
obligations upon Israel, the occupying Power, are clear
and it must be held accountable. The Security Council
must implement its resolutions, without exception.
States also have clear individual and collective
responsibilities. In that regard, we highlight the call
upon all States in paragraph 5 to distinguish between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967. In that regard, the Council rightly
reaffirmed that it will not recognize any changes
to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to
Jerusalem, other than those agreed to by the parties
through negotiations. We appeal to all States to uphold
their obligations not to assist in the perpetuation of
the illegal situation and to accord full respect to the
Council’s decision. In that regard, neither the existence
nor the lack of bilateral negotiations can exempt
States and international bodies from assuming their
responsibilities.
The Secretary-General is also requested to report to
the Council every three months on the implementation
of the provisions of the resolution. We look forward to
the publication of his periodic reports and to serious
consideration by the Security Council as we seek to
continue moving towards a peaceful solution. In that
connection, we wish to laud Secretary-General António
Guterres for declaring the pursuit of peace the hallmark
of his administration and express our confidence in his
leadership and our full commitment and cooperation to
that most noble end.
Of course, the Palestinian Government pledges its
respect for resolution 2334 (2016) and its commitment
to peace, international law, the two-State solution,
non-violence and to combating terrorism. Furthermore,
we reaffirm the readiness to abide by our obligations to
the best of our ability, bearing in mind the very serious
obstacles we face under Israel’s occupation. We also
reaffirm our readiness to continue cooperating with all
international and regional efforts to advance just peace
and appeal for the intensification of such efforts and
support to the parties, as called for by the resolution.
We understand the need for negotiations and have
repeatedly engaged in good faith in direct negotiations,
to no avail. Palestine has supported every single recent
peace effort, while Israel has rejected those efforts
and reprimanded countries initiating or supporting
them. We said yes to Paris, yes to Moscow and yes to
resolution 2334 (2016), just as we said yes to the 1967
6/52

17/01/2017

borders as a historic compromise, and to the terms of
reference of the peace process as per international law,
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and Quartet road
map, which were all opposed, ignored or violated
and undermined by Israel. That is why international
involvement is indispensable.
In that regard, we welcome the convening by France
of the Middle East Peace Conference on 15 January to
harness international support to preserve the two-State
solution and promote peace. The Paris Conference
underscored the urgency, inter alia, of restoring a
credible horizon for meaningful peace negotiations
and reaffirmed the role of multilateral diplomacy for
addressing challenges in the Middle East and beyond.
We hope it will serve as impetus for continued global
efforts for peace, including in terms of the efforts of
the League of Arab States, the Quartet, Egypt and the
Russian Federation, as well as the significant statement
made on 28 December 2016 by the United States
Secretary of State.
The 1967 borders are the delineating line between
conflict and peace. We are fast approaching a point
of no return. The implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) is the way back from the brink, providing the
means to ensure an end to the Israeli occupation, the
realization by the Palestinian people of their right
to self-determination in an independent, sovereign,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side with Israel on the basis of the 1967 borders and
in peace and security, and a just solution to the plight
of the Palestine refugees. The international community
must act now to revive the possibility of peace.
In this year marking 70 years since the partition, 50
years since the onset of Israel’s occupation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip,
which remains under an inhumane Israeli blockade,
and 50 years since the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 242 (1967), we will either save the two-State
solution or we may have to bury it. Let us seize this
opportunity to usher in a new era for Palestinian-Israeli
peace, Arab-Israeli peace and global peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to welcome the
new members of the Security Council that joined
this month: Ethiopia, Italy, Kazakhstan, Sweden and
Bolivia. I would also like to recognize Sweden on
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

assuming the presidency of the Council this month.
Israel looks forward to working with all members
during their time on the Security Council.
Last month, the Council voted to adopt resolution
2334 (2016). Immediately following the voting, the
Chamber erupted into applause, with almost every
nation represented voicing its approval over a resolution
that condemns Israel. The vote was also welcomed by
some around the world. Here are two examples: first,
“We welcome this important transformation and
development in international provisions supporting
Palestinian rights in international forums”
and, secondly,
“There is an international public opinion
against Israel and its policies and it has become
possible to isolate, boycott and pursue Israel in
international forums for the crimes and aggression
it commits”.
The first quote was uttered by a Hamas spokesperson;
The second one was from the Islamic Jihad. Both of
these organizations have injured and killed countless
innocent Israelis. Both are recognized as murderous
terrorist organizations by the United States, the
European Union and many other countries, and both
are openly committed to the destruction of the State
of Israel.
Last week a Palestinian terrorist used his truck
to drive into a group of soldiers who were visiting
Jerusalem as part of an educational seminar. They had
gathered at a site where Jews, Christians and Muslims
come to take in the beautiful vistas of Jerusalem. The
terrorist drove his truck back and forth, killing four
Israelis and injuring dozens of others. We appreciate
the strong words used by the Council, the SecretaryGeneral and others in condemning this act of Palestinian
terror. Palestinian President Abbas, on the other hand,
has once again remained silent. Nothing.
Hamas and Islamic Jihad celebrated this despicable
act. They gave out candy in Gaza in honour of the
murder of innocent Israelis. These are the entities
that joined the Council in welcoming resolution 2334
(2016). That resolution declared that our presence in
Jerusalem is illegal. It encouraged the Palestinians to
continue to avoid negotiations and inspired the terrorist
in Jerusalem.

S/PV.7863

And this was the result: Shir Hajaj, Yael Yekutiel,
Erez Orbach and Shira Tzur were murdered by a
Palestinian who was led to believe that he could use
terror and violence to remove the Jewish people from
Jerusalem. He will not succeed.
Let us take a few minutes to better understand
this resolution, which was supported by Hamas. It is
particularly appalling that, among its many biased and
false clauses, the resolution, in paragraph 1, designates
Israel’s presence in the parts of Jerusalem which
were liberated in 1967 as “a flagrant violation under
international law”.
Let me remind the Council that this includes
Jerusalem’s Old City and Jewish Quarter, and it also
includes the holy Western Wall that sits at the heart of
Jerusalem. This Wall is a remnant of our Temple, which
was first built on the mount above by King Solomon
almost 3,000 years ago. Yes, the same Temple Mount
which the Council refuses to call by its historic name.
King Solomon famously noted that “there is nothing
new under the sun”. His words of wisdom still ring true
today.
In the year 587 B.C.E., the Babylonians destroyed
the first temple and exiled my people from Jerusalem.
But the Jewish people returned to Jerusalem and rebuilt
the Temple. In the year 70, the Ancient Roman Empire
succeeded in destroying the Second Temple and sent
us into our long exile. The physical destruction of
Jerusalem was not enough for the Romans; they even
renamed the land of Israel “Palestine” in an attempt to
erase any trace of our connection to our birthright. But
all of these attempts, and many more, failed to break
the bond between the people of Israel and Jerusalem.
Today, I represent not only the State of Israel, but
the 16 million Jews worldwide who pray and yearn for
Jerusalem. Those who came before us prevailed over
the attempts to remove us from Jerusalem, and we, too,
shall overcome empty statements and resolutions.
For Israel, peace is not a convenient ploy that we
raise in international forums; it is an essential part of
all of our prayers. This is why Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu has repeated his call time and again for
President Abbas to meet with him directly for genuine
negotiations. Prime Minister Netanyahu’s offer still
stands today, and he is willing to meet in Jerusalem,
Ramallah or even here in New York to enter into a real
dialogue.

17-011677/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We know that neither speeches nor statements will
bring peace to our region. The only way forward is for
the Palestinians to understand that they must condemn
terror, yes, condemn terror, end incitement and return
to the negotiating table.
It saddens me, however, to report that last month’s
resolution has set us back in the pursuit of peace.
The message emanating from this Chamber, from the
current Administration in Washington, D.C., and now
from Paris is exactly the opposite. It has encouraged the
Palestinians to continue down the dangerous path that
they have chosen. The day after the Security Council
vote, Fatah, the movement of Mahmoud Abbas, posted
a cartoon on its official Facebook page. It showed a
dagger in the shape of a map of Israel coloured with
the Palestinian flag. Not Judea and Samaria; what some
call the West Bank. All of Israel. Under the dagger
was a pool of blood, and next to it said, “Thank you”
and listed each Council member who voted for that
shameful resolution.
The Council may have thought that the resolution
would send a message to Israel, but instead it sent a
message to the Palestinians. They now understand
that they should continue to spread the lie that the
Western Wall is not sacred to the Jewish people but,
rather, occupied territory. They now understand they
should continue to teach their children that Tel Aviv
is really “Tel al-Rabia”. And they now understand
that they should continue to raise the next generation
of Palestinians to believe that instead of a people who
have returned to their homeland, Zionism represents a
foreign occupying Power that must be overthrown.
This is why the Palestinian Foreign Minister’s
immediate reaction to the resolution and Secretary
Kerry’s speech was to declare “No to Israel as a Jewish
State”. In this rare moment of honesty, the Palestinian
leader admitted that this conflict was not about socalled settlements but about the refusal to accept the
Jewish State of Israel, in any borders.
By saying “no” to Israel as the nation State of the
Jewish people, the Palestinians are saying that their end
game is not to create a State alongside Israel but rather to
replace it completely. That is why they continue to turn
to international bodies instead of negotiating directly
with Israel. They believe that they can accomplish all
they seek without making the concessions needed to
really put an end to this conflict. Just two days ago, a
conference was convened in Paris to supposedly further
8/52

17/01/2017

the cause of peace. This gathering took place despite
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s calls to hold a meeting
with President Abbas instead of a useless conference.
More than 70 nations met in the City of Light without
our presence to discuss how we should make peace.
What arrogance!
It is because Israel wants to see real diplomatic
progress that the actions of the United Nations are
so dangerous. For years we have sounded the alarm
alerting the Council of the various bodies and agencies
which, under the pretence of assisting the Palestinian
people, really serve as mechanisms to delegitimize
Israel. They present a biased, one-sided narrative of
the conflict and encourage the Palestinian leaders to
continue to hold their people hostage and avoid the
steps needed to promote real peace.
In the wake of the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016)
last month, we have decided that enough is enough.
Israel has initiated a reassessment of its relationship
with a number of United Nations organizations. Our
first step is to suspend more than $6 million from our
annual contributions to the United Nations for 2017.
That amount represents the portion of the United
Nations budget allocated to anti-Israel bodies that
represent the United Nations double standard when it
comes to Israel. Those organizations inject anti-Israel
sentiments and prejudice into the United Nations
system, harm its credibility and violate the principles
on which the United Nations itself was founded.
All we need do is look at just one example. The
Division for Palestinian Rights is a prime example of
a United Nations body focused solely on promoting
the Palestinian narrative while delegitimizing Israel.
That division spends more than $1.3 million on travel
alone. The sum of $1.3 million could have been used to
promote dialogue and understanding but was instead
spent on touring the world in an organization that
has 16 employees. Those millions of dollars should
be going to make the world a safer and more secure
place for our children but are instead being spent on
spreading hatred and even blatant anti-Semitism. The
steps that we are taking should be seen as an act of
protest. It is our sincere hope that the message that we
are sending will be heard and that this organ will take
the necessary steps to fundamentally change the way in
which it operates.
Despite the events of the past few weeks, we
remain hopeful. We are hopeful because with every
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

new composition of the Security Council, there is a
chance that the members will stake a new and honest
course by actually encouraging peace in our region
rather than continuing down the path of assigning
one-sided blame only on Israel. We are hopeful because
a new Secretary-General has taken office and with him
comes the possibility of a wind of change. That can be
an opportunity for the United Nations to institute real
reforms, return to its founding principles and “unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security”,
pursuant to the second preambular paragraph of the
Charter of the United Nations. We are also hopeful
because a new American President will take office in
three days. With that new Administration comes the
hope that the United States will return to its policy of
rejecting unfair and biased Security Council resolutions
and of promoting direct and genuine dialogue between
Israel and the Palestinians.
Finally, we are hopeful because we are armed
with thousands of years of history behind us and the
innovative, vibrant and moral modern State of Israel
before us, and because, as Rabbi Yehoshua Weitzman so
poetically described the strength of the Jewish people,
“the eternal people does not fear a long journey”.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On Sunday
15 January, more than 70 countries and international
organizations met in Paris to speak as one for the
revival of the Middle East peace process. On behalf of
the President of the Republic, Mr François Hollande,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr Jean-Marc
Ayrault, I would like to reiterate France’s gratitude
to all partners who participated in that meeting and
contributed their ideas to and encouraged a process that
was initiated by French officials nearly a year ago. That
same process, which was marked by the international
conferences held on 3 June and 15 January, had three
main goals that are reflected in the joint communiqué
adopted in Paris this past Sunday.
The first goal was to urgently reinsert the ArabIsraeli conflict into the list of the international
community’s top priorities. Failure to settle the ArabIsraeli conflict poses a permanent threat to international
security. It is true that the Arab-Israeli conflict has
not been the most deadly conflict in the Middle East
in recent years, but the elements that have already led
to three wars over the course six years continue to be
present today and could, at any moment, lead once
again to a flare up either in Jerusalem, Gaza or the
West Bank. Owing to its highly symbolic importance,

S/PV.7863

the conflict, which has remained unresolved for more
than 70 years, amply extends beyond Israeli borders
and Palestinian territories, and every escalation carries
a risk of uncontrollable regional destabilization. That is
why we cannot accept the status quo — a euphemism
that, in reality, underlies the daily deterioration of the
situation on the ground and in attitudes.
The second goal of the French-led process was
aimed at reaffirming a common understanding of the key
component, namely the commitment to the two-State
solution that is inextricably linked to the condemnation
of settlement policy and the unequivocal condemnation
of terrorism and violence. The reaffirmation of the
preeminence of the two-State solution is at the heart
of the joint statement made on 15 January and is
more than ever our unique common goal. It is all the
more important and urgent to reaffirm that common
priority as the realization of the two-State solution is
increasingly faced with the threat of disappearing like
a mirage in the desert, while no credible alternative
exists that can satisfy the aspirations of the two parties.
Let us not forget that the best guarantee for Israel’s
security — to which, as everyone knows, France is
committed — is a just peace with the Palestinians
through the establishment of a viable and independent
Palestinian State and, therefore, the two-State solution.
In that context, the Paris joint declaration recalls the
fundamental principles to which we are all beholden:
an international framework for all future agreements,
the pre-1967 borders and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The preservation of the two-State solution
is also the goal of resolution 2334 (2016), which is
an important resolution that the ongoing advances in
settlement policy have made urgent and necessary.
The third objective of our initiative was to take
a positive and encouraging approach towards the
resumption of talks. To that end, we have engaged with
all the concerned steak holders to work meaningfully
together towards defining positive incentives with all
our voluntary partners. I thank in particular Sweden,
Germany, Norway and the European Commission
for their tireless commitment in that regard. Those
incentives are based on three main aspects: first, an
economic component, including a special privileged
partnership with the European Union and the enhanced
participation of the private sector, which is absolutely
key; secondly, building the institutional and State
capacities of the Palestinian side; and thirdly the
rapprochement of Israeli and Palestinian civil societies,

17-011679/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in order to improve necessary dialogue between the
parties, to revive the public debate and to bring together
two societies that are destined to coexist. The goal of
those incentives is to remind the parties the extent of
their interest in obtaining peace and to what degree the
international community can and wants to help them to
that end.
The joint declaration of the Conference of
15 January is the result of long-term effort and great
collective mobilization. It has benefited from the
efforts of all parties, including the Quartet, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the initiatives of Russia and Egypt
and the essential role of the United States. There has
been complete transparency towards all of the parties.
Therefore, the parties must show their commitment to
the two-State solution through specific action on the
ground.
As has been stated time and again by the French
authorities, it has never been a question of dictating
the terms of the peace agreement. Only direct
negotiations between Israel and Palestine can lead to
peace. Nonetheless, the international community has
an irreplaceable role to play in creating, by means
of guarantees and encouragement, an appropriate
framework and favourable conditions for negotiations to
start once again. That is the thinking behind the French
initiative and the Paris conference, which is a friendly
hand held out to the parties. In that context, the joint
declaration of 15 January is not the end of the road. It
is a necessary and important step towards relaunching
the peace process. The situation on the ground demands
that we remain more than ever active in helping the
parties move quickly towards a settlement.

17/01/2017

the only way to respond to the legitimate aspirations of
both parties and to ensure that Palestinians and Israelis
are able to live side by side in peace and security. We
call for the unswerving commitment of all our partners,
in particular the members of the Security Council, in
order to press on together along this rocky road.
Let us take on together the historic responsibility
that falls to us in the service of peace in the Middle
East.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin my statement by welcoming the holding
of this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including Palestine. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, which reminds
us that our meeting today is taking place in a very
disturbing context in which the situation on the ground
is volatile, there is an ongoing unacceptable building
of settlements and violence; as well as a very difficult
humanitarian situation; in particular in Gaza.
However, in spite of these obstacles, the past year
has been marked by the ongoing commitment of the
international community to peace in the Middle East.
Indeed, from the French initiative, which the Permanent
Representative of France referred to quite elegantly,
to the efforts of stakeholders in the region, including
Egypt and the Russian Federation, and the issuance of
the Quartet’s report (S/2016/595, annex) on the situation
on the ground, the international community has shown
that it continues to have faith in a two-State solution.

The heinous attack on Jerusalem on 8 January,
which cost the lives of four young Israeli soldiers
and which France strongly condemned, shows us the
extent to which the situation on the ground remains
precarious. As the joint communiqué of Paris states,
we must demonstrate a spirit of responsibility and
vigilance, and must avoid any unilateral act because
that would only further exacerbate the situation on the
ground in Jerusalem and elsewhere.

The crowning achievement is that eight years
after the most recent action taken on this subject, the
Security Council, which has regularly focused on the
intensified and accelerated building of settlements,
adopted resolution 2334 (2016) last December. The
resolution calls for a halt to the settlements, which are
deemed illegal from the standpoint of international
law and reaffirms the two-State solution as the only
way for a positive and lasting outcome to the conflict.
The same resolution also invites us to pursue and
intensify diplomatic efforts to arrive at a settlement
to this dispute, which bears witness to our common
commitment to peace in the Middle East.

We must remain active with a view to resuming
negotiations and that is why the participants in the Paris
conference have committed to meet again during the year
to review the progress being made and to move forward.
The objective is to re-establish a positive political
dynamic founded on the two-State solution, which is

The peace has been threatened by considerable
obstacles, which we are regularly alerted to primarily
by the Secretary-General. Among the most disturbing
obstacles undoubtedly are the ongoing accelerated
building of settlements and the occupation of the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, which in addition to

10/52

17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

dangerously imperilling the two-State solution, fuels
and spurs on hatred and violence affecting Palestinians
and Israelis alike, two peoples who must coexist in peace
and security, each within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
The most recent tragic illustration of this violence
was the attack in Jerusalem, on 8 January. We condemn
that attack and all acts of violence or terrorism,
regardless of who the perpetrators are or what their
motivations are. In order to overcome these obstacles
to peace, Senegal, echoing the recommendations of
the Quartet’s report, urges the parties to put an end to
the building of settlements and to related policies, as
well as to renounce violence and incitement to hatred.
This is what resolution 2334 (2016) calls for in order
to prevent acts of violence against civilians, as well
as those intended to provoke or cause destruction or
terrorist actions, requires that the perpetrators for such
actions be brought to justice.
As the report of the Quartet reminds us, we cannot
ignore the dangers posed by the precarious situation
in Gaza, especially its catastrophic humanitarian
dimension, which affects 70 per cent of the nearly
2 million people living there. The demonstrations of the
people in Gaza last Sunday against the precariousness
of basic social services, especially electricity. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the humanitarian dimension in the occupied territories
during the Council’s briefings on the Middle East,
including Palestine.
We reiterate our appreciation to humanitarian
actors, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
for their efforts in support of Palestinian refugees. I
urge Member States to continue to provide assistance
to that Office, which has just launched an appeal for
emergency aid in the amount of $813 million. Beyond
the provision of humanitarian aid, we must help restore
the Palestinian economy, which is in a very difficult
situation, primarily as a result of the occupation,
but also as a result of reduced aid from international
partners. In this connection, I welcome the fact that
the French initiative provides for economic and
political incentives to make the two-State solution
more attractive and mutually beneficial for Israelis and
Palestinians. The same is true of the support needed
by the Palestinian Authority in its strategy of building
credible institutions and reaffirming the essential role
of civil society.

S/PV.7863

June 2017 will mark the very sad anniversary of
50 years of occupation of the Palestinian territories.
However, despite the frustrations that can arise from
the lack of tangible progress in the political process and
the difficult reality on the ground — frustrations that
may lead to discouragement and even cynicism — we
have no alternative but to redouble our perseverance
and efforts on this issue. In that regard, we reiterate our
call on the Israelis and the Palestinians, who in fact are
the only parties that can give a real chance to this muchdesired peace and work to overcome their differences
with a view to achieving a two-State solution on the
basis of international law and relevant resolutions.
In conclusion, Senegal, in its capacity as Chair of
the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, would
like to assure these two peoples, with whom we share
legitimate aspirations to peace and progress, that
it will join the rest of the international community
in accompanying them on the path of dialogue and
cooperation with a view to definitively resolving this
dispute, which is certainly deep but not insurmountable.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, please allow me to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing today and for his
relentless efforts on this issue. Through him, I would
also like to commend the essential work carried out by
all relevant United Nations entities and staff, both at
Headquarters and on the ground.
The Paris Middle East Peace Conference, in
which Italy took part at the ministerial level, showed
the cohesiveness of the international community in
keeping the Middle East peace process high on the
world agenda. It also confirmed the widely shared
commitment to pursuing the goal of a just and lasting
peace between Israel and Palestine, based on the twoState solution through direct negotiations.
As indicated by the July 2016 Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) and Security Council resolution
2334 (2016), facts on the ground are threatening the
viability of the two-State formula. Settlements, which
have expanded considerably in the past year, as well as
increased demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian
projects in the occupied territory, including East
Jerusalem, are dangerously imperilling the viability of
the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders.
Settlements, of course, are not the only obstacle
to peace. Let me underline in this regard Italy’s deep
concern over the risk of growing terrorist violence and

17-0116711/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

incitement on the ground. The recent murderous attack
in Jerusalem reminded us of the extreme fragility of
the situation and that immediate steps are required to
prevent such acts, which must be condemned by all
parties, including with active rejection of incitement.
If not properly addressed and reversed, those facts on
the ground may deepen the political stalemate and lead,
both in Israel and in Palestine, as well as in the region,
to growing risks of further hatred, intolerance and
violent extremism.
The erosion of the two-State solution may leave
room for a sort of dangerous one-State illusion, plagued
by insecurity and continuous tension. That is neither
the end state in which the international community
has invested so many political and financial resources
nor what Israeli and Palestinian citizens deserve.
We think that the parties must take substantial steps
to demonstrate their genuine commitment to the
re-establishment of a political horizon leading to the
resumption of direct negotiations, which shall be the
aim of every international effort, bearing in mind that
peace cannot be imposed from the outside.
We also believe that the impact of our endeavour
will be measured by our capacity to bring the parties
back to the negotiating table, to defuse mistrust and to
clearly highlight the many dividends of peace. In this
vein, I wish to express our appreciation for the work put
forward by the outgoing United States Administration
in the pursuit of a just peace. We are particularly
appreciative of John Kerry’s relentless efforts during
his tenure as Secretary of State. We are confident that
the next Administration of the United States will invest
the same political capital and deploy the same efforts
for a resolution of the conflict based on the two-State
formula. Italy appreciates and further encourages
the efforts of the Middle East Quartet, whose
recommendations are still fully valid and underscore
the importance of the ongoing efforts to advance the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Despite some recent encouraging signals,
Palestinian
national
reconciliation
remains
unaccomplished. Let me underline that the Palestinian
reconciliation process is an important element
for reaching the two-State solution. Poverty, high
unemployment rates — especially among young
people — and persisting stagnation of the economy are
some of the indicators that show that the daily life of
Palestinians is characterized by countless emergencies.
As Minister Alfano recently stated in the Council (see
12/52

17/01/2017

S/PV.7857), it is only by addressing the root causes of
instability that we can build the peace of tomorrow.
There are priorities for socioeconomic development
that can no longer be deferred, such as access to water
and energy resources. This underscores the urgency
of dialogue and concrete cooperation in these fields
between Israel, Palestine and relevant neighbouring
countries, beside and above political considerations.
The dire humanitarian situation in Gaza must
also be concretely and effectively addressed. The
reconstruction of the Strip and the improvement of the
living conditions of its people cannot wait any longer.
In the Council and in other relevant forums, Italy is
committed to playing its role to finally and fully put
in practice the framework outlined in Oslo more than
20 years ago. There is considerable work to be done in
order to rebuild trust between the parties, including by
their respective civil societies, and to rehabilitate the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security.
I also wish to mention another country that we
consider crucial to regional stability — Lebanon. Italy
welcomes the recent election of President Aoun and the
formation of the Government led by Prime Minister
Hariri, whose declared objective is to restore trust. In
the light of our substantial contingent of peacekeepers
within the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), we remain strongly committed to upholding
stability in Lebanon and will work within the Security
Council in order to ensure the broadest international
support for the current positive cooperation between
Lebanese political forces. UNIFIL’s strategic review is
also a key opportunity to ensure the effectiveness of the
mission, including its essential civilian and maritime
components. Weakening them would create dangerous
voids.
In this respect, we hope that parliamentary
elections in 2017 will mark a significant step forward in
strengthening Lebanese democracy and consolidating
State institutions. All countries, especially countries of
the region, must shoulder their responsibilities in this
regard.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to thank you, Sir for organizing this open debate
and the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing. We
reiterate once again Uruguay’s total support for his
efforts.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In 1947, the General Assembly, including Uruguay,
adopted resolution 181 (II), which decreed the partition
of Palestine to create an Arab State and a Jewish State.
Uruguay voted in favour, convinced that the decision
would allow the establishment of two States, Israel
and Palestine, that would live in peace withing secure
borders. The position of Uruguay has not changed since
then.
In the seven decades since the adoption of
resolution 181 (II), Israel has established itself as a full,
modern State and member of the Organization, while
Palestine continues to face serious difficulties in its
development and international integration, resulting in
serious consequences for its population and an increase
of tensions in the whole region. Undoubtedly, this is
a particularly relevant time on the long and winding
road to peace in the Middle East. The adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016) and the recently concluded
peace conference in France both clearly indicate the
urgency that the international community attaches to
the peaceful and successful conclusion of the peace
process.
Uruguay reaffirms, as it has since 1947, its
unwavering support for the right of Israel and Palestine
to live in peace within secure and recognized borders
and in an atmosphere of renewed cooperation, free of
any threat to peace or acts that could undermine peace.
My delegation also reiterates its support for the two
independent States solution, as it is convinced that that
is the only option that would allow for the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine. In that regard, we
call once again for the resumption of direct negotiations
between both parties, which is essential to achieving the
desired goal. It is crucial that their authorities give clear
political signals to each other and to the international
community in order to escape the current vicious
circle of misunderstandings and violent confrontations
between the parties. Similarly, it is necessary that they
refrain from unilateral decision-making that could
act as a barrier to dialogue, and that they comply in
good faith with their obligations under international
law and with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Moreover, in the light of several announcements made
by key third-party countries to the process, composure
and reflection are needed in order to avoid measures
that might seriously affect the future of negotiations
and the two-State solution.
Last week Uruguay strongly condemned the
terrorist attack committed in Jerusalem on 8 January,

S/PV.7863

showing its solidarity with the victims, their families
and Israel, and once again reiterating its total rejection
of such acts, which pose a serious threat to the peace
process in the Middle East. We are distressed and
saddened that the Palestinian Authority has not publicly
condemned that despicable and cowardly attack. We
reiterate that there should be no place for incitement to
or glorification of violence. Neither should there be any
room for complicit silence.
Uruguay welcomes any initiative that makes it
possible to move forward in the search for solutions in
the Middle East peace process, with a view to achieving
a solution that is peaceful, fair, negotiated and lasting,
and that, in accordance with international law, takes
into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties.
In that framework, Uruguay was among the countries
that signed the Paris statement on the peace process last
Sunday.
Allow me to mention briefly the conflict in Syria.
After several failed initiatives in 2016 to achieve a
cessation of violence, the year ended with the adoption
of two resolutions that provide a glimpse of hope for the
Syrian people. Although those steps are encouraging,
there is still a long way to go before we reach the end of
that horrendous six-year conflict.
We acknowledge the important step achieved in
unanimous adoption of resolution 2328 (2016), which,
after several attempts, made it possible to take into
account the humanitarian situation in Aleppo and to
monitor the evacuation of the inhabitants of that city.
We also welcome the adoption, on the last day of the
year, of resolution 2336 (2016), and wish to highlight
the efforts made by Russia and Turkey, as well as the
opportunities that those efforts offer to find a solution
to this conflict. Uruguay reaffirms its support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura. My delegation trusts that the negotiations that
will take place in Astana, Kazakhstan, and in Geneva
will yield immediate and effective results. We are
certain that the new Secretary-General will continue to
work tirelessly to achieve peace in Syria.
Throughout the open debates on the Middle East,
in which Uruguay has participated, participants have
stressed the pressing need to protect civilians and to
allow humanitarian assistance to reach them, as well as
the basic care needed to survive the chaotic situation in
which civilians find themselves embroiled, in particular
the most vulnerable groups. For that reason, we should

17-0116713/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

17/01/2017

also not forget the critical situations in Yemen, Iraq and
other countries of the region.

to the parties to the conflict to restate their commitment
to a two-State solution.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Middle East and North Africa region is
still experiencing a systemic multilevel crisis. There
have been ongoing, bloodthirsty terrorist attacks and
other attacks, including the murder of the Russian
ambassador in Ankara, Mr. Karlov. There have been
explosions in Turkey and Egypt, and the tragedies in
Berlin and Jerusalem. They are all evidence that the
terrorist threat is global. That, once again, shows the need
for a consolidated effort on the part of the international
community to form a broad counter-terrorist front.
That has been called for time and again by the Russian
President, Vladimir Putin. Furthermore, there is a
need for measures to achieve a political settlement in
a number of conflicts, and for the re-establishment of
stability and a peaceful life in the region of the Middle
East and North Africa.

At the same time, we remain convinced that
today, as never before, the time is ripe for practical
measures to be taken to bring the peace process out of
its dangerous impasse. With that in mind, we continue
to work to renew direct political dialogue between the
Palestinians and the Israelis. We restate our readiness
to offer Moscow as a forum for that contact. I recall that
that meeting was supposed to take place in September
last year, and that the Palestinian party was ready
for it. Another priority for our work was and remains
facilitating intra-Palestinian reconciliation. A highlevel meeting of representatives of all of the main
Palestinian groups was recently held in Moscow.

The situation on the Palestinian-Israeli track of
the Middle Eastern settlement remains tense and
explosive, as demonstrated by the periodic spikes in
violence, including the 8 January terrorist attack in
Jerusalem, in which four Israeli soldiers were killed,
and the numerous arrests of Palestinians and violations
of the ceasefire regime around Gaza. The Russian
position on a peace settlement in the Middle East was
and remains fundamental and consistent. We advocate
a comprehensive, fair and stable settlement on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative. We are convinced that the long-term
solution to the conflict should be sought through direct
negotiations between the parties to the conflict without
any preconditions.
The general position of the international community
has been stated repeatedly. Based on that consensus,
we voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016). We
believe that the resolution provides a consolidated
signal that unilateral efforts are unacceptable, whether
on the Israeli side or on the Palestinian side. It is also
unacceptable to second guess the conclusions that might
be reached in the peace negotiations, and it is important
to maintain the prospect of a two-State solution. In that
context, we note that the concluding statement of the
international ministerial conference on the PalestinianIsraeli peace settlement in Paris rightly reproduced the
main provisions of the existing international legal basis
for conflict settlement and includes an encouragement
14/52

We note the key importance of re-establishing the
political and geographical unity of Palestine on the basis
of the political platforms of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative. If we
manage to solve the intra-Palestinian conflict, then
we have the preconditions for enabling the Palestinian
people to exercise their legal right to an independent
and viable State, existing in peace and security with
their neighbours.
The effective overcoming of intra-Palestinian
discord will also help to ease the situation in Gaza.
There, the humanitarian and socioeconomic situations
remain very difficult and, as a result, Palestinians are
increasingly reliant on the help of the international
community. We therefore welcome the work done by
United Nations agencies in that area, in particular the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Russian
Federation, for its part, has decided to earmark a
voluntary contribution of $2 million to the UNRWA
budget for 2017-2021.
With regard to settling the crises in Syria,
Iraq, Libya and Yemen, Russia has unswervingly
advocated that there is no alternative to a political
and diplomatic process based on inclusive national
dialogue. We continue to strive to support the political
process for resolving the conflict in Syria, while
expanding humanitarian access and the fight against
terrorism, as is stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015)
and the corresponding decisions of the International
Syria Support Group. We welcome the signing of an
agreement on 29 December on a ceasefire between the
Syrian Government and the main groups of the armed
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

opposition. That took place under the aegis of Russia
and Turkey. And naturally, the terrorists of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Nusrah were
excluded from that agreement. The ceasefire has been
imposed throughout most of the territory.
There are real hopes for the international conference
on a Syrian settlement to be held in Astana on 23 January,
and active preparation for it is under way. It is expected
that it will be attended by representatives of the Syrian
Government and of those armed opposition groups
that have signed the cessation of hostilities agreement
and support a political solution. We are planning the
conference as a concrete step in the implementation of
resolution 2336 (2016), which approved the December
agreements.
In its way, the conference in Kazakhstan represents
a bridge to the inclusive Geneva talks that Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, has scheduled for 8 February. We believe
that this resuscitation measure will help to revive
the abandoned intra-Syrian dialogue. The format for
Astana will involve the participation of United Nations
representatives, who could serve as moderators for
the contacts between the Syrian sides. In general, the
participation of outside invitees, in our view, should be
decided according to the tasks identified. Our Kazakh
colleagues, as hosts, will have a significant role to play.
We need the involvement of forces wielding
influence on the situation on the ground if we are
to create conditions conducive to strengthening the
ceasefire, and that subject will be at the centre of the
talks. It is likely that a number of other important
aspects, such as confidence-building measures,
improving humanitarian access and the components
of the political agenda, will also be discussed. We
are currently finalizing the organizational issues. We
hope that our international and regional partners will
support these efforts. New possibilities are opening up,
and and whatever happens, it is vital that we make the
most of them.
We hope that the forthcoming meeting in Astana
on Syria will enable us to strengthen the cessation of
hostilities and give powerful impetus to the process of
political settlement under United Nations auspices.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive and very useful
briefing.

S/PV.7863

It is self-evident that peace and stability in the Middle
East have broader implications for the maintenance of
international peace and security. For Africa, and for
the Horn of Africa in particular, developments in the
region have significant meaning for our own peace and
security, owing to our close proximity. The growing
threats of terrorism and violent extremism and the
possibility of Da’esh and Al-Qaida establishing links
with Al-Shabaab are no longer matters for speculation;
they are real. The recent geopolitical shifts in the Middle
East and the Red Sea region have also dramatically
changed the security dynamics, further complicating
the peace and stability of our region. Here I would
like to emphasize our vehement condemnation of the
terrorist attack in Jerusalem a few days ago. We fully
understand the challenge that Israel is dealing with in
that regard.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been one of
the disputes at the core of the dangerous situation that
has essentially defined the Middle East for the past
several decades. The situation has been compounded
by recent conflicts plaguing other countries in the
region. The collapse of State institutions, the growing
influence of terrorists and the escalation of sectarian
violence threaten to unravel the whole region. It is not
too much of an exaggeration to say that the fallout from
the crisis in the Middle East is likely to have a huge
impact on our region, which is partly why we support
a peaceful resolution of the conflicts in the Middle
East, particularly the long-standing Israeli-Palestinian
dispute.
As a country that is friendly to both Israel and
Palestine, Ethiopia is very concerned about the lack of
progress in their peace process. Not only have they not
made much progress towards resolving the crisis; even
more worryingly, there seems to be no real possibility
for making progress in the future towards the only viable
option for a durable peace — a two-State solution. But
we continue to hope that progress is still possible and
not all is lost. Such positive developments as the signing
two days ago of an agreement renewing the activity of
the joint Israeli-Palestinian water committee could give
us reason to hope.
Ethiopia’s position on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute
has always been clear. As much as we support Israel’s
right to exist in peace and security, we also support
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and Palestine’s right to exist as a free
and independent State. Given the many problems we

17-0116715/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

have in Africa, and specifically in the Horn of Africa,
we should perhaps tread carefully lest we appear to be
pontificating on how to achieve peace in the Middle
East. But we take the Security Council and the United
Nations seriously. We feel that being a member of the
Council carries with it an obligation to the Charter of
the United Nations and to an institution that emerged
from the Second World War — a historical fact that for
a variety of reasons can sometimes be overlooked — “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.
But still, given the political realities, we realize that
the Security Council cannot resolve the Israel-Palestine
conflict. Only the two parties concerned can do that.
But neither can the Council be a mere spectator, which
amounts to an abdication of responsibility. It can and
must nudge, prod and encourage the parties to make
sure that a two-State solution remains viable and that
peace is secured, justice is done and the countries’
security protected. As the previous Secretary-General
said in one of his last speeches to the Council, “ The
right of the Jewish people to have a State does not
negate the right of the Palestinian people to statehood”
(S/PV.7839, p. 2). Accordingly, Ethiopia fully supports
the goal of two States living side by side in peace and
security as the only viable option for a resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute. We believe that is not only
in the best interests of both Israel and Palestine but that
it will also significantly advance peace and security in
the Middle East.
We all know that many initiatives have been
launched to facilitate negotiation between the
Israelis and Palestinians with a view to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting resolution. We are
meeting just two days after the Paris Middle East
Peace Conference, which we welcomed and which is
aimed at creating political momentum conducive to
new negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians
themselves. Unfortunately, peace has so far remained
elusive, to the detriment of Israelis and Palestinians
as well as to peace and stability in the Middle East.
Actions on both sides that run counter to the possibility
of achieving a negotiated peace are not only increasing
frustration and mistrust but also undermine the very
viability of a two-State solution.
At a time when terrorists are expanding their
influence in the region and sectarian violence is on the
rise, the absence of any meaningful progress will be
a recipe for disaster, increasing the radicalization that
creates the conditions in which extremists thrive. It is
16/52

17/01/2017

therefore imperative that the two sides resume direct and
meaningful negotiations to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution on the basis of mutual trust
and a spirit of compromise that ensures Israeli security
and Palestinian aspirations to statehood. That is what
the situation calls for, and it is also in the best interests
of the two parties and of the international community
as a whole.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing.
I would like to begin by welcoming the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016) last December. With the
two-State solution immediately in jeopardy, it was
important for the Security Council to demonstrate a
clear commitment to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace. The resolution demands that Israel cease
settlement activities. It also calls for immediate steps
to prevent violence against civilians and for collective
efforts to launch negotiations. I would like to stress that
the resolution must be taken as a whole. The cessation
of settlement activities will not bring about peace on
its own, and all other efforts must also contribute to
the relaunch of political dialogue. Japan calls upon the
relevant parties to show commitment to the resolution.
Little progress has been seen in the Middle East
peace process and future prospects are dim. Japan
rejects all acts, incitement and glorification of violence.
Terrorist attacks, such as the vehicular attack on
8 January, cannot be justified for any reason, and Japan
firmly condemns such acts of terrorism. At the same
time, the disproportionate use of force by Israel is also
a concern. Persistent violence leads people from both
sides to lose faith in the two-State solution.
Japan reiterates its firm position that settlement
activities are in violation of international law, and Israel
must immediately freeze such activities. Japan has on
various occasions urged Israel to reconsider its policy.
Nevertheless, house demolitions continue in 2017, with
over 70 buildings destroyed in the first week of January
alone. Those activities physically erode a two-State
solution. Unity among Palestinians is also important.
Preparations are under way for the first session of the
Palestinian National Council in 20 years. Japan hopes
that the Council will be inclusive, promote unity and
bolster efforts to achieve a two-State solution.
In Gaza, the humanitarian situation is dire. People
suffer from a severe lack of electricity, water and places
to live. Those hopeless conditions are ruining peace
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

efforts and feeding radicalism, and do not benefit either
side. Assistance from the United Nations and other
humanitarian institutions is vital and their political
space must be maintained. Furthermore, we call for the
easing and eventual lifting of the Gaza blockade, while
duly taking security concerns into account.
Given those impediments to the peace process, what
can we do? Japan is undertaking a three-part approach
involving political dialogue, confidence-building
and economic assistance to the Palestinians. Japan
believes that dialogue is the only way to achieve
peace and calls upon both parties to resume direct
negotiations. Japan appreciates the various initiatives
undertaken by the relevant parties. We welcome the
joint communiqué issued at the ministerial-level
Middle East Peace Conference hosted by France on
15 January, underscoring international support for a
negotiated solution, with two States living side by side
in peace and security. State Minister for Foreign Affairs
Kentaro Sonoura attended the meeting on behalf of
Japan, outlining our efforts to date his his statement.
Japan also welcomes the powerful call of United States
Secretary of State Kerry on Israel and Palestine to make
the difficult choice for peace. The determination shown
by the new Secretary-General at the open debate last
week (see S/PV.7857) to actively engage in mediation
and peace-making is a hopeful sign.
Turning to economic assistance, the Jericho Agro
Industrial Park — which Japan has promoted for
the past 10 years, together with Palestine, Israel and
Jordan — will increasingly contribute to the Palestinian
economy and the building of trust in the region. We
must also remember the importance of investing in
future generations. Last November, Japan initiated
a technical assistance programme to revise math and
science texts and curricula in Palestine. That augments
our previous assistance to those schools and underlines
our commitment to future generations.
On confidence-building, Japan promotes regional
cooperation in the agricultural sector with Israel, Jordan
and Palestine, which enhances mutual trust and the
development of agriculture in Palestine. At the grassroots level, we invited 10 future leaders of Israel and
Palestine to Japan last month as part of the programme
we have been running for 20 years. The participants
spent time together, familiarizing themselves with
the history of Japan’s post-war reconciliation and
development, while exchanging views and developing
mutual understanding among themselves. One

S/PV.7863

participant from Palestine commented that it was the
first time he had an opportunity to talk to Israelis other
than soldiers.
I firmly believe that a peaceful environment enables
such an exchange of views and mutual understanding.
Recently, I heard from Mr. Pierre Krähenbühl,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, that young people in Gaza have extremely limited
opportunity to exit Gaza, much less to interact with
Israelis. I recognize the importance of continuing this
programme.
In conclusion, Japan reiterates that peace is
achieved only through direct negotiations between the
parties. I urge both sides to make a decision for peace.
Alongside support for political dialogue, Japan will
continue to promote confidence-building that enables
such dialogue and to offer economic assistance that
keeps a two-State solution viable.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East, Mr. Mladenov,
for briefing the Council today, and him and his Office
for their tireless efforts to keep the Council informed
while working with all sides.
Let me begin by reiterating in the strongest
possible terms the United States condemnation of the
horrific vehicular attack on 8 January by a terrorist in
Jerusalem. We extend our deepest condolences to the
families of the four Israeli soldiers who were killed,
including United States citizen Erez Orbach, and we
hope for a full and fast recovery of those injured. The
United States and the Security Council both issued
statements condemning the attack. There is absolutely
no justification for such brutal and senseless attacks.
Moreover, we cannot allow attacks like these to deter
achieving lasting and durable peace in the Middle East.
Resolution 2334 (2016) very clearly addresses the need
to prevent acts of terror and to condemn them, observe
calm, exercise restraint and refrain from incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric.
As we all know, the viability of a two-State solution
is increasingly at risk. We have called for both sides to
take significant steps on the ground to reverse current
negative trends, and to send a clear message that they are
prepared to fundamentally change the equation without
waiting for the other side to act. We have repeatedly
and emphatically stressed to the Palestinians that all
incitements to violence must stop and that all acts of

17-0116717/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

terror must be condemned. Our position regarding
settlement activity has also been clear. Meanwhile, we
have strongly opposed unilateral efforts to deligitimize
Israel in international forums.
Unfortunately, trends continue to move in the
wrong direction. We must all work together to reverse
those trends. As reaffirmed by the participants at the
French ministerial-level Middle East Peace Conference
over the weekend, the international community stands
ready to help the parties realize a two-State solution.
The ministerial’s communiqué reflected the principles
outlined by Secretary Kerry. We ask the parties to
restate their commitment to the goal of two States
and take urgent steps to reverse trends on the ground
that threaten it. Nobody can make decisions on final
status issues for Israel or the Palestinians; rather, they
must come together to negotiate this themselves in
meaningful direct negotiations. It is up to Israel’s and
Palestinians to make the difficult choices for peace, and
if they are ready, we can all help. Our commitment to
peace in the Middle East has never wavered and it never
will.
Let me move now to Syria. Since 2012, the
Council, through numerous resolutions, has called
for investigations into chemical weapons use for a
nationwide ceasefire and political process to end the
war, for sustained humanitarian assistance to all Syrians
in need and for steps to be taken to halt the unceasing
hell the Syrian people have been living through since
the conflict started. Yet here we are in 2017, just a
month after the United Nations alerted the world to
credible and continuing reports of terrible atrocities
in Syria, including summary executions, intense
bombardment of areas still populated with civilians
and dire humanitarian conditions. Given the grave
situations Syrians continue to find themselves in, we
support all genuine efforts to de-escalate the violence
in Syria and pave the way for renewed intra-Syria talks.
To that end, we support recent Russian and Turkish
efforts to bring about a true ceasefire that is respected
by all parties. We expect those efforts to lead to the
resumption of United Nations-led talks between the
regime and the opposition, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), as well as the Geneva principles of 30 June
2012. As we have long said, the parameters for those
talks must include a viable nationwide ceasefire, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance for all who need it
and a Syrian-owned and -led political process that can
18/52

17/01/2017

bring about a more representative, peaceful and united
Syria.
While the current ceasefire has somewhat reduced
violence, attacks continue and thousands of Syrians
remain under siege. For months, no United Nations
assistance has been delivered to those trapped by the
regime, Iran and Hizbullah in towns outside Damascus,
despite the presence of United Nations warehouses just
a few kilometres away. I remind the Council that those
cynical siege tactics and attacks on civilians are a real
threat to international peace and security, since they
drive the radical extremism that the perpetrators claim
they are trying to fight. We cannot remain silent while
those atrocities serve as a recruitment tool for terrorists.
In Lebanon, we welcome the formation of a
cabinet and encourage the new Lebanese Government
and President Michel Aoun to seize this opportunity
to respond to the needs of the Lebanese people
and to address the pressing security, economic and
humanitarian challenges facing the country. The
United States reaffirms its strong commitment to
Lebanon’s security, stability and sovereignty, and we
look to all parties in Lebanon to uphold its international
obligations, including those contained in resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). We will continue to
support Lebanon’s State institutions, including the
Lebanese Armed Forces and internal security forces,
which defend Lebanon’s borders and contain violent
spillover effects form the Syrian conflict.
Finally, turning to Iraq, in Mosul, the Iraqi security
forces — supported by the international counter-Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant coalition — are making
strides against Da’esh, having liberated almost half of
the city, with the rest soon to follow. The humanitarian
situation, however, remains dire for the millions of
internally displaced and other civilians impacted by
the conflict. The United States has partnered with
the Iraqis, the United Nations and others to fund and
coordinate the delivery of life-saving assistance. We
also note the Government of Iraq’s close attention to
preventing and minimizing civilian harm in the course
of ongoing combat operations. Yet, the eventual defeat
of Da’esh will not mark the finish line. Post liberation,
Iraqis from all sects, ethnicities and creeds will need
to commit to the challenging, often frustrating and
compromise-driven process of political reconciliation.
Meaningful reconciliation will be essential if Iraq is to
avoid a future resurgence of extremism and violence.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends the holding of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, under the Swedish
presidency. I thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
briefing to the Council. The Palestinian question is at
the crux of the Middle East issue. It is a fundamental
question for the region. Safeguarding the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people is the
common responsibility of the international community.
Presently, the conflagration between Palestine and
Israel is become increasingly intense, with frequent
outbreaks of violence and peace talks are at an impasse.
The humanitarian situation is dire. The international
community should take effective actions to push for a
solution to the question in order to realize the two-State
solution, as soon as possible.
First of all, we must stay committed to the correct
path of the independent statehood of Palestine,
with Palestine and Israel coexisting in peace. The
establishment of a fully sovereign State of Palestine,
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, is the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people and it is also the key to the Palestinian question.
The parties should be firm in advancing the peace
process on the basis of the land for peace principle, the
two-State solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, both Israel and Palestine should take
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) as an
opportunity to resume the peace talks as soon as possible.
A few weeks ago, the Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016) on Israeli settlements. Both Israel and Palestine
should effectively implement that resolution, remain
calm, practice restraint and gradually rebuild mutual
trust in order to return to the right path of peace
negotiations. Israel should cease the construction of
settlements and the demolition of Palestinian homes, in
order to create adequate conditions for the resumption
of peace talks. The legitimate security concerns of
countries of the region must be respected. Both Israel
and Palestine have the responsibility to ensure that
United Nations agencies can continue regularly with
their mandates, without any interference.
Thirdly, there must be broader engagement on the
part of the international community. China welcomes
the successful convening in Paris of the international
conference on the question of Palestine. We hope it

S/PV.7863

marks a new start to intensified diplomatic efforts.
China supports all efforts that are conducive to easing
the situation between Israel and Palestine and to
achieving the two-State solution. We support relevant
actors in making contributions from different angles to
build new momentum for peace talks, in order to set
up a more effective mechanism for peace in the Middle
East, positively address the legitimate concerns of
Palestine and Arab States and play a more positive role
in pushing for an end to the conflict and the resumption
of peace talks.
Fourthly, we should continue to promote economic
reconstruction in Palestine. China urges Israel to
cooperate with international assistance efforts and
completely lift the blockade against the Gaza Strip. The
parties should respond actively to the United Nations
Programme of Assistance to the Palestinian People and
engage in economic cooperation in order to improve
Palestine’s humanitarian situation and living conditions.
China will continue to provide assistance to Palestine
and stands ready to work within the framework of the
One Belt, One Road initiative to help Palestine achieve
socioeconomic development as soon as possible.
China is a firm supporter of the just cause of the
Palestinian people. China is also an active mediator
for peace between Palestine and Israel. We stand ready
along with the international community to further our
efforts to push for an early solution to the Palestinian
question, a solution that is complete and just, in order to
realize peace and stability in the Middle East.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I think you, Sir, for
convening today’s open debate. I also appreciate the
briefing by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, which was very
useful.
The Middle East peace process remains at the core
of any efforts aimed at restoring regional stability.
Ukraine consistently supports the Middle East peace
process and the principle of a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine coexisting in peace and security. In
this regard, we are outraged by the latest wave of attacks
and widespread violence. Ukraine strongly condemns
the terrorist attack in East Jerusalem on 8 January,
which is another stark reminder of how dangerous the
situation has become.
Preserving the current status quo and doing nothing
will only lead to further deterioration of the volatile
security environment for both Israelis and Palestinians.
I want to make it crystal clear that absolutely no

17-0116719/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

terrorist act can be justified, and we strongly condemn
any attempts to glorify such acts. Perpetrators must be
brought to justice, as should instigators and sponsors
of terrorism. At the same time, both sides must
demonstrate genuine restraint and refrain from the
use of force that could only stir up violence and lead
to increased casualties. This is a very bad time in the
region to do things that can play into extremists hands.
Diplomatic efforts must be redoubled to contain
and de-escalate the latest wave of violence and unlock
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Ukraine welcomes any
international effort aimed at bringing new dynamics
to the Middle East settlement process or at finding
opportunities for the resumption of negotiations
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides. We believe
that the French initiative and the recently-concluded
international conference in Paris remain an important
element in the international efforts to give peace a
chance.
Nevertheless, it is obvious that any international
effort aimed at encouraging the negotiation process
cannot succeed without direct dialogue between the
parties to the conflict, the Israeli and Palestinian
sides, and a genuine adherence to their commitments.
Ukraine reiterates its position that Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement lies within the framework of the
unconditional fulfilment by the parties of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
including land for peace, the road map, the agreements
previously reached by the parties and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
The Syrian conflict is probably the greatest
regional challenge — and one of the largest global
challenges — the world is facing as we enter the
year 2017. We look forward with hope towards the
resumption of the intra-Syrian political talks scheduled
to take place next month in Geneva. However, there
are still plenty of reasons to remain sceptical about the
prospects for these talks. The underlying cause for this
scepticism is the fact that Damascus is moving with all
deliberate speed to impose a military solution in Syria,
ignoring its commitments to the political track and
implementing a kneel-or-die type of strategy.
By adopting resolution 2336 (2016), the Security
Council gave a generous credit of trust to the Russian
Federation and its ability to deliver results after the
announcement of the nationwide ceasefire in Syria.
However, after nearly three weeks, we do not see
20/52

17/01/2017

substantial changes in the country, neither on the
battlefield nor in the political domain. I believe that the
Syrian government forces’ offensive in Wadi Barada
and eastern Ghouta is the main impediment to the
resumption of talks. To make the ceasefire work, a
necessary level of confidence and trust, which is clearly
missing now after so many years of conflict in Syria,
should be built up among the parties. The establishment
of a credible multiparty monitoring mechanism with the
participation of the United Nations is a key requirement
for any viable ceasefire to work.
Unfortunately, so far, the monitoring mechanism
embedded in the 29 December ceasefire agreements
exists only on paper. We believe that only full
implementation of and adherence to the letter and spirit
of the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2015) can lead to the settlement of
the conflict in Syria. That is why the only way out of
the current impasse is a results-oriented discussion on
the establishment of a credible, inclusive nonsectarian
governance-transition body, followed by the adoption
of a new Constitution and the holding of elections.
Ukraine is convinced of the urgent need to put an
end to the violence in Yemen. The continued lack of
progress in the intra-Yemeni political process is deeply
troubling. However, the absence of a final agreement so
far should not be interpreted by the parties as a pretext
for escalating the fighting. The nationwide ceasefire
must be re-established and observed, paving the way for
a new round of talks. We therefore call on the parties to
resume direct talks without preconditions and conduct
these negotiations in the most flexible and constructive
manner, which would enable them to swiftly reach a
final and comprehensive agreement.
Without meaningful dialogue the results may be
disastrous. The only parties that would benefit from
this would be the terrorist groups that are increasingly
active in Yemen. It is increasingly worrisome to see
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula continuing to
demonstrate a sustained ability to expand its base of
support in Yemen and exploit deepening division lines
in the war-torn Yemeni society.
The rapidly evolving threat of violent extremism
surpasses the boundaries of any region. It benefits from
existing conflicts and continues to destabilize countries
across the Middle East. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), despite some serious military setbacks,
remains a viable threat to regional and global security.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Pending the ultimate inevitable conventional military
defeat of ISIL, there is an urgent need to create a dayafter strategy with the regional actors playing a leading
role in preventing a resurgence of its clones. Without a
clear way out of the multiple crises that are tearing apart
the Middle East, particularly those in Syria, Yemen and
Iraq, it will be impossible to contain the growing threat
of violent extremism and the global spread of terrorist
groups.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing on the escalating
situation in the Middle East and especially for his
efforts to seek a peaceful solution to the several issues
in the region.
With respect to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, we
are seriously concerned by the trends of a complicated
humanitarian situation, economic backwardness, the
ongoing construction of settlements and the growing
acts of violence — all of which are unacceptable.
The peaceful coexistence of two States, which must
start with the early resumption of Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations, especially in the bilateral format and via
intensified efforts in the framework of the Middle East
Quartet and all other diplomatic initiatives, is the only
viable option.
The rights to life and to security are among
humankind’s major postulates. Let us therefore grant
the right to life to an independent Palestinian State
and the right to security to the State of Israel. We call
on both sides to demonstrate wisdom, responsibility
and the political will needed to reach a historic peace
agreement that would meet the legitimate aspirations of
both their peoples.
As the Chair of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe in 2010 and of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation in 2011, and
having established the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, Kazakhstan
is convinced through first-hand experience that longterm stability and sustainable peace can be achieved
only by understanding the strong connection between
peace, security and development. We would therefore
like to call for restoring mutual trust by increasing
investments in sustainable development and economic
growth as confidence-building measures between the
parties.
Kazakhstan commends France for organizing, on
15 January in Paris, the international Peace Conference

S/PV.7863

on the Middle East and considers it a contribution to
international efforts to find a viable road map for the
two sides to work together towards a mutually agreeable
solution.
The devastating situation in Syria concerns
Kazakhstan, as it does the rest of the world. The
catastrophe has spread beyond the region, with farreaching, perilous implications. Kazakhstan continues
to support the measures taken by the United Nations, the
League of Arab States, the United States, the Russian
Federation, Turkey and the international community
to bring the Syrian Government and opposition
forces together for dialogue and reconciliation. We
particularly commend the unceasing efforts of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria Staffan de
Mistura and appreciate the solidarity and unity exerted
by the members of the Council in adopting unanimously
resolution 2336 (2016), presented by the Russian
Federation and Turkey, to end the violence in Syria and
jump-start a renewed political process. The upcoming
meeting in Astana, as the platform provided by my
country’s leadership, is intended to be an important
part of the Syrian-led political process and will be a
significant step ahead of the resumption of negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva
next month. Preparations for the Astana meeting are
well under way.
As a country that prioritized food, water and energy
security as the foundations for peace, Kazakhstan calls
upon all parties to stop civilian deaths and suffering
and provide access to those basic necessities, along
with health services. Of special importance is to
allow the much-needed delivery of humanitarian
aid in the besieged areas. To that end, we commend
the neighbouring States of Syria, such as Lebanon,
Jordan, Turkey and Iraq, which opened their borders
to accommodate refuges and are struggling hard to
cope with one of the largest refugee exoduses in recent
history.
Iraq deserves special attention because of the
grave humanitarian situation in the northern part of the
country, namely, in Mosul. We call for safe corridors and
full mobilization of emergency assistance, life-support
services and humanitarian assitance in order to relieve
the suffering of the population.
Counter-terrorism is central to any discussion on
the Middle East, as terrorism today, in all its forms
and manifestations, constitutes one of the most serious

17-0116721/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

17/01/2017

threats to regional and global peace and security,
most of all in the Middle East region, because of the
destructive activities of well-known violent extremist
organizations. In that regard, we would like to remind
the Council of Kazakhstan’s proposed initiative to
develop a code of conduct for anti-terrorist operations,
as well as establishing a United Nations-led worldwide
coalition/network for the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

to launch credible negotiations on all final-status
issues and urged the intensification and acceleration
of international and regional efforts to support a
comprehensive peace. We recognize that, utlimately, an
agreement can be achieved only by direct negotiations
between the parties. But international action has an
important role to play in supporting those bilateral
efforts and in helping bring about peace — and it is
long overdue.

Finally, we reiterate our robust commitment to
ensure peace in the Middle East, based on building a
secure, just and prosperous world for all.

Turning briefly now to Syria, we begin 2017
much as we did 2016, with some cautious and fragile
optimism. But although 2016 began with promise — the
International Syria Support Group, resolution 2254
(2015) and the London Conference — the year that
followed saw some of the worst violence since the start
of the conflict. We owe it to the people of Aleppo, and
so many others, to ensure that in 2017 we seen the end of
atrocities by the Syrian regime. That means that this year
must be the year that we see a full, nationwide cessation
of hostilities, one monitored by the United Nations and
that leads to a return to genuine and inclusive political
negotiations led by the United Nations. We will support
all efforts that bring about that reality. For that reason,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2336 (2016) last
year. It is time for that resolution, and all those before
it, to be fully enacted.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank Nickolay
for his briefing just now, which made clear that we are
beginning a difficult year for the Middle East.
Fifty years since the Six Day War and almost six
years since the start of fighting in Syria, peace for
many in the region is but a distant memory. Years of
violence are now, sadly, the norm. We saw that last
week on the streets of Jerusalem. Let me take this
opportunity to condemn that horrific terrorist attack
and to offer my sincere condolences to the four victims
and their families. There simply can be no justification
for this kind of terrorism. The United Kingdom urges
the authorities to take appropriate actions against those
who commit such crimes. And we call upon Hamas and
other terrorist groups permanently to end their violence
and rocket fire against Israel.
At the root of this violence lies a seemingly
unending cycle of poisonous rhetoric and incitement.
The British Government strongly condemns the use
of racist, anti-Semitic and hateful language. We
deplore incitement, wherever it comes from. As the
Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) made clear, this
spiral of violence and incitement is only eroding the
prospects of a two-State solution. It is critical that the
Palestinian leadership implement the recommendations
of the report and continue their efforts to tackle terror
and incitement, strengthen institutions and develop a
sustainable economy.
It was because of the United Kingdom’s longrunning support for the two-State solution and our
commitment to Israel as the Jewish homeland that we
voted in favour of resolution 2234 (2016) last month.
It has long been our position that Israeli settlement
activity is illegal and undermines the viability of two
States for two peoples. But we should also recognize
that the resolution calls upon all parties to exert efforts
22/52

The ceasefire agreed by Russia, Turkey and Iran,
which came into force on 29 December, is still very
fragile. Reports of violations are commonplace. We
must continue to monitor developments in the coming
days and weeks and ensure that all those directly
involved in violations and those with influence adhere
to the ceasefire.
We are especially concerned by the situation in
the Wadi Barada area of Damascus. Civilians there are
facing intense bombardment from pro-regime forces.
More than 5 million people across Damascus also
remain without access to the central water supply. And
there are still more than 700,000 people in besieged
areas in Syria, the vast majority besieged by the regime,
whose activity has been abetted by external actors.
We can therefore be under no illusions. The task
to bring peace to Syria remains painfully incomplete.
The frameworks for dialogue are there, but they cannot
exist on paper alone. And those who have perpetrated
terrible crimes in Syria continue to escape justice.
As we work together to find peace this year, we must
pursue accountability in tandem. To that end, the
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Kingdom and France will be putting forward
a draft resolution to ensure that those members of
the regime who were involved in the abhorrent use
of chemical weapons will face the consequences. We
urge all members to support that vital initiative when it
comes before the Security Council.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): There
has been a conviction that conflicts and events in the
Middle East would undermine attention on the question
of Palestine and that efforts to sustain the status quo
would lead to tensions in the occupied Palestinian
territories, thereby affecting stability in the region.
That conviction, however, is false. That is why
international efforts, including those of Egypt, the
United States and France, have been made to revive
negotiations between the two parties, proving that the
question of Palestine is still alive and awaiting solution,
especially now as the Middle East is witnessing
unprecedented political developments, recurrent crises,
tremendous challenges and widespread chaos that
undermine the very notion of statehood.
The peace process has not seen such prevarication
since the adoption of the Oslo Accords. Each time, the
international community has worked hard to push the
two parties towards serious negotiations, regardless of
setbacks, because all were aware of the danger of stalling
or delaying the process. Egypt has warned against such
delays, and I know that everyone agrees with me that
the situation in the Middle East cannot afford any
escalation of the situation of Palestine. Frustration and
despair are fuels that will stoke violence and extremism
and play into the hands of extremist groups seeking to
influence and lure our young people to the brink of
chaos that will destroy their future and their lives.
Given the specific options available to Egypt
in this situation, including its clear connections and
channels of communication with the two parties and
the experience we have accumulated over the years
in our efforts to bring them to the negotiating table,
as well as our historic support for the rights of the
Palestinians and for peace with Israel, Egypt will spare
no effort to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in
the region based on the two-State solution, put an end to
the conflict in cooperation with likeminded countries,
ease tensions, calm relations between the two parties
as a prelude to direct negotiations, and build trust and
the necessary foundations for future negotiations. Such
negotiations would address all final status issues and

S/PV.7863

lead to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
I do not believe that I am exaggerating in saying
that a resolution of the Palestinian question would help
to enhance cooperation among the countries of the
region in seeking solutions to other crises there. Thus,
in 2002 the Arab world launched a comprehensive
vision for achieving that goal, namely, the Arab Peace
Initiative. All we need do is translate the Initiative into
concrete, incremental steps. Our recent efforts, within
the Council and beyond, are part and parcel of the peace
process that we have been developing for more than 50
years. We will pursue that path even though we are fully
aware of the difficulties ahead in reaching a settlement
to a very complex and thorny conflict — perhaps the
most complicated in our history.
Egypt is aware of the heavy responsibility it must
bear in that regard, and will spare no effort in assuming
it, fully committed as we are to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, our belief in the legimate
rights of the Palestinian people and the legitimate
norms of international law, and our aspirations to
achieve prosperity and peace. Egypt will redouble its
efforts to ensure success in the peace negotiations, and
calls on all parties to assist to that end and help prevent
any setback that might perpetuate the occupation. I call
on the two parties to demonstrate the courage to take
the difficult decisions necessary to achieving peace for
the region and its peoples.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank your
presidency, Sir, for its leadership at the head of the
Council and for having convened this meeting.
I also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing today. We believe that meetings such as
today’s contribute towards settling a just, comprehensive
and long-lasting conflict that has peristed without
resolution for decades.
Bolivia condemns terrorism and violence,
regardless of the perpetrators or their motives. All our
efforts will be aimed ultimately at achieving peace
for the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples. Bolivia
participated in the Middle East Peace Conference
to address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, held on
15 January in Paris, and thanks France, and in particular

17-0116723/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

17/01/2017

President Hollande, for their efforts in that regard. The
Conference confirmed yet again that the only solution
acceptable to the international community is the twoState solution, based on the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine.

taken by the organs of the United Nations reflects the
failure of the international community over the past 50
years. There are two parties to the conflict, but we must
never forget that those two parties, which are not on
equal footing, do not view the conflict in the same way.

Like my colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Uruguay, I recall that General Assembly resolution
181 (II) of 29 November 1947 — I repeat, 29 November
1947 — referred to the future Government of Palestine.
Seventy years have gone by since the adoption of
that resolution and fifty since Israel first occupied
Palestinian territory. A number of conventional wars
have been fought and numerous acts of aggression
committed, including the despicable attack in Gaza
perpetrated by Israeli military forces in 2014.

Neither the Council nor the Organization should
ever forget that one of the parties is the occupying
Power. The Organization should never forget that one
of the parties uses, and has used, force to occupy the
territory of the other party. Let us not forget that one
of the parties has built a wall, which, according to
the 2004 advisory opinion (see A/ES-10/273) of the
International Court of Justice, represents a breach
of international law. Let us not forget that one of the
parties, pursuant to resolution 2334 (2016) and others,
has built illegal settlements on the territory of the other.
Let us not forget that one of the parties has forcibly
displaced civilians, built settlements, confiscated land,
demolished homes and imposed a blockade on Gaza,
which has had terrible humanitarian consequences. One
of the parties has taken punitive action against those
countries that voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016)
or have expressed agreement with its provisions. One
of the parties dishonours its international obligations
and systematically violates the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. It does so
because, as long as they are not implemented, as the
representative of Israel has stated, those resolutions and
the Charter of the United Nations will simply gather
dust.

Dozens of resolutions on this tragic situation have
been adopted by the Organization. The the committees
of the General Assembly and the Security Council have
spoken clearly of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. Bolivia supported the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 67/19, recognizing Palestine as a
non-member observer State of the Organization and
allowing the flag of Palestine to be raised outside the
Hall in permanent recognition of the silence and failure
of the Organization.
We welcome the recent adoption of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016), reaffirming the inadmissability
of the acquisition of territory by force and condemning
all steps taken to change the demographic composition,
nature and status of Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem. We have also
condemned, inter alia, the construction and expansion
of settlements, the transfer of settlers, the confiscation
of land, the demolition of housing and the displacement
of Palestinian civilians, in violation of international
humanitarian law and relevant resolutions of the
Council.
I should like to share an experience I had a few
years ago, working here at Headquarters. I recall that
in one committee, as we adopted a draft resolution
recognizing the rights of the Palestinian people, an
Israeli representative took the floor to say, more or less,
that we could adopt all the resolutions we wanted to
adopt because they would in any event do nothing but
collect dust here in the archives. I was struck by the
disregard for the decisions that we have taken. But I
was struck even more by the situation on the ground, as
the widespread and systematic violation of the decisions
24/52

We face a choice. Will the Charter of the United
Nations prevail, or will the occupation continue? Will
the Charter prevail, or will colonialism continue?
Will the Charter prevail, or will the illegal activities
continue? Will the Charter prevail, or will the
acquisition of territory by force continue? That is why
the involvement of the international community is so
crucial, as it can enable the victims of the occupation
to experience conditions that are less unequal, as the
international community tries to resolve the protracted
conflict.
We draw attention to the unusual and tragic situation
of Palestinian refugees and the dire situation in Gaza,
where access to basic services such as water, electricity
and other sources of energy is unpredictable. In the
same vein, with regard to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the international community must not
spread the vicious lie that the Sustainable Development
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Goals can be achieved in a territory under foreign
occupation. It will not be possible for the Palestinian
people to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals
of the 2030 Agenda if they remain under Israeli
occupation. We commend the efforts undertaken by
France, the Quartet, the League of Arab States and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. As the President
of Bolivia, Evo Morales Ayma, stated, we welcome
Pope Francis’ assertion that lasting peace could be
achieved in the Middle East through dialogue.
Secretary-General António Guterres has injected
new energy and hope into the work of the Organization.
He has declared that 2017 will be the year for peace.
We hope that the work of the Council will be carried
out with that goal in mind. If we wish to meet the
challenge set out by the Secretary-General himself and
the Charter of the United Nations on this very sensitive
issue, and in order to ensure that the Charter does not
continue to gather dust for decades, it is crucial that we
put an end once and for all to the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory, which began in 1967, and ensure
the right of the Palestinian people to independence and
a sovereign, contiguous and stable Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
To that end, we believe, with regard to the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2334 (2016), adopted in December 2016, that three
priorities exist for the path that leads to the success
or failure of the Council and of the international
community. The three priorities are implementation,
implementation and implementation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.
First, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Mr. Mladenov for his tireless work and that of the entire
United Nations staff on the ground.
The international community is committed to a
two-State solution with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security, and with Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States. However, the twoState solution is becoming more distant each day. The
constant deterioration in the situation on the ground,
with continued settlement expansion, demolitions and
violence, is destroying the hopes for peace. We must
avoid a move towards a one-State reality and perpetual
occupation.

S/PV.7863

Sweden’s long-standing engagement on the
Middle East peace process is based on international
law, including human rights law and international
humanitarian law. It was our support for the two-State
solution and our desire to make the parties less unequal
that led us to recognize the State of Palestine in 2014.
The international community has an important role
to play in moving from words to action by helping to
break the current deadlock and by finally ending the
occupation that started 50 years ago. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), which is a
milestone towards resumed efforts to save the twoState solution. We must now encourage the parties to
swiftly implement its provisions, as has been stated by
everyone in the Chamber today. More than 70 countries
met in Paris last Sunday in order to save and promote
the two-State solution. We commend France for its
initiative — a much-needed recommitment to the peace
process. We welcome the adoption of the joint statement
of the Paris Middle East Conference, especially the
recommendation to refrain from unilateral steps that
prejudge the outcome of negotiations on final status
issues, including the future status of Jerusalem, and the
stated readiness of the interested parties to meet again
before the end of the year to review progress.
As part of the French initiative, Sweden convened
a working group on civil society, which heard the
voices of 150 civil-society organizations in Israel and
Palestine. We thank all the countries and international
organizations that have supported those efforts, and
we welcome the fact that other countries now want
to join. In those consultations, it was made clear that
many in the post-Oslo generation, on both sides, had
lost hope that the two-State solution is attainable. We
need to engage civil society to revive a public debate
on the prospects for peace and the two-State solution.
We need to show young women and men that there is
an alternative to the current violence, the depressing
status quo and the continuously negative developments
on the ground. Sweden will therefore host a civilsociety forum this spring.
We fully support the efforts of the United Nations,
the Quartet and the League of Arab States. The United
Nations and its presence, through various United
Nations bodies on the ground, play an important role
in supporting the Palestinian people. We support
a reinvigorated Quartet that moves forward to
seek to facilitate the swift implementation of the
recommendations contained in its report of 7 July 2016

17-0116725/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(S/2016/595, annex). We highlight the importance of
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. Finally,
I would like to recognize the outgoing United States
Administration for its efforts, including Secretary
Kerry’s remarks on 28 December. We look forward to
continued United States engagement in support of the
two-State solution.
On Lebanon, Sweden welcomes the election of
Michel Aoun as President on 31 October 2016 and the
formation of a Government of national accord, led by
Prime Minister Saad Hariri, in December. We hope
that these positive developments will now pave the way
for parliamentary elections. We commend Lebanon for
hosting more than 1.1 million Syrian refugees and call
for the implementation of the shared commitments on
refugees made at the London Conference on 4 February
2016. We support United Nations-led efforts on the
ground.
Finally, the situation in Syria is the crisis of our
time, with a devastating toll in human suffering. We
welcome the unity in the Council in December that led
to the adoption of resolution 2336 (2016).
Despite the reduced levels of violence resulting from
the ceasefire, humanitarian access remains dismal. All
parties to the conflict, not least the Syrian Government,
must ensure full, timely, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian workers countrywide.
Sweden looks forward to a resumption of the
United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks in Geneva on
8 February, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), and
hopes that the Astana meeting can help create the
right conditions for this. Syrian women must be fully
involved in the process. We must also work together
to ensure accountability for the atrocities committed
during the conflict, some of which may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
The blinking lamp on the microphone signals that
the time is up; it is not an encouragement to keep
talking. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
26/52

17/01/2017

I wish also to inform the Council that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon): As the occupation of the
West Bank and Gaza enters its fiftieth year, the words
of the late Palestinian poet Mahmoud Darwish resound
more than ever:
“The Palestinians are the only nation in the world
that feels with certainty that today is better than
what the days ahead will hold. Tomorrow always
heralds a worse situation”.
For almost half a century now the Palestinians
have had that certainty ingrained in their minds. I need
hardly remind the Council that for the Palestinians the
situation on the ground has continued to deteriorate
for five decades, with daily violations of their basic
rights, including countless killings, arbitrary arrests
and detention, confiscation of their private property,
demolition of their homes and forcible displacement. And
as the days, weeks, months and years pass, more Israeli
settlements are built on occupied Palestinian territory,
thus rendering the prospects for a just, comprehensive
and durable peace, based on the principle of a two-State
solution, less and less attainable.
Amid this grim reality, the latest breakthrough
achieved with the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2334 (2016) must be welcomed.
Regrettably, and in reaction to the adoption of this
resolution, we have also witnessed Israeli inflammatory
rhetoric and hatred towards the United Nations and the
international community, denouncing a so-called bias
and a disproportionate number of resolutions against
Israel.
However, the only disproportionate matter here is
the number of years the Palestinian people have been
waiting for the implementation, yet to come, of dozens
of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
recognizing their legitimate aspirations of ending the
occupation and their right to live, like all other peoples
on the planet, in an independent and viable State of
their own.
There is no bias whatsoever when United Nations
resolutions recall, year after year, Israel’s lack of
compliance with its obligations under the Charter and
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international law. As a matter of fact, resolution 2334
(2016) mainly reaffirms — and let me stress the word
“reaffirms” — what has emerged for many years as a
consensus within the international community: that
Israeli settlements have no legal basis and constitute a
major impediment to the two-State solution.
If there is any bias in the matter, it would then
be that no concrete measures have yet been taken to
compel Israel to abide by its obligations under Security
Council resolutions, the Charter and international law.
I would also like to commend the Government of
France — and here I wish to say, thank you, France — for
all the efforts it has deployed to ensure the convening
of the Middle East Peace Conference in Paris on
15 January and to welcome its outcome in the form of a
joint declaration that reaffirmed the commitment of all
the participants to a negotiated political solution based
on two States, and
“underscored the importance of the Arab Peace
Initiative of 2002 as a comprehensive framework
for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict”.
Let me now turn to Syria.
Almost six years into the conflict, the time has
come to end this crisis, which has claimed hundreds
of thousands of innocent victims, destroyed livelihoods
and laid waste to much of the people’s property and
to the country’s infrastructure. Here we welcome the
efforts undertaken by Russia and Turkey to facilitate
the establishment of a ceasefire in Syria, and the
resumption of the political process through the meeting
that will be held in Astana later this month. We would
also like to acknowledge the efforts by the Government
of Kazakhstan to organize and host this very important
meeting, and we look forward to the resumption of
negotiations in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations.
Finally, as for Lebanon, despite the extremely
volatile situation in the Middle East, the resumption of
the normal functioning of State institutions is a clear
demonstration yet again of the resilience of my country
and the attachment of its citizens to their democratic
traditions. At the core of the ministerial declaration of
the Government of Lebanon, based on the acceptance
speech of the newly elected President of the Republic,
is the safeguarding of the sovereignty of Lebanon and
its stability. In this regard, my Government reaffirmed
its firm commitment to the full implementation of

S/PV.7863

Security Council resolution 1701 (2006), which helped
to put an end to the 2006 Israeli war on Lebanon.
During this war, Israel bombarded the Jiyyeh power
plant, which resulted in an unprecedented oil spill on
Lebanese shores, with a substantial environmental
impact. And for 10 consecutive years, the General
Assembly has been adopting, by an overwhelming
majority of States from all regional and cross-regional
groups, a resolution requesting Israel to pay prompt
and adequate compensation to Lebanon for the damage
caused by the oil spill, deemed to be in the amount of
$856 million, as per the relevant report of the SecretaryGeneral.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating today what
I said before the Council in July 2016: it is almost
impossible to maintain peace and security if States
are not held responsible for their internationally
wrongful acts. Hence it is our firm belief that it is now
the responsibility of the Council, as the main organ
entrusted under the United Nations Charter with the
maintenance of peace and security, to act without delay
to ensure that Israel compensates Lebanon for the
damage related to the oil spill it has caused.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): There is a strong
international consensus on how the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict should be solved. Let me mention three main
points.
First, a negotiated two-State solution with two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security, is the only way to achieve a durable peace.
Secondly, the parties should restate their
commitments to the two-State solution and take urgent
steps in order to reverse current negative trends on the
ground, including settlement activities and continued
acts of violence.
Thirdly, the outstanding issues between the parties
can be resolved only through direct negotiations.
Norway is actively engaged as the Chair of the socalled Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
in supporting the parties to make further progress
on strengthening the Palestinian institutions and
sustaining the Palestinian economy. The donors need
to realize that the Palestinian Authority will not be

17-0116727/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

able to close the current financing gap by itself, partly
due to a significant drop in budget support. The donors
should reconsider their budget support commitments
and disburse their pledges made at the Cairo conference
in 2014.
The AHLC has never been an alternative, of course,
to any peace agreement, but a necessary condition for
it. As a State-building project, it has underpinned the
two-State solution. It is the only existing international
mechanism whereby both parties meet regularly and
engage in a serious dialogue to resolve outstanding
economic issues. Most important, with the assistance
of the AHLC, the parties have made progress and
delivered concrete results. Let me mention just two
examples.
First, an agreement was reached on transferring
the authority of the electricity sector to the Palestinian
Authority last fall. Secondly, an agreement was reached
last Sunday to renew the activity of the Joint Water
Committee to improve water infrastructure and supplies
to the Palestinian people. Both of those agreements
are significant steps in transferring authority to the
Palestinian Authority as outlined in the Oslo Accords.
Palestinian State-building must continue. It is critical to
the viability of the two-State solution. It is also critical
for delivering basic public services, such as water and
energy, to the Palestinian people.
With regard to Syria, all sides should grasp 2017
as an opportunity to find a way out of the destructive
cycle of escalation and counter-escalation. The conflict
has already resulted in an economic loss of $275 billion,
and the estimated cost needed to reconstruct Syria is
a daunting $180 to $200 billion. The reconstruction
of Syria is intricately linked to the ceasefire and
political negotiations. We are therefore pleased that
the ceasefire is holding, thereby ensuring somewhat
improved humanitarian access. But the numerous
alleged violations are of great concern. We hope that
the Astana meeting will focus on securing a lasting
ceasefire to further reduce violence. The ceasefire is
also important for confidence-building. It provides an
important framework in which to resume the United
Nations-led negotiations in Geneva on 8 February.
Resolutions 2254 (2015), 2268 (2016) and 2336 (2016)
must be fully implemented. It is time to get back to
work and agree on a peaceful future for Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
28/52

17/01/2017

Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to convey my appreciation to you,
Sir, and the Swedish presidency, and to express my
thanks to Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.
My delegation welcomed the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), which is a step in the right direction, namely,
the realization of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination. The resolution represents
the consensus and political will of the international
community to object to and oppose the policies and
practices of the Israeli regime against the Palestinians.
While the regime, encouraged by impunity, has always
flouted international law, including United Nations
resolutions, the Security Council should uphold its
responsibility as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations by adopting necessary measures to implement
its recent resolution and end the criminal policies that
the regime has pursued thus far.
The rapid increase in illegal settlements in
Palestinian territory, which constitute not only a grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention but also
war crimes, as defined by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, demonstrated long ago
that the Israeli regime has never had any interest in
peace with the Palestinians and that its participation
in the peace process has been just a cover to hide its
policy of aggression and expansion. In the past few
years, it has increasingly put aside that cover and
utterly negated the right of the Palestinian people to
self-determination. Under the current circumstances,
as it was always the case in the past, the situation in
Palestine requires urgent international attention and
action. The illegal and brutal occupation continues
unabated, causing much suffering to the Palestinian
people, and is dangerously inflaming tensions in the
already volatile situation faced by the region. The
Israeli regime continues to breach international law,
including humanitarian law and human rights law and,
by doing so, inflicts widespread human suffering on
civilians and deliberately destabilizes the situation,
with far-reaching and serious consequences for peace
and security in and beyond the Middle East.
At the same time, the criminal policies and
practices, including the illegal blockade of the Gaza
Strip, are causing massive deprivation, hopelessness
and a grave humanitarian crisis. The destructive
impact of such violations is immense, as reflected in
the rising tensions and the deteriorating socioeconomic
conditions among the Palestinian civilian population,
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which has been living under half a century of Israeli
occupation.
Other crises in our region, such as those in Libya,
Iraq, Syria and Yemen, all share the common element of
being stoked by invasion, illegal foreign intervention,
terror, extremism and violence. Those problems have
persisted and deepened because the international
community has failed to do its part in dealing with the
root causes.
Finally, Lebanon continues to suffer from the
successive Israeli violations of its borders and
incursions into its territory, followed by subsequent
years of occupation and aggression. Unfortunately, the
Israeli regime continues to violate Lebanese airspace
and territory. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions.
The occupation of the Syrian Golan continues to
demonstrate another aspect of Israeli aggressiveness.
Their attempts to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, which
have intensified after the outbreak of Syrian crisis,
constitute another grave breach of international law.
In that case, as well, Security Council resolution 497
(1981) and other relevant resolutions have been flouted
by the Israeli regime, while the Security Council has
failed to take any action.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Djani.
Mr. Djani: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I wish to begin by congratulating Sweden on its
election to the Security Council and on its presidency,
and by congratulating the other newly elected members,
Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan. We express
our appreciation, as well, for the outgoing Council
members — among whom there are members of our
own Committee — and recognize their efforts during
their mandates — Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Spain and Venezuela. Allow me also to congratulate
His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres on
assuming his duties at the helm of the United Nations.
The Committee looks forward to working closely with
the new Secretary-General and the wider United Nations
family towards resolving the question of Palestine,
which has been on the agendas of the Security Council
and General Assembly for far too long. While the
necessary components for the settlement of this longstanding issue are well known to all, the Secretary-

S/PV.7863

General’s good offices, vigour and experience will be
pivotal in making the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace a reality.
Despite efforts to break the political stalemate,
the year 2016 saw limited achievements on the part
of the international community in realizing enduring
peace and a negotiated two-State solution on the basis
of the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map. In the meantime, the twoState solution continues to be severely threatened by
unrelenting developments on the ground, including
the decade-long blockade of Gaza, which amounts
to collective punishment, and the construction and
expansion of settlements, the transfer of Israeli settlers,
the confiscation of land, the demolition of home and the
displacement of Palestinian civilians in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, which amount to altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967. All are
in violation of international humanitarian law and the
relevant resolutions. All of those actions are in violation
of international humanitarian law and the relevant
resolutions and, along with other ongoing provocations
and incitement, they raise tensions and fuel resentment
and violence. Similarly, preventing Palestinian
development in Area C of the occupied West Bank and
taking Palestinian land for Israeli settlement activities
only increase a sense of frustration and hopelessness
and call into question Israel’s commitment to the twoState solution.
Yet there were reasons for hope last year and
in the first weeks of the new year, including action
by the Council and the French initiative, which the
Committee supported. On 23 December, by resolution
2334 (2016), co-sponsored by three members of the
Committee and New Zealand and supported by another
10 members of the Council, including two Committee
members/observers, namely, Egypt and Ukraine, for a
total of 14 in favour and one abstention, the Council
demonstrated its much-needed leadership at this stage.
The Council unequivocally reconfirmed support for a
two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 lines and
its Charter-based principled positions. It reiterated that
Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, are illegal. The acquisition of
territory by force is inadmissible. All parties must take
immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence against
civilians, as well as acts of provocation and destruction.

17-0116729/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The international community must distinguish, in its
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, that is, all lands occupied since
1967. The Council also urged the intensification and
acceleration of international and regional efforts aimed
at achieving the two-State solution.
Breaking its silence of nearly seven years on this
issue with resolution 2334 (2016), the Council has
generated a unique momentum for peace in a very
difficult environment by reaffirming the core purposes
and principles of the Organization and the parameters
of the international consensus on resolving the question
of Palestine. That momentum must be maintained at all
cost and the international community, most notably the
Council, must follow up on its determination to secure
the full implementation of this and its other relevant
resolutions, rally around the legal principles set out
in the resolution and hold perpetrators accountable
for violations of international norms. The Committee
looks forward to the Secretary-General’s reporting on
the implementation of the provisions of the resolution.
Similarly, the Committee welcomes the joint
declaration issued at the Paris Conference over the
weekend, in which participants welcomed international
efforts to advance Middle East peace, including
through adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), and
reiterated that a negotiated two-State solution should
meet the legitimate aspirations of both sides, including
Palestinians’ right to statehood and sovereignty, fully
end the occupation that began in 1967, satisfy Israel’s
security needs and resolve all permanent status issues
on the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
While the joint declaration did not go far enough in
condemning those who seek to actively undermine this
outcome, the Committee urges all interested parties to
ensure that the two-State solution remains a realistic
possibility and that a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace is achieved.
As thoroughly documented by United Nations
agencies and others, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
remains dire and the two-State solution is in real peril.
The Committee urges the international community to
actively seize the moment and exert collective efforts to
ensure the reversal of the negative trends on the ground
and the launch of credible negotiations on all final
status issues in the Middle East peace process with a
view to achieving a comprehensive peace agreement
30/52

17/01/2017

that justly resolves all final status issues. Both Israelis
and Palestinians must show leadership and make the
difficult decisions required for peace.
During this year, tragically marking 50 years
of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory,
the international community must spare no effort
to ensure that this untenable situation is ended and
that the Palestinian aspirations for independence and
sovereignty in their State, as well as Israeli security
needs, are met. The Committee will mark this solemn
anniversary by organizing several events, in the hope
of drawing attention to the continuing plight of the
Palestinian people in all its dimensions and generating
further momentum towards ending the Israeli
occupation. The Committee, lastly, calls upon all
States and organizations to enhance their cooperation
and support to the Committee in the performance of its
General Assembly mandate, including with respect to
achieving the end of the Israeli occupation, the capacitybuilding of the State of Palestine and recognition on the
basis of the 1967 borders and its eventual admission to
full membership in the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
very complex and to be marked by instability and
insecurity. The Palestinian people continue to suffer
the illegal foreign occupation of Israel and suffer under
Israeli policies and practices, in serious violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), in accordance with the Security Council’s
primary role in the maintaining international peace and
security, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. That resolution reaffirmed, inter alia, the
illegality of Israeli settlement activities and reiterated
the call for Israel to immediately and fully cease from
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with
international law.
However, while the resolution is a step in the right
direction, it is still not enough. This year is the fiftieth
anniversary of the Israeli occupation of Palestine, which
marks 50 years of systematic abuses, acts of aggression,
killings and human rights violations. As an international
community we owe a debt to the Palestinian people. It
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is time to break the silence and the stalemate that have
led to the suffering of the Palestinian people of abuse
and to put an end to the impunity of Israel’s criminal
actions against Palestine.
We call once again on the Security Council to
adopt the necessary decisions and demand that Israel
put an immediate end to the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories; an end
to the blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has gone on for
more than 10 years and where 2 million Palestinians are
being collectively punished and besieged, threatened
and exposed to extreme deprivation and isolation,
which has resulted in a serious humanitarian crisis; an
end to the building and expansion of Israeli settlements
and the separation wall in occupied Palestinian
territory; an end to the destruction and confiscation
of Palestinian lands and property; and an end to the
forced displacement and the transfer of settlers to
occupied Palestinian territory, among other violations
of international law, international humanitarian law,
human rights, the rights of the Palestinian people and
United Nations resolutions.
Until the Security Council takes on its responsibility
and implements not only resolution 2334 (2016) but
also additional concrete actions that contribute to the
search for effective solutions to the conflict, Israel
will continue to entrench the occupation, making the
two-State solution inviable and preventing a fair and
peaceful solution to it.
We call again on the international community to
take a firm and principled stand that will address all the
illegal actions of Israel against the Palestinian people
and its property, before it is too late.
We reiterate that the only possible solution to the
question of Palestine is the peaceful coexistence of
two independent States, with the establishment of an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
with its capital in East Jerusalem and respecting the
pre-1967 borders. We also support the admission of
Palestine as a full-fledged Member of the Organization.
We reiterate our call to the Security Council to take
action to that end. That would undoubtedly be another
step on the right path. If it is not done, the General
Assembly should act with full determination to decide
on the case.
As on other occasions, we reiterate our
condemnation of the politicization of the Syrian crisis
and the manipulation of the humanitarian situation and

S/PV.7863

of the suffering of the Syrian people, which suits the
dominating geopolitical interests of countries that pursue
the declared objective of imposing a regime change in
Syria. We also condemn the double standard. It cannot
be repeated often enough that those who speak against
Syria all too often forget the major humanitarian needs
of the besieged Gaza Strip. It cannot be overlooked that
those who urge the General Assembly to pronounce
itself on alleged and unrecognized crimes committed in
Syria do not urge the Assembly to rule on the inclusion
of the State of Palestine as a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations or to review the crimes committed
against the Palestinian people.
Those who have fuelled the conflict in Syria — by
providing weapons and financing and sponsorship to
terrorist groups from the outside — are responsible for
the thousands of civilians who have fallen victim to the
conflict and the humanitarian situation. We reject the
promotion of an interventionist agenda as a means of
solving the crisis in Syria. Cuba deeply deplores and
mourns the loss of innocent lives as a consequence of
the situation. We condemn all of the acts of violence
against the civilian population in Syria. We call for
a halt to the violations of Syrian sovereignty and the
foreign military presence that are not subject to the
consent of and coordination of operations by the Syrian
Government, the only legitimately elected authority in
Syria. A political solution — reached through dialogue
and negotiations and without preconditions — is the
only viable way out of the conflict in Syria. In that vein,
we welcome the adoption by the Security Council on
31 December 2016 of resolution 2336 (2016), negotiated
by Russia and Turkey, which supports the ceasefire
in Syria, as well as the re-opening of direct political
negotiations between the Syrian Government and the
armed opposition, which will take place at the end of
January in Astana. Peace in Syria can be achieved only
through respect for the right of the Syrian people to
decide their own fate without foreign interference and
impositions. We support the Syrian people and their
aspirations to live in peace and choose their own destiny.
To conclude, we reiterate our support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflicts
in the Middle East, which will make it possible to
safeguard the sovereignty, security and territorial
integrity of all States in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.

17-0116731/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Begeç (Turkey): The nature of the current
conflicts requires us to intensify our efforts to achieve
peace and security. The tireless work and perseverance
on the part of responsible members of the international
community have paved the way to the adoption of
important resolutions in the past few months by the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the
questions of Palestine and Syria. Those positive steps
can make a difference only if they are fully implemented
on the ground.
Turkey supports all initiatives that revitalize the
Middle East peace process, address the long-standing
vacuum on the political track and preserve the letter and
spirit of the established parameters. We will not cease
our efforts to reach a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace, which would include the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In that regard, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), which reflects the widespread
agreement on the negative impact on the two-State
solution of Israel’s illegal settlement activities. That
resolution, as well as the recent Paris Middle East
Peace Conference, in which Turkey also participated,
represent steps in the right direction in reaffirming the
international community’s commitment to the twoState vision.
In the meantime, Israel should immediately cease
all settlement activities, as well as the demolition of
housing, land confiscation and other policies that deny
Palestinians their right to development. The continuation
of those practices deepens the sense of injustice,
creates a growing mistrust towards the international
community and breeds desperation. Needless to say,
that is in nobody’s interest. Furthermore, attempts to
alter the historical status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
increasing violations of its sanctity, as well as measures
violating the freedom of worship, jeopardize peaceful
coexistence. Palestinians should be able to sit at the
negotiation table as the State of Palestine, equal to
Israel. In that regard, the recognition of the State
of Palestine by more than the current 137 countries
and its full integration to international forums are
vital. Palestinian reconciliation is also an important
component of the lasting peace, and Turkey continues
its efforts to that end.
As part of the agreement on the normalization
of Turkish-Israeli relations, the Ambassadors of both
32/52

17/01/2017

countries have recently assumed their duties in Ankara
and Tel Aviv, respectively. That will enable us to restore
our bilateral relations in many fields and increase our
contributions aimed at addressing the humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza and the development needs of the
West Bank. Currently, we are focusing on the urgent
needs of the Palestinian people, in particular the
electricity and water shortages, as well as health and
housing issues. We have sent two technical missions to
Gaza to assess the infrastructure. Our humanitarian aid
delivery to Gaza will continue regularly.
Turkey has been undertaking intensive efforts to
end the violence in Syria, ensure the unfettered flow of
humanitarian aid and reach a political solution based on
the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522,
annex), as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). To that
end, we have done our utmost to ensure the safe and
secure evacuation of people from eastern Aleppo. We
were pleased to see that those efforts, along with our
call for an emergency special session at the General
Assembly, led to the unanimous adoption of resolution
2328 (2016). That was a modest but promising step after
a long silence regarding Syria in the Council. Following
the decisive role that Turkey played in the evacuation
of 45,000 people from eastern Aleppo, we facilitated
and became the guarantors of an understanding reached
by the warring parties on a countrywide ceasefire.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2336 (2016)
demonstrated the international community’s support
for that process and reconfirmed the link between our
efforts and the meticulous work undertaken by the
United Nations.
With the ceasefire in place, we have covered
significant ground. Our aim is to ensure a sustainable
and functional continuation of that understanding. So
far, working with our Russian counterparts, we have
been able to contain the violations by the regime and the
foreign militia elements. Violators are warned through
appropriate channels. However, the process remains
fragile. The maintenance of the ceasefire is decisive, if
we wish to unblock the political solution. That is exactly
why the period ahead will be critical, particularly the
next two weeks. We invite all actors to exercise their
influence in order to reach the goal desired.
Our efforts are aimed at restarting the political
track from the point where it left off in April 2016. The
preparations for the meeting to be held in Astana with
the presence of the United Nations are ongoing. The
Astana meeting will be complementary and supportive
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the political process led by the United Nations and
represents an important confidence-building step
ahead of the resumption of negotiations in Geneva on
8 February.
While we refocus on our efforts on the ceasefire
and political talks, accountability remains a central
concern. Reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria
will be based on our success in that matter. In that
regard, the adoption of resolution 71/248 by the General
Assembly is a significant development.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong will,
working with our partners, to continue to support
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people in the
coming period.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We condemn Mr. Mladenov’s continued failure
to deal with the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
and with ongoing Israeli violations and practices there,
which are part of this particular agenda item. They also
form an integral part of Mr. Mladenov’s mandate as
Special Coordinator.
This debate coincides with the upcoming 50-year
anniversary of Israel’s occupation of Arab territories.
That includes systematic and documented violations
by Israel of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. The international community has not taken
real steps to end the occupation, which has encouraged
Israel to escalate its aggression and its unprecedented
settlement policy, the latest illustration of which is the
bill seeking to legalize the outposts.
The Security Council should immediately
implement resolution 2334 (2016). That resolution,
which was adopted weeks ago, condemns settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
resolution should also apply to Israeli occupation
policies in the occupied Syrian Golan. The Israeli
Government decided to establish 19 new districts and
400 housing units in Katzrin settlement, built on the
ruins of the Syrian village of Kasreen, and has increased
the settlers’ numbers in the occupied Syrian Golan by
adding 750 farms. Those are matters not covered by
Mr. Mladenov in his briefing.
Syria has a principled position in support of the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
to an independent State on all of its national territory,

S/PV.7863

with Jerusalem as its capital, and to the right of return
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III) of 1948. The war from which we suffer in Syria is
due in large part to our refusal to succumb to pressure
to relinquish our support for the Palestinian people and
their just cause.
Israel still refuses to return the occupied Syrian
Golan to our homeland of Syria. Moreover, Israel has
not implemented resolution 497 (1981). It continues
systematically to violate international humanitarian
law and human rights law with respect to our people
in the occupied Syrian Golan, with a view to erasing
the Syrian identity of the Golan and separating it from
the Syrian motherland. Israel has confiscated land,
expanded settlements and demolished homes. Recently,
that Government demolished the home of citizen
Bassam Ibrahim. Israel also arrested an elderly man,
aged 70, named Asa’ad Al-Waly, who died days ago in
an Israeli prison after being sentenced to eight months
of imprisonment for building a home on his own land.
That is a violation of international law, which prohibits
any occupying forces from confiscating the property
of the citizens of occupied territory, in this case the
Golan. The Golan is Arab Syrian land that Syrians have
inherited from their ancestors.
Israel continues looting the resources of the Golan,
distorting its history and plundering its antiquities,
and has planted more than 20 million land mines. It
has deprived steadfast Syrians on their territory of
the right to study using the Syrian national education
curriculum in Arabic. It has deprived them of the
right to carry Syrian identity cards and the to build
national Syrian hospitals. Israel continues its arrest
and coercion policy, victimizing scores of Syrians in
the Golan. The Syrian Government calls for pressuring
Israel for the immediate release from prison of Sidqui
Al-Maqt — the Syrian Mandela — and his co-prisoners
Iyad Al-Johari and Amal Abu Saleh, who are being held
in inhumane conditions in Israeli detention centres, as
well as rescinding the unjust sentences of Amal Abu
Saleh and a female prisoner, Bashira Mahmoud.
Since the beginning of the events in Syria, Israel,
the occupying Power, has added a new chapter to its
annals of terrorist aggression, in direct violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and Security
Council resolutions, in particular those resolutions
concerning counter-terrorism. It has provided support
of all kinds to armed terrorist groups in the area of
separation in the occupied Syrian Golan, including

17-0116733/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

17/01/2017

the Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, facilitating their crossing of the ceasefire
line. It treats wounded terrorists in its hospitals with a
view to allowing them to return to Syria and continue
their terrorist activities. It has built a two-kilometre
berm that crosses the ceasefire line, with illegal gates
for use by armed terrorist groups, to the great concern
of the Syrian Government and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force. That is well known to
the member States of the Council, but apparently not to
Mr. Mladenov.

I will not reply or respond to the false allegations made
by certain countries, especially those that harbour,
support and finance terrorists, or that promote sabotage
and extremism in Syria and are working hard to derail
any peaceful solution to this crisis by intervening in our
internal affairs — in particular Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom, the United States, France and others.
They use the diaspora of global terrorism as a political
tool to put pressure on my Government to change its
choices and positions.

While continuing its terrorism, policies of
aggression and defiance of international laws, norms
and resolutions and its support to terrorist groups,
Israel perpetrated a new, treacherous act of aggression
against the territory of Syria after midnight on
13 January. The launch of a large number missiles
by its warplanes north of Lake Tiberias, led to a fire
on the periphery of Al-Mezzeh airport in Damascus.
Apparently Mr. Mladenov and the United Nations do
not know about that particular act of aggression. This
illustrates that Israel and terrorism are two sides of the
same coins.

I now give the floor to the representative of
South Africa.

We call upon the Security Council to take
immediate action to punish Israel for its aggression and
to prevent it from being repeated. The Security Council
is also called upon to take immediate action against
Israel and force it to end its aggression and violations
and its occupation of the occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, and to withdraw
to withdraw to the borders of 4 June 1967 in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497
(1981) and 2334 (2016). We reiterate that Syria has a
sovereign right over the occupied Syrian Golan up to
the line of 4 June 1967. It is not a right that is up for
negotiation, nor can it be waived. We are not asking for
concessions from Israel, which it describes as painful.
We are referring to lands and rights that have been
usurped and should be restored to their rightful owners
and holders. Israeli settlers will have to leave our land
in Golan sooner or later.
In conclusion, we reject the attempts by some
delegations to undermine the substance of the item on
today’s agenda, which is dedicated to discussing how to
end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands, including the
Syrian Golan, and not to attempts to mislead the Council
through the discussion of the internal affairs of countries.
Not wanting to be part of those reprehensible attempts,
34/52

The President: I remind speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes. Delegations
with lengthy statements are encouraged to circulate
their texts in writer and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We join other Member
States in expressing our appreciation to Sweden for
convening this open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. It is our belief
that these periodic open debates are necessary in order
to mobilize the international community, especially
the Security Council, and to assist both Israel and
Palestine in finding a lasting solution to the conflict
that continues to prevail in both of those countries.
As we engage in this important open debate, we
need to reflect on resolution 2334 (2016), adopted in
late December 2016. The Security Council’s decision
is welcome and long overdue, bearing in mind that that
was the first time since January 2009 that the Council
was able to adopt a decision on the Middle East peace
process. What is of specific relevance regarding
resolution 2334 (2016) is the fact that it emphasizes
the illegal nature of the activities undertaken by the
Government of Israel, which include the building of
settlements, the confiscation of land, the demolition
of Palestinian property and the displacement of
Palestinians. The resolution conveys the resolve of the
Security Council not to recognize any changes to the
internationally agreed lines of 4 June 1967 as the basis
of a negotiated settlement.
My delegation wishes to highlight the fact that
Israel, as a State Member of the United Nations, is
obliged, under Article 25 of the Charter, to comply with
the decisions of the Security Council.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7863

In that regard, South Africa urges Israel to comply
with all of its obligations under international law.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

The reality, however, is that the illegal Israeli
settlements continue unabated. They have led to
the fragmentation of the West Bank and continue to
threaten the viability and territorial contiguity of a
future Palestinian State. The illegal and unilateral
Israeli policies, practices and activities impede the
peace process. We also believe firmly that continuing
the settlement activities will undermine Israel’s own
immediate and long-term security prospects and help
to radicalize the entire region.

Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for convening and presiding over today’s meeting.
I am also grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and
frank assessments.

Negotiations and dialogue are the only way forward,
if we are to reach a lasting solution. The guidelines
for the negotiations are based on an established
international legal framework that includes the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Quartet road map, to mention only a few of
its elements. South Africa supports all international
efforts aimed at brokering a just solution to the IsraeliPalestine conflict. In that regard, we welcome the
Middle East Peace Conference held in Paris this past
weekend and align ourselves with the statement issued
there. We regard it as a vehicle that can help to relaunch
effective and serious peace talks between Israel and
Palestine, leading to the creation of an independent,
free and sovereign Palestinian State coexisting side by
side in peace and security with the State of Israel, based
on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

My delegation associates itself with the statements
to be delivered by the representatives of Venezuela and
Uzbekistan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
respectively.
In December 2016, less than a month ago, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016), on
the illegal Israeli settlements, a resolution sponsored
by Malaysia, together with New Zealand, Senegal and
Venezuela. After more than three decades of inaction
on the part of the Council, which have led to Israel’s
relentless and systematic settlement expansion in
complete disregard for international law and the views
of an overwhelming majority of the international
community, the Council finally decided to take action
to preserve the possibility of a two-State solution. The
delay in that action has come at a great cost to peace
and the idea of a two-State solution.

In conclusion, South Africa is of the opinion that
negotiations between Palestine and Israel should take
place within a clear, mutually agreed-on framework
that includes a reasonable timetable and clear sanctions
to be applied to parties that do not live up to their
commitments. An open-ended approach and process
are by now a luxury that the international community
cannot afford, given the changing reality on the ground
in Palestine, which poses an immense risk to the
achievement of a viable, contiguous and independent
Palestinian State, as well as of an escalation in violence.

Over the decades, the illegal settlements and the
settler population have multiplied, undermining and
fragmenting the contiguity and territorial integrity of
a potential Palestinian State, including East Jerusalem.
They have also physically threatened the viability and
prospects for the physical realization of a two-State
solution on a basis of the pre-1967 borders. We have
seen how settlement expansion has led to the demolition
of Palestinian homes, the forced displacement of
Palestinian families, increasing violence on the part
of settlers, and discriminatory policies, as well as to
the denial to the Palestinians of their development,
infrastructure and access to natural resources. The
strong support that we received from Council members
and the international community for resolution 2334
(2016) reflected a realization of the urgency and
importance of reversing the negative trends that
threaten peace and the viability of a two-State solution.

Fifty years of occupation is too long. South Africa
would like to emphasize once again that, at the end
of the day, the prime responsibility for peace falls
squarely in the hands of both Palestine and Israel. As
the international community, we can only support,
encourage, advise and thereafter reward.

In view of Israel’s worrying and aggressive response
to the resolution, Malaysia urges the international
community and the Council to remain firm and not
give in to threats, intimidation and pressure, while
upholding international law, international human
rights standards and the various relevant United

17-0116735/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations resolutions. In the next few months, the parties
involved and the international community should focus
on implementing resolution 2334 (2016), including the
provisions relating to settlements and acts of violence
and incitement against civilians. We expect to see a
written report every three months from the SecretaryGeneral on the resolution’s implementation.
The international community must not remain a
bystander as the situation on the ground worsens. In
that regard, Malaysia welcomed the holding two days
ago of the Paris Middle East Peace Conference. We
will continue to support France’s efforts to mobilize
the international community and its commitment to a
two-State solution. We seek to create an environment
conducive to pushing the parties towards a resumption
of the peace process.
In conclusion, Malaysia would like to reiterate
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
conflict by ending the repressive military occupation
of Palestine. That prolonged occupation has created
and sustained the settlement enterprise and has spread
further despair, frustration and insecurity in the region
and beyond. As we begin 2017, which marks 70 years
of Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestine, we must
redouble our efforts to end the longest occupation in
modern history. Malaysia remains committed to playing
a constructive role in realizing a two-State solution. We
reiterate our long-standing support for the Palestinian
people’s inalienable right to self-determination and
to a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Palestine-Israel conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to commend you and the Swedish
Mission, Mr. President, on the work you are doing in
the Security Council this month. We are also grateful
for today’s briefings.
I will focus on two issues in the region, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the situation in Syria,
while reiterating our position that a diplomatic solution
is required in both cases.
In the case of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
my country emphasizes how urgent it is to ensure a
resumption of negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis on the persistent core issues in the conflict.
A political solution should be based on the previous
36/52

17/01/2017

obligations and agreements already arrived at between
the parties, supported by international law and the
decisions of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is vital that we achieve a political solution
to the conflict and create, with all possible speed, a
new peace architecture for resolving differences. We
need a sustainable peace aimed at establishing the
foundations for direct negotiations leading to a goal that
is acceptable to the international community — that of
the harmonious coexistence of the State of Israel and
a viable, independent Palestinian State. Costa Rica
remains convinced that a two-State solution is the only
possible way for both States and their peoples to live
side by side in peace and security.
We therefore welcomed the Security Council’s
adoption, on 23 December, of resolution 2334 (2016),
which reiterates the consensus established in the
international community that the settlements have no
legal validity and urges all parties to work collectively
to initiate credible negotiations on all the final status
issues in the peace process. We reiterate our support
for the use of international law as a tool in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and for the position of the
Security Council and the General Assembly as bodies
created to preserve international peace and security.
We urge respect for and compliance with the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016), which is binding on every
State Member of the Organization.
With regard to the conflict in Syria, we welcome the
adoption by the General Assembly of resolutions 71/130,
of 9 December 2016, and 71/248, of 21 December 2016.
We reiterate our position, given the grave nature of the
crimes that may have been committed and the level of
destruction of Syria, that we need to have accountability
mechanisms in place in order to recover, safeguard and
consolidate the evidence that would enable us to bring
the perpetrators of such crimes to justice in the future.
We understand that, given the terrible dynamics of the
Syrian conflict, some legal processes will begin in the
future. For that very reason, it is urgent to compile
as much evidence as possible. We also highlight the
importance that such a mechanism should be financed
through the United Nations regular budget.
The international community has long waited for
a Security Council agreement on Syria. We therefore
welcome the fact that the Security Council was able
to adopt resolutions 2328 (2016) and 2336 (2016)
unanimously. That represents a significant step forward
in the work of the Council and an important initial step
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for our efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict.
We reiterate our conviction that the only lasting
solution to the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic
will be achieved through diplomatic channels. In that
regard, we call upon all States to respect and implement
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by
the General Assembly.
Costa Rica urges that the efforts of the international
community should not cease until a final ceasefire has
been achieved through an agreement that covers all the
parties concerned. We wish to recall that the Security
Council has the power to refer the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court in the event that
States with primary jurisdiction did not exercise it and
also in the face of the mass atrocities committed there.
In conclusion, Costa Rica reiterates its concern at
the growing tension among regional Powers, which has
raised the tone in those confrontations. We therefore
make a robust appeal for peace in the Middle East. As
Members of the Organization, we have a legal, political
and moral responsibility to prevent and stop any act
that leads to the death of innocents. We should support
and enhance those mechanisms that allow us to bring
to justice those responsible and combine our efforts
to stop the spiral of violence and end the suffering of
civilians. That is the only way that we can feel satisfied
that we have complied with the provisions established
in the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Krisnamurthi (Indonesia): Let me begin
by commending the delegation of Sweden on its
assumption of membership in the Security Council and
on its assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of January, as well as for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. My delegation would also like
to take a moment to welcome the other new members
of the Council, namely, Bolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and
Kazakhstan. We wish them a very productive term. I
also thank Special Envoy Mladenov for his briefing.
This open debate is taking place only two days
after the adoption of the joint statement at the Middle
East Peace Conference in Paris, which reaffirmed
that the two-State solution is the only way to achieve
a just, lasting and comprehensive resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The joint statement also
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),

S/PV.7863

which, among other things, condemns the settlement
activity. Indonesia wishes to express its full support
for those positive outcomes — the resolution and the
joint statement — produced within less than a month
of each other, and to congratulate the Council and the
Government of France for the progress achieved.
In resolution 2334 (2016) the Council stresses that
the cessation of all Israeli settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory is essential if we wish
to salvage the two-State solution. It also calls for
affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse the
negative trends on the ground that are imperilling the
two-State solution.
In a bold move, the Council reaffirmed that Israel’s
establishment of settlements in the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has
no legal validity, constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and is a major obstacle to
the achievement of the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace. The Council further
reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and
completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
that Israel fully respect all of its legal obligations in
that regard.
Resolution 2234 (2016) was long in coming. Since
2009 the Council has not adopted a single resolution
concerning Palestine, nor have any of its resolutions
spoken of the illegality of the settlements for over 30
years. On that account, my delegation commends the
members of the Security Council that supported the
resolution, particularly its co-sponsors.
While the resolution is a landmark achievement,
some specific provisions are particularly significant,
including the declaration that no recognition of any
change to the line of 4 June 1967, including with regard
to Jerusalem, will take place, other than those agreed
by the parties through negotiations. Another extremely
significant achievement of the resolution is the call
upon all States, bearing in mind the declared illegality
of the settlements, to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967. We are also pleased
that the resolution mandates the Secretary-General to
report to the Council every three months concerning
the implementation of its provisions.
While the letter of that resolution is mighty, its spirit
is mightier. What the resolution actually implies is the

17-0116737/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

17/01/2017

change of heart in the Council that many delegations
in the Organization, including mine, have called for
for many years. That change of heart affirms clearly
and firmly the recognition that change will not come in
the Middle East as long as Israel’s construction of the
settlements and its arrogant ignoring of international
law continue. It is that change of heart that clarifies that
any settlements built illegally since 1967 remain illegal
and will not be recognized.

Mr. Lal (India). I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on the Middle East. These
quarterly meetings of the Security Council serve as
a stark reminder that the situation in the Middle East
remains fragile and that peace and reconciliation
continue to elude us. Violence and terror continue
unabated, leading to widespread suffering and
large-scale exoduses of refugees. Those effects are
being felt far and wide.

What next? The 2017 billion-dollar question
is expressed in one word: implementation,
implementation and implementation. A resolution,
whether an institutional one or one made personally in
the new year, is meaningless if it is not implemented.
That is why, while we praise the courage behind the
adoption of the resolution, the challenge is in the
tangible and effective implementation that it demands.
If settlement construction by Israel was illegal before,
if it constituted a flagrant violation of international law
and a major obstacle to peace and the viability of the
two-State solution based on 1967 borders, it is even
more profoundly so since the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016) last month.

These quarterly deliberations are also a pointer
towards the interconnectedness of peace and security
across regions and the importance, therefore, that the
international community attaches to the pursuit of a
peaceful and just resolution of those conflicts. However,
international efforts have proved largely insufficient
and ineffective in addressing the multiple challenges to
peace and security in the region.

We have therefore arrived at the point where the
Council must demonstrate the mettle of which it is
made, on the side of right over wrong, justice over
injustice. The Council has the moral obligation to
be on the right side of history. The evidence so far is
unflattering, as previous resolutions — like reports by
United Nations-appointed representatives, rapporteurs
and commissions — have often been trampled upon
by Israel, and then eventually ignored by the United
Nations itself. In our view, the failure to implement
that resolution would finally frustrate the hopes of
all Palestinians, and even of the majority of Israelis,
who simply want to live side by side in peace with
their neighbours.
Finally, my delegation would like to stress that even
the cessation of settlements can only be the beginning
of a long process. The parties must start the negotiation
process without delay and commit to addressing the
root causes of the problem. In that regard, it our hope
that the newly elected members of the Council will also
lend their support to, and support the implementation
of, that historic resolution in this the fiftieth year of
Israel’s occupation of Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
38/52

Despite that gloomy backdrop, we can discern, as
we commence a new year, at least some developments
that can offer some hope, including the Middle East
peace process, the recent Syrian truce and the formation
of a national unity Government in Lebanon.
The lack of any significant forward movement on
the Palestine issue, ever since the collapse of talks
nearly three years ago, continues to be a cause for
concern. The past one and half years has seen a further
deterioration of the security situation in Palestine.
Only a negotiated two-State solution can bring about
sustainable peace and lasting security.
There is therefore an imperative need for restraint
and moderation on all sides. We stress that it is the
collective responsibility of the two sides to ensure that
they move closer to a solution. We welcome the latest
efforts by the international community to promote
peace through the recently concluded Middle East
Peace Conference in Paris, in which more than 70
countries, including India, participated. At the same
time, India continues to invest through its development
efforts, including through capacity-building and skillsdevelopment, so as to empower Palestinian youth with
opportunities to improve their lives.
The truce in Syria, which came into effect on
30 December, was a much-needed positive development.
We welcome all efforts to end violence in Syria and
to jump-start the political process. In that context, we
welcome resolution 2336 (2016), adopted a few weeks
ago. During his recent visit to Syria, India’s Minister
of State for External Affairs, Mr. Mobashar Jawed
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Akbar, expressed the hope that the age of destruction
would give way to reconstruction in Syria, and that
the solution to the crisis in Syria should be worked out
through a comprehensive political process that achieves
and accommodates the aspirations of the Syrian people.
We look forward to the outcome of the direct
talks scheduled for later this month in Astana. It is
encouraging that the process is committed to the
principles of the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and is
led and owned by Syria. Meaningful involvement by
the United Nations is also essential to the process.
In Lebanon, the recent election of President Michel
Aoun and the subsequent formation of a national unity
Government, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Saad Hariri, have been further positive developments.
In his congratulatory message, the President of India
expressed our hope that the new presidency will usher
in an era of political stability and progress in Lebanon.
We hope that those developments will also be helpful
from the perspective of regional stability. Lebanon’s
example of resolving complex sectarian issues via
institutional means through political processes can
serve as valuable lessons for other similar situations in
the region.
Whether it is “salaam” or “shalom”, the deepseated yearning for peace across peoples is only too
evident. We hope that 2017 will bring about a surge in
diplomacy for peace, as has been called for by the new
Secretary-General. Pragmatism and compromise are
essential for moving forward for the greater interests of
all. History has shown that only peaceful coexistence is
sustainable in the long term.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for having convened this extremely
important open debate in the light of recent events and
the persistent situation in the Middle East. We also
express our gratitude to the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. We convey our appreciation and support for
his tireless efforts in the quest for just and sustainable
political solutions that will help bring the conflict to an
end and achieve peace in that tumultuous region.

S/PV.7863

Venezuela sees terrorism as one of the major threats
and destabilizing elements in the region. In that regard,
we categorically condemn all terrorist acts and groups,
whoever its perpetrators may be and whatever its goals.
Our statement will focus on the Palestinian question,
as that protracted conflict continues to be a significant
source of tension in the complicated panorama that
prevails in that region.
Resolution 2334 (2016), of 23 December 2016, which
condemns the illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, was adopted by consensus and
co-sponsored by my country at the end of our term in
the Security Council as a non-permament member, and
has undoubtedly contributed to bringing to the attention
of the international community the terrible impact of
the occupation of Palestinian territory on the hundreds
of thousands of men, women and children whose daily
lives and most fundamental rights are compromised by
the illegal Israeli policies, the occupying Power, which
arrogantly and cruelly oppresses them and denies them
their right to exist in a sovereign, independent and
viable State.
In that context, we regret the violent, threatening
and arrogant reaction of the Israeli Government
to resolution 2334 (2016). Instead of heeding and
complying with the Council’s resolutions and
mandates, as called for in the Charter of the United
Nations, that Government continues to defy the
international community, declaring that there will be
more settlements and threatening those countries that
continue to insist on the two-State solution and on
compliance with international law.
Nevertheless, Venezuela hopes that the Security
Council will continue to do its utmost to achieve the
effective implementation of that crucially important
resolution, which includes the requirement that Israel
immediately and totally cease all illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and that measures be adopted
to safeguard the Palestinian people from the continued
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which have been occurring for 50 years, and in the
Gaza Strip, which for almost 10 years has been subject
to an inhumane and brutal blockade by Israel.
The two-State solution continues to be the only
possible way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In that regard, we welcome France’s diplomatic efforts,

17-0116739/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which culminated in the convening of 70 countries on
15 January at the Paris Middle East Peace Conference,
in which Venezuela participated with the strong desire
to join its voice with others who called for a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the conflict, based on
the existence of two States, Israel and Palestine — as
a full-fledged United Nations Member and with East
Jerusalem as its capital — living in peace within secure
and internationally recognized pre-1967 borders. We
note the total consistency between the points agreed in
the joint statement adopted at the Paris Conference and
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016), which shows
that the Council’s document fully reflects the concerns
of the international community regarding the conflict
and its willingness to seek short-term solutions that
do not eliminate the possibility of reaching a political
solution in the form of a two-State solution.
We also commend the fact that the statement
adopted in Paris noted the importance of providing
ongoing financial support to the Palestinian Authority
so that it can build the necessary infrastructure
for a viable Palestinian economy. We welcome the
goodwill of the States and organizations that attended
the Conference, and we reiterate our support for that
collective effort to achieve peace in the Middle East,
as well as the work of the Middle East Quartet and
initiatives from countries like Egypt and Russia that
seek to promote political processes and conversations
between Israel and Palestine, with a view to reaching
agreements on the basis of the two-State solution, which
should take into account the Arab Peace Initiative, the
terms adopted at the Madrid Peace Conference and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

17/01/2017

Israeli prisons. Not only do we reiterate the importance
and the need for the members of the Organization and
the Security Council, the organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
remain attentive to future developments in the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and to be an element of support
and assistance for the parties as they search for peace,
but we do so with special emphasis on the importance
of defending the weaker party, namely, the occupied
Palestinian people.
In this way, we will ensure that agreements
resulting from resolutions, declarations, discussions
and multilateral and direct negotiations go beyond
the population in question and open the way in 2017,
“the year of peace”, in the words of Secretary-General
António Guterres, for the end of the occupation,
in accordance with resolution 242 (1967), and the
emergence of a Palestinian State on an equal footing
with all the nations of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): The delegation
of Bangladesh thank the Swedish presidency for
organizing today’s quarterly debate.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of Uzbekistan, who will speak on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

We believe that Israel must stop turning its back
on international law and we demand that it do so. Israel
must heed the calls of so many in the international
community for the resumption of an open and honest
political discussion with the Palestinian Authority
based on the existence of two States in order to initiate
a process that will put an end to the tragedy of the
Palestinian people, that will put an end to the illegal
occupation of its territory, and that will put an end to put
an end to one of the greatest abuses committed against
a people in the contemporary history of the world.

This year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
illegal Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories.
This protracted situation has been a sheer affront to the
values and principles enshrined in the United Nations
Charter. There is every reason for the States Members
of the United Nations to collectively question and
re-examine this untenable status quo. As we witness
wilful provocations to further diminish the prospects
of a two-State solution, the urgency of reorienting
the political horizon towards resuming the Middle
East peace process cannot be overstated here in the
Security Council.

Venezuela is waiting for Israel to listen. Venezuela
expects Israel to cease its arrogance and violence.
Venezuela expects and demands that Israel shall cease
to violate the human rights of hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians, including more than 700 children in

The International peace conference held in Paris on
15 January was a clear proof of the sense of urgency
held by the international community. The message has
been unequivocal. The quest for a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question must be

40/52

17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

pursued earnestly, all the more so given the backdrop
of a volatile regional security situation. We could agree
more with the French Minister for Foreign Affairs
when, in an op-ed piece in the Israeli daily Ha’aretz,
he wrote,
“Thinking that the Middle East could restore
its stability without settling its oldest conflict is
unrealistic. This conflict, if not dealt with, will
continue to fuel frustration and will ultimately
only worsen the vicious cycle of radicalization and
violence. It will continue to give budding terrorists
excuses for enlisting.”
A recent survey of a relatively small segment of
our population conducted in an online interface on
discontents giving rise to violent extremist attitudes
has revealed that the situation of Muslims under foreign
occupation and other forms of systematic discrimination
ranks first among the list of such discontents. For those
who wish to ignore the underlying root causes of the
recent rise of violent extremism across the globe, such
evidence-based findings should provide some food
for thought.
There is near-unanimity in the international
community that the continued expansion of Israeli
settlements constitutes one of the most blatant
manifestations of the injustice committed against the
Palestinian people and poses a serious impediment to
the resumption and pursuit of the peace process. The
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) by the Security
Council last month has reaffirmed the illegality of the
settlements and prevailed upon the occupying Power to
halt further expansion of settlements and stop attempts
to give legitimacy to the existing ones. In fact, the wise
words of the Permanent Observer of the Observer State
of Palestine earlier today sums it all up:
“The will of the Council, and of the international
community as a whole, to stand by the resolution
and implement its provisions will be an indicator of
whether the two-State solution can be saved or not
and whether peace will be possible or not.”
For its part, Bangladesh will continue to add its
voice in support of implementing resolution 2334
(2016) and for the moment of truth it ushers in for
peace, justice and the international rule of law. As
reiterated by our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina during
her meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Palestine recently, the Government and the people of
Bangladesh will remain steadfast in advocating in

S/PV.7863

favour of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to return, self-determination and
an independent and viable State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would like to start by first
conveying Pakistan’s conviction that the leadership,
energy and dynamism of Secretary-General António
Guterres will help us in healing the complex conflicts
and crises in the Middle East and in restoring
world order which is being threatened today from
multiple directions.
For 50 years, Israel has persisted in its occupation
of the West Bank in defiance of the United Nations
Charter’s central tenet that territories cannot be acquired
through the use of force or aggression. None of the
basic foundations for lasting peace between Israel and
the Palestinian people — Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 242 (1967), demanding Israeli
withdrawal from occupied territories, the Oslo Accords
outlining the principle of land for peace, and the
general consensus of the international community for
a two-State solution — have been implemented by the
occupying Power.
It is our conviction that enduring peace in the Middle
East is inconceivable without a just resolution of the
Palestine-Israel dispute. The establishment of an viable
independent and contiguous State of Palestine on the
basis of internationally agreed parameters, the pre-1967
borders, and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, is
the only sustainable guarantee for peace. It is clear that
the transfer of any State’s embassy to Jerusalem will
also manifestly violate Security Council resolutions.
The international conference on the Middle East
peace process, held in Paris over the weekend, is a
welcome step in the right direction. With over 70
States in attendance, the conference reaffirmed the
primacy of the two-State solution. There must be
consequences for those who continue to defy the force
of international consensus.
We are also following with great dismay the tense
situation unfolding in Gaza, after 2 million Palestinians
have been left with just a couple of hours of electricity
a day in the middle of winter. We call for full respect of
the right to freedom of expression, peaceful protest and
assembly in Gaza.

17-0116741/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine, the Holy Land, is the heart of the Arab
and Islamic world. What happens to Palestine and its
people will resonate throughout the region. Let us not
forget that the basic narrative of the region’s extremists
is that Muslim peoples can secure justice only through
resort to force and violence. It will be difficult to defeat
this narrative — and extremist ideologies — unless we
bring peace and justice of the Palestinian people.
Resolution 2334 (2016), recently adopted by the
Council, affirmed the self-evident conclusion that
the continuing expansion of Israeli settlements in the
occupied West Bank are likely to foreclose a two-State
solution and eliminate the prospects of a peaceful
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute. Pakistan
welcomes the Council’s adoption of this resolution. Not
surprisingly, the resolution has been opposed by the
occupying Power. But others who have sought to apply
pressure and coercion on members of the Security
Council and on the United Nations display their own
narrow and deeply flawed vision. Resolution 2334
(2016) must be expeditiously and fully implemented by
the parties concerned.
The fratricide in Syria is now almost six years old.
The human suffering it has caused is unprecedented
in recent history. We have collectively missed many
opportunities to end this tragic conflict over this
period. Yet another such opportunity now beckons.
With a Russia-Turkey-brokered ceasefire backed by
resolution 2336 (2016) still holding, Syrians have
started believing again. Their eyes are now set on the
peace talks in Astana on 23 January. Those tentative
beginnings must be nurtured and regional and
international players must stay firm in their resolve to
bring peace back to Syria. That can be achieved if the
legitimate interests of all States and parties involved are
equitably accommodated and a viable coalition formed
to defeat Da’esh and other terrorist groups. Even as Iraqi
and coalition forces retake Mosul and defeat Da’esh,
thought must turn to building durable structures of
peace through the recognition and reconciliation of the
interests of all of Iraq’s people.
Despite the untiring shuttle diplomacy of Special
Envoy Ismail Ahmed, Yemen continues to burn. The
extended war is grinding the country further into
poverty. The situation has been further exacerbated
by the external arming and encouragement of certain
groups. The endeavours of the Special Envoy must be
fully supported by all parties to restore peace with
dignity for our Yemeni brothers and our Yemeni sisters.
42/52

17/01/2017

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to congratulate the Kingdom of
Sweden on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month, and thank it for convening
today’s important open debate on the situation in the
Middle East.
Iraq fully appreciates the Council’s united position
in response to racist Israeli settlement-building
policies. That position was reflected by the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), in which the international
community condemned Israeli settlement-building and
lent considerable support to the two-State solution, in
line with 1967 borders. My delegation sincerely thanks
the delegations of New Zealand, Malaysia, Venezuela
and Senegal for pleading in favour of justice and
international law by submitting the text on which the
Council voted on 23 December 2016.
We also thank the United States for abstaining and
not using its right to veto, illustrating the country’s
commitment to basic principles and its faith in the twoState solution, and for acknowledging that, in the eyes
of the international community, the policy of illegal
settlement construction hinders and undermines the
international community’s efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the Palestinian cause.
The Palestinian people have the right to enjoy
special international protection, in addition to the
protection to which they are entitled, under the
provisions of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The Security Council
should ensure that Israeli occupation forces do not
violate those international rules and monitor the
horrendous abuses perpetrated against civilians, end
unprecedented violations committed against holy sites
in Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque and protect
the Palestinian people. It should also ensure the full
withdrawal from occupied territory based on 1967
borders, in accordance with resolution 242 (1967) and
resolution 338 (1973).
We condemn all acts of Israeli settlement-building
as illegitimate and illegal. They are a major obstacle to
the two-State solution and undermine peace efforts in
the region. The Arab party, however, demonstrates a
sincere willingness to end this protracted conflict and
achieve just peace, which would have a positive impact
on the management of natural resources, judicious and
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7863

lasting economic governance and on the promotion of
security in the Middle East.

continue to lend support to the Palestinian question in
the light of the status quo.

We commend the efforts of some States members of
the Council that seek to launch global peace efforts, in
particular the recent efforts of France that culminated
with the holding of the Paris Middle East Peace
Conference. The outcome of that Conference reaffirmed
the right of Palestinians to a sovereign State and the end
of Israeli occupation that began in 1967, as well as the
settlement of the issue, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We reassert that the Palestinian
people have the right integrate into the international
economy and to have full control over their territory,
natural resources and revenue, which would allow them
to have lasting and predictable income and improve
their overall financial situation.

I would like to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Council: Sweden, Bolivia, Italy,
Ethiopia and Kazakhstan. I would also like to thank the
Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mladenov, for his valuable briefing on this issue.

United Nations reports unequivocally confirm the
adverse impact of the Israeli occupation, which can be
seen in the rise in Palestinian production costs and the
isolation of the Palestinian people who are now excluded
from global value chains. In addition, the inhumane
blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip, the restrictions
on the freedom of movement — a prerequisite for
economic recovery — and the illegal confiscation
of Palestinian land are all factors that exacerbate
the plight of the Palestinian people, undermine the
domestic economy and fuels people’s anger and loss of
trust in the international community, which still has not
managed to secure a two-State solution.
We support our brothers in occupied Palestine
territory and in the occupied Syrian Golan in their
legitimate struggle, in accordance with international
law, to establish an independent, viable Palestinian
State that is geographically connected, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, based on 1967 borders. We
call upon the international parties engaged in the peace
talks to speed up efforts and overcome the difficulties
that hinder efforts to achieve a two-State solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. I would also like to
thank you for convening today’s open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, reaffirming your country’s willingness to

We have bid farewell to 2016 — a year in which
developments occurred quickly, especially in the
Middle East. Those developments overshadowed the
region’s main cause, namely, the Palestinian question. It
is a question that continues to linger in the background.
It has worsened due to the stalemate in the negotiations
in 2014, which led to the escalation and expansion of
the policies of Judaization and settlement-building in
occupied Palestinian territory since 4 June 1967.
There have been successive calls for the cessation of
Israeli settlement-building in the occupied territories,
as well as successive efforts through the Arab
Ministerial Committee for the Arab Peace Initiative
comprising of Morocco, Egypt, Jordan and Palestine
to end to the Israeli occupation, international efforts
and initiatives to save the two-State solution, and the
international Quartet and its recommendations to end
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in accordance with
international legitimacy. All these efforts have been
aimed at salvaging the two-State solution, which is
the only way to restore peace and security between the
Israelis and Palestinians.
The adoption by the Security Council of resolution
2334 (2016), of 23 December, stresses the need to put an
end to settlements as the main impediment to the twoState solution. Therefore, Morocco has consistently
called for an end to be put to settlements and has
reiterated that they undermine all efforts towards peace
and that the only solution is the two-State one.
However, the road ahead is still long and arduous.
As we have said in previous statements, the resolution
of the situation in the Middle East is conditional on
finding a solution to the Palestinian question, which
is the central and pivotal question of the Middle East.
This should be translated into a Palestinian state, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, otherwise, the situation
will deteriorate.
The Kingdom of Morocco, led by his Majesty King
Mohammed VI, heads the Jerusalem Committee. This

17-0116743/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is of great importance to Muslims, as this is the first of
the two Meccas and the third sacred shrine. Anything
other than the two-State solution will eventually cause
more violence. The continued deterioration of the
Palestinian situation due to Judaization, settlements
and the displacement of peoples will eventually fuel
additional violence. It has therefore become imperative
for the international community to shoulder its
responsibility to find a way out of the stalemate that has
characterized the situation since the negotiations halted
between the Palestinians and Israel, as this caused the
situation to deteriorate even further and resulted in
violence. However, negotiations should not be held just
for negotiations’ sake, but should aim to achieve the
two-State solution, with East Jerusalem as the capital.
That is why Morocco has been keen to support all
initiatives that aim to find a solution to the situation
and to give impetus to the peace process in the Middle
East, so as to make it possible to devise a settlement
that will eventually enable the Palestinians to establish
their own State, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In
this regard, Morocco has all along supported the French
initiative and also participated in the Middle East Peace
Conference, which was held in Paris two days ago, and
we also welcome the joint declaration of the Conference.
Morocco firmly believes that the only way to
resolve the Palestinian question is for both parties to
go back to the negotiating table in good faith and to
work within a very specific time frame, based on the
principles of international legitimacy underlying the
solution of two States coexisting peacefully, in harmony
and with cooperation.
Morocco will sustain its principled position as
regards the conflict, based on the Arab Peace Initiative
and the principle of creating an independent State
of Palestine. Morocco has always been and remains
ready to engage actively and effectively in any and all
initiatives aimed at giving impetus to the peace process,
in order to reach a settlement that will eventually create
security, stability and peace in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Sughayar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.
44/52

17/01/2017

This discussion comes at a critical point in time,
not just because it coincides with recent developments,
which have included many actions on the Palestinian
political track, but also because it touches on important
issues in the Middle East since the appointment of
the new Secretary-General. We hope that the new
Secretary-General will directly and effectively exert
influence to bring about stability and security in the
region. The Middle East region requires sincere, major
efforts in order to achieve unity and peace, efforts that
address the root causes of the conflict.
The resolution of the Palestinian — Israeli
conflict requires reasonable and wise decisions that
do not repeat the mistakes of the past and that end the
policies of tyranny and deprivation of rights. This has
only brought more tension, extremism and violence to
the region. The efforts made recently at all levels to
break the stalemate in the conflict have had increasing
political significance given the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016) and the Paris Conference held two days ago.
Jordan welcomes the adoption of this resolution
and the French initiative. In this regard, we call on
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities;
enhance the momentum achieved; and implement the
resolution in full and use it in the context of innovative
initiatives that would lead to a two-State solution being
realized and to a comprehensive settlement in terms of
final status.
The adoption of resolution 2354 (2015) and
its condemnation of Israeli settlement plans in the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly East
Jerusalem, reflects the reaction of the international
community to settlement activity, in particular in view
of the unprecedented increase in settlements and in the
number of settlers on occupied Palestinian territory.
It asserted the important principle that the Security
Council would not acknowledge any changes to the
1967 borders, that settlements are illegal, and that Israel
should be compelled to adhere to its obligations under
international law and needs to put an end to all illegal
settlements on Palestinian territory.
We have repeatedly condemned Israel’s illegal
practices and its unilateral actions, as an occupying
Power, against the Palestinian people as well as the
policy of imposing a new reality on the ground,
including the demolition of homes, the confiscation of
land and the displacement of civilians. Peace cannot be
imposed or even achieved unless the two parties take
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

bold action that end the tension and violence and build
confidence. Statements by Israel that it is committed to
the two-State solution and is ready to negotiate directly
with the Palestinians will not have any significance
unless they are coupled with concrete action on the
ground based on international resolutions.
We reaffirm our principled position that the
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will happen
only when the occupation ends and an independent and
viable Palestinian State is established that is based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
based on international terms of reference that include
the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. We reaffirm that we will continue
to defend Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem
and to protect them. This is based on the custodianship
of the Hashemite Kingdom over Islamic and Christian
holy sites. That is the mandate of Abdullah II, King
of Jordan.
We support any serious initiatives aimed
at promoting the peace process through serious
negotiations and also supported the Paris Conference,
which reflected the true will of the international
community towards a solution to the conflict. We
reaffirm that negotiations aimed at a two-State solution
need to take place within a specific time frame. Despite
the fact that such efforts will not lead to an immediate
end to the conflict, it is, however, a chance to end
the long stalemate in the peace process and create
momentum to end the political vacuum, which will,
sooner or later, lead to a more severe conflict between
the two parties and in the region as a whole.
Israel must objectively and positively look at
recent developments. Its continued intransigence with
regard to and rejection of developments and settlement
activities is a threat to the two-State solution and its
own security. Those international efforts are not
directed against Israel but aimed at achieving the
two-State solution in accordance with international
law. Success in reaching an agreement would actually
achieve the aspirations of the Palestinian people and
security for Israel.
The Palestinian question is the primary concern of
the countries of the region and many others throughout
the world. Failure to reach a just and comprehensive
settlement of the issue would lead to an increase in
extremism, violence and terrorism in the region. The
region cannot sustain any more tension and violence. The

S/PV.7863

continued lack of stability would lead to the targeting
of many parts of the international community, helping
the terrorist groups to become the biggest winner.
Jordan reaffirms that, now more than ever, serious
cooperation and willingness at the international
and regional levels to combat terrorism must receive
the utmost priority. We therefore need to respond to
threats that affect stability and undermine security in
the region, in particular, and international peace and
security in general. We need to support such a response
so that we can confront the terrorist groups that have
exploited the instability and political vacuum in the
region to expand their power. Those terrorist groups are
responsible for the fear not only of only individuals but
of entire communities because of their bloody tactics
and horrible crimes, which have claimed the lives of
countless civilians.
Turning to Syria, since the beginning of the
crisis we have maintained a principled position
aimed at ending the violence and reaching a Syrianled political process, led with a unified international
vision for its guiding principle based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and the recommendations of the
International Syrian Support Group that would ensure
Syria’s unity and territorial integrity and support the
pluralistic nature of the State of Syria.
We support all sincere efforts to end the crisis
in Syria. We encourage the parties in Syria to build
confidence so as to reach a comprehensive political
solution. The current phase calls for concerted efforts
to help the Syrian people overcome the crisis. Jordan
is pleased to note the Turkish-Russian agreement for
restoring calm in Syria and other positive developments
that have led to concrete results with regard to the safe
evacuation of Syrian civilians from Aleppo. We look
forward to the political discussion to take place in
Astana. We hope that they will foster an environment
conducive to the resumption of the United Nationssponsored Geneva discussions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to begin
my statement on behalf of Brazil by thanking the
Government of Sweden for organizing this debate and
welcoming the newly elected non-permanent members
of the Security Council: Bolivia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan,
Italy and Sweden.

17-0116745/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The various conflicts in the Middle East are a matter
of grave concern for the international community,
particularly the United Nations, but more so for the
inhabitants of that region — the first victims of what
looks like an endless cycle of violence. Brazil, as well
as the international community in its overwhelming
majority, supports a negotiated settlement to the
conflict between Israelis and Palestinians — one that
meets Israel’s security needs and the Palestinian right
to statehood and sovereignty, as Brazil has constantly
advocated, and one that fully takes into account
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), among others.
We have repeatedly appealed to both sides to refrain
from acts of violence that may push the parties further
away from the negotiating table and the two-State
solution that we all envision. We firmly repudiate all
terrorist activities, regardless of their motivation. As
Secretary-General António Guterres has stated, such
acts should not be allowed to deter the parties from the
need for a renewed commitment to dialogue.
Brazil appreciatively takes note of and welcomes
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), which
condemns all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror as well as all acts of provocation,
incitement and destruction, and reaffirms that Israeli
settlements in Palestinian territory are illegal under
international law and an obstacle for a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. It comes as an important
addition to a stock of Security Council resolutions:
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980), 1397
(2002), 1515 (2003), and 1850 (2008), which represent
an instrument that the international community uses to
point the parties in the direction of peace. We expect
that that initiative and the Paris Peace Conference held
last weekend will motivate further multilateral efforts
favouring the return to meaningful negotiations between
the parties, thereby leading to the establishment of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living peacefully side-byside with internationally recognized borders.
The recently announced nationwide ceasefire in
Syria, brokered by Turkey and the Russian Federation
and supported by resolution 2236 (2016), represents a
much-needed measure of hope in the efforts to reach
a political solution to the conflict. We welcome those
developments. Brazil urges all parties to respect the
ceasefire and engage constructively in the negotiations
to take place in Astana and Geneva, based on the road
map established by resolution 2254 (2015), allowing for
an inclusive and Syrian-led political process.
46/52

17/01/2017

Last month, Brazil supported two important
decisions of the General Assembly concerning Syria.
Resolution 71/130 demanded an immediate end to
attacks on civilians throughout the country, while
resolution 71/248 established the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of those Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. Those initiatives confirmed that the Assembly can
have a relevant role in seeking peace and accountability
for Syria without prejudice to the responsibilities of the
Security Council.
Brazil welcomed the resolution of the political
impasse in Lebanon with the election of President
Michel Aoun and the formation of a Government of
National Accord under Prime Minister Saad Hariri.
We congratulate the new Lebanese leadership and
reiterate our long-term commitment to the development
and stability of Lebanon, including through our
participation in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). Brazil underlines that the strategic
review of UNIFIL currently being undertaken by the
Secretariat, as called for in resolution 2305 (2016),
must take into consideration the strategic, operative
and financial needs of the mission, as well as its highly
volatile security environment.
With regard to Iraq, we are concerned by
the humanitarian impact of the ongoing military
operations in Mosul. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs reports that approximately
140,000 people have been displaced by hostilities in and
around the city — a figure that continues to rise. Food
and water shortages are affecting the civilians of Mosul,
who are already being subjected to a harsh winter. In
Mosul and elsewhere in Iraq, we strongly condemn
tactics attributed to the what is known as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) that may constitute
war crimes or crimes against humanity, including
forced displacements, attacks against humanitarian
workers and the use of civilians as human shields.
We highlight the need to plan long-term stabilization
and reconstruction efforts in Mosul. Another priority
should be the long-term reconciliation of all ethnic
and religious communities coexisting in the areas once
occupied by ISIL. Women, girls, minorities and other
vulnerable populations deserve particular attention in
that regard.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Lastly, on Yemen, we regret the absence of a
durable cessation of hostilities as well as the parties’
unwillingness to accept the road map for negotiations
proposed by Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed,
whose work we support.
In conclusion, Brazil urges all Yemeni actors and
their external supporters to renew efforts towards a
negotiated solution and to avoid unilateral measures
that might jeopardize this process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Estreme (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Swedish delegation for organizing this
open debate.
Argentina has always supported conflict
resolution through dialogue and diplomacy; respect for
international law and the sovereignty, independence,
national unity and territorial integrity of States; the
rejection of the acquisition of territory by force; and
confidence in the constructive role and persuasive
power of the international community to open paths for
dialogue and to advance the negotiations. That is why
my country strongly supports all efforts to achieve peace
and stability in the Middle East, whether in relation to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or in connection with
the situations in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq.
With regard to the conflict between Israel and
Palestine, and in the light of the fact that half a century
has passed since the adoption of the historic resolution
242 (1967) and the beginning of the occupation of the
Palestinian territories, we reaffirm our support for a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace on the basis of the
two-State solution. Argentina participated last Sunday
in the Paris Middle East Peace Conference and firmly
supports the aspiration of its joint declaration that a
State of Israel and a State of Palestine must coexist side
by side in peace and security, on the basis of the 1967
borders and whatever the parties determine during
the negotiation process. We thank the Government of
France for this initiative.
Argentina recognizes the right of the State of Israel
to live in peace with its neighbours, within secure and
internationally recognized borders, as well as the right
of the Palestinian people to form an independent and
viable State that is recognized by all nations.
My country reiterates its concern about the
persistent and continuing growth of illegal Israeli

S/PV.7863

settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories
and calls for an end to their expansion, as set out in
resolution 2334 (2016) adopted on 23 December. The
settlements are an obstacle to peace and weaken the
prospect for a two-State solution, thereby promoting
the perpetuation of an unsustainable status quo.
At the same time, Palestinian leaders must sincerely
address Israeli security concerns. Hamas and other
Palestinian groups must put an end to incitement and
attacks on Israeli civilians, as set forth in resolution
2334 (2016). The launching of rockets from the Gaza
Strip against Israel must cease immediately. My country
strongly condemns all terrorist acts and is convinced
that there is no military solution to this conflict, nor
can a solution be imposed through terrorist methods.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, and rejects any unilateral measure aimed
at changing it. My country believes that the holy city
should be a place of convergence and peace and that
the three great monotheistic religions — Judaism,
Christianity and Islam — should be guaranteed free
access to the holy places.
With regard to the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina continues to be deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in that country
and condemns all acts of violence, including attacks
on civilians. My country is eager to see the recent
initiatives to stop the violence in Syria and launch a
political process give way to a new phase that will
end years of conflict and disunity. In that regard, we
welcome the ceasefire and the adoption of resolution
2336 (2016), which we hope will be implemented in
good faith by all parties, as well as resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016).
Over the past five years, Argentina has affirmed in
all discussions on Syria that the solution to the conflict
can only be a political one and not military, much less
a terrorist one, as has been acknowledged in resolution
2254 (2015). That is why, just one week before the
meeting of the representative of the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic with the representatives of
the opposition to be held in Astana, we hope that the
agreements reached there will contribute to the success
of the official negotiations to be held in the framework
of the Geneva process, under the auspices of the United
Nations, next month. We hope that all countries with
influence over the parties will continue to act in

17-0116747/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

concert to achieve an early ceasefire, ensure access
to humanitarian assistance and continue the political
process in accordance with the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Peace in the Middle East is only possible through
dialogue and negotiation that respect the parameters
recognized by the international community, namely, the
two-State solution, based on relevant United Nations
resolutions, agreements signed between the parties,
the road map of the Quartet, the Arab Peace Initiative,
a mutually acceptable solution to the situation of
Jerusalem and a fair resolution of the refugee issue.
In order to respond to the call of Secretary-General
António Guterres to make 2017 into a year for peace,
the international community should spare no effort to
put an end to the various conflicts in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Madrakhimov (Uzbekistan): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in my capacity as chair
of the OIC group. I would ask you, Sir, to accept my
warmest congratulations on Sweden’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you every success. I also wish to congratulate the
other newly elected members of the Council — Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan — on the assumption of
their responsibilities.
At the outset, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation welcomes the recent adoption by this
organ of resolution 2334 (2016), which, among several
important elements, reaffirmed that the establishment
by Israel, the occupying Power, of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal validity and constitutes
a flagrant violation under international law, and
reiterated the Council’s demand that Israel immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and fully respect all its legal obligations in
this regard.
The international consensus in this regard and the
urgency of justly and peacefully resolving the question
of Palestine, the core of Arab-Israeli conflict, have
been made abundantly clear by this important action
of the Council. We urge the Security Council to accept
serious follow-up efforts to compel compliance with
48/52

17/01/2017

and ensure the implementation of the resolution towards
providing tangible political support for international
efforts aimed at ending the Israeli occupation and
achieving a two-State solution on the basis of pre-1967
borders and promoting, in accordance with relevant
United Nations resolutions and the moderate principles
of the Arab Peace Initiative, the realization of a just,
lasting and peaceful solution to which OIC remains
unflinchingly committed.
Significantly, this meeting assumes special
importance as it comes two days after convening the
Paris Middle East Peace Conference. Such a historic
timely meeting highlights the will and commitment
of the international community to continue its pursuit
to salvage the two-State solution before it is too late
and reach a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
without delay.
This meeting takes place overshadowed by an
extremely volatile and continually deteriorating
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, owing to Israel’s prolonged occupation
and illegal policies and measures, including, inter
alia, systematic human rights violations against
the Palestinian civilian population; gross collective
punishment perpetrated against Palestinians in the
Gaza Strip under the decade-long Israeli siege and
blockade; continuing house demolitions; the arrest
and administrative detention of Palestinian civilians,
including political and human right activists; settlement
and wall construction; and the expansion and isolation
of Jerusalem from its natural Palestinian environs.
The recent attempts by the Israeli Government
with regard to a bill aimed at further entrenching its
illegal settlement outposts is not only undermining
the credibility and significance of political efforts and
damaging the viability and territorial contiguity and
integrity of the State of Palestine; it also goes against
international law and United Nations resolutions.
All of such illegal measures must be ceased and the
occupying Power must abide by its legal obligations
under international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, as stipulated in resolution 2334 (2016). The
OIC remains firm in its conviction that the Security
Council must act to ensure the halt of all Israeli illegal
acts, provide protection and justice for the Palestinian
people and compell Israel, the occupying Power, to
strictly abide by its obligations under international
law and comply with the countless resolutions of the
Security Council and General Assembly.
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Once again, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation must draw attention to its great concerns
regarding the ongoing Israeli violations against holy
places, particularly the al-Aqsa Mosque, which are not
only violations against religious rights of Muslims,
but are also threatening to ignite religious conflict.
We forewarn about the recent decision of the Israeli
Government banning the call for prayer in mosques in
the occupied city of Al-Quds and its suburbs, given that
the decision constitutes a grave violation of the freedom
to worship and threatens to destabilize the situation on
the ground. Such provocations and incitement must
be brought to an end. The OIC views with concern
the unprecedented levels of assaults by extremist
Israeli settling groups against civilians in the city of
Al-Khalil/Hebron, including the recent harassment
and threats against human rights activists, including
human rights defenders who had documented on video
the crimes of an Israeli soldier shooting an injured,
unarmed Palestinian.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the OIC’s support and solidarity and
readiness to engage with relevant international efforts
in order to enable the Palestinian people to regain
their inalienable national rights, including the right to
return, self-determination and realize the independence
and sovereignty of the State of Palestine on the land
occupied by Israel since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. We must reach a just solution to the question
of Palestinian refugees according to the relevent
resolutions of the United Nations and establish lasting
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): I would like to thank
the Swedish presidency of the Security Council for
convening this quarterly open debate on the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
We are starting the dialogue on this topic this year
at an important juncture — following the adoption
of resolution 2334 (2016), the first Security Council
resolution on the Palestinian issue in almost a decade.
The Maldives welcomes the resolution, which reaffirms
the illegality of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territory of Palestine and calls upon States to distinguish,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967.
We believe that this is a significant step forward in the

S/PV.7863

Security Council that demonstrates the international
political support in addressing the predicament of the
Palestinian people, which has stretched on for far too
long. It is a clear message to the Israeli Government that
its policies and laws aimed at perpetuating and further
extending its illegal occupation in blatant violation of
international law will not be accepted by the Council or
the rest of the world.
With deep concern, we take note of the punitive
actions that the Israeli Government has taken against
the Security Council members that voted in favour of
the resolution, as well as the harsh political statements
issued from the highest level expressing the lack
of intent to implement the resolution. This flagrant
disregard for the very basic principles of international
law sets a dangerous precedent, for which the Israeli
Government should be held accountable. We believe it
is critical to build on the momentum generated by the
resolution and take further concrete measures to bring
an end to the Israeli occupation and find a peaceful
and sustainable resolution to this conflict, which has
continuously overshadowed peace and security in
the region.
The Maldives also welcomes resolutions 2328
(2016), 2332 (2016) and 2336 (2016), which address
the escalating humanitarian crisis in Syria. Given the
appalling number of innocent lives that have already
been claimed by that conflict, we believe it is crucial
to ensure that unobstructed humanitarian aid is
continuously accessible to those in need in order to
prevent further casualties. We also welcome the efforts
of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Turkey
aimed at initiating the political process to end the
violence in Syria, and call upon all the relevant parties
to enhance and expedite those efforts.
The crisis in Syria is indeed the one of the gravest
tragedies of our time. The Maldives, along with other
Member States, remains committed to taking action to
resolve the crisis and rebuild that war-torn country. We
cannot falter in our duties as Member States in times of
dire need.
All decisions of the Security Council should be
followed by urgent action. The lack of progress in
implementing the resolutions of the Council on issues
relating to the Middle East must be addressed in a
concrete manner in order to maintain the credibility of
not only the Council, but the United Nations as a whole.
We welcome the initiatives by Member States, that help

17-0116749/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

supplement the implementation of those resolutions,
including the Paris Middle East Peace Conference,
which was held on 15 January.
The Maldives would like to reiterate its call for a
two-State solution that recognizes the sovereign and
independent State of Palestine, based on the pre-1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. The
achievement of sustainable peace in the Middle East
can be possible only through political will, international
cooperation and tangible actions. The resolution of those
conflicts is necessary in order to resolve other threats
to international peace and security, such as terrorism
and violent extremism. Collectively, we need stronger
resolve in order to secure a better, more peaceful future
for those countries and maintain international peace
and order.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Im In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate.
Let me begin by welcoming the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016) on 23 December 2016, which
clearly condemns illegal Israeli settlement activity
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.
The resolution of the Middle East question is today
one of the top priorities for sustaining peace and security
in the world. Almost 70 years have passed since the
international community started its endeavour to settle
the Palestinian and Middle East issues, which started
with Israel’s occupation of Arab territories in 1948.
Nevertheless, no significant progress has been made
yet. This is entirely due to the Israel’s anti-peaceful
stand and the prejudicial Middle East policies of
certain forces.
Israel has ignored the just and fair demands of the
international community and it is continuing to cling
to the aggressive and inhumane policies of illegally
occupying Arab territories, expanding settlements,
blockading the Gaza Strip, ruthlessly killing civilians
and so forth. This reality is negatively affecting the peace
and security process in the Middle East. Nevertheless,
the Security Council, whose main responsibility is to
safeguard international peace and security, has turned
its face away from Israeli atrocities without taking any
50/52

17/01/2017

appropriate measures, thereby bringing about serious
damage to the credibility of the Security Council. This
is because the Security Council played into the hands of
the double standard of the United States, taking Israel’s
side in the matter.
Such double standards are extremely visible with
respect to the Korean peninsula, and the Security Council
sanctions resolutions against my country, fabricated by
the United States, provide a typical example of that.
The United States persists in its desperate attempts to
deprive the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of
its independence and its legitimate and justifiable right
to defence. Obsessed with its ill-intended, inveterate
antipathy towards the independence of other countries,
the United States also fabricated a sanctions resolution
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
using the Security Council, in wanton violation of
international justice and the principle of impartiality,
and has pressured other countries to implement
such resolutions.
The main reason that the Middle East has fallen
into a chaos characterized by terrorism, destruction and
the refugee crisis is the high-handedness, arbitrariness,
military aggression and interference in other countries’
internal affairs by the United States. The United States,
which tolerates the Israeli expansionist policies and
nuclear capability, is the principle offender destroying
world peace.
All facts demonstrate that the Security Council,
which is mandated to ensure peace and security in the
world, should pay greater attention to today’s changing
reality and undertake much stronger measures to reach
a fair solution to the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. The establishment of
an independent State of Palestine is an inalienable and
sovereign right of the Palestinian people. The support
of the just struggle of Palestinians for an independent
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital and on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders, is a trend that no one can stop.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea strongly
condemns Israel for its illegal settlement expansion
and demands that it stop undermining peace and
security in the region, and that it withdraw its forces
from illegally occupied Arab and Palestinian territories
without preconditions.
I take this opportunity to clarify once again the
principled position of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea: all disputes should be settled peacefully
17-01167

17/01/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

through dialogue and negotiation between the parties
concerned without any interference from outside forces.
In that connection, my delegation is of the view that the
Syrian issue should also be resolved peacefully through
dialogue, without foreign intervention, in accordance
with the Charter’s principle of respect for sovereignty
and non-interference.
In conclusion, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea will continue to stand firmly with the Palestinian
and Arab peoples in their just struggle for peace
and stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
It is my pleasure to speak on behalf of the Group of Arab
States. I would like to congratulate the friendly country
of Sweden on its accession to the Security Council and
on assuming the presidency for the month of January.
I fully trust that Sweden, given its principled positions
on international matters and its remarkable record at the
service of international peace and security, will play in
an effective role not only this month but throughout its
mandate in the Security Council.
I also wish to congratulate the delegations of
Ethiopia, Bolivia, Kazakhstan and Italy on their elections
as members of the Security Council. Furthermore, I wish
to praise Angola, Venezuela, Malaysia, New Zealand
and Spain for their distinguished service during their
mandates as members of the Security Council.
The Arab Group is pleased by the remarkable
action that the Security Council has taken in adopting
resolution 2334 (2016). That resolution condemns
Israeli settlements on occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. The resolution also calls
on all States concerned to distinguish between Israel
and the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
with particular regard to agricultural and industrial
production. It recognizes the need to not allow Israel,
the occupying Power, to exhaust the natural resources of
the Palestinian territories, or to create obstacles on the
road to a peaceful, fair solution that would put an end to
the Israeli occupation and enable the independence of
the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital
on contiguous Palestinian territory — which has been
occupied since 1967 — and lead to the development of
an equitable solution for the Palestinian refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 1948.

S/PV.7863

We encourage the Council to move on from the
adoption of resolutions to taking practical steps to
implement the aforementioned resolutions. That
is a major responsibility of the Council in its new
composition, in accordance with the agreed international
references, in particular the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations and the Madrid Conference, including
the principle of land for peace, the Quartet road map, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the principles set forth by the
Secretary of State of the United States on 28 December
2016. We also subscribe to the statement adopted by the
Paris Middle East Peace Conference.
The Council must continue to push towards an
internationally recognized political solution. The
Council must not remain unmoved in the face of Israeli
intransigence and violations. We must not lose sight of
a very clear reality, namely, that peace in the Middle
East and in the entire world cannot accommodate
the persistent occupation of Arab and Palestinian
territories. Peace cannot be achieved in the absence
of a fully independent and sovereign Palestinian
State. International cooperation and the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism must be based on
mutual respect. We also reaffirm the fact that the
complete Israeli withdrawal from the occupied Arab
territories, the occupied Syrian Golan and usurped
Lebanese territory must take place and must include the
lifting of the blockade on the Gaza Strip.
I shall continue now in my national capacity.
Saudi Arabia intends to participate actively in
all international efforts to reach peace and stability
in the kindred country of Syria. In that connection,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2336 (2016),
adopted on 31 December 2016, which affirms the
need for real peaceful political transition in Syria in
accordance with the Geneva communiqué of June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex), as well as the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, in particular resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016).
Saudi Arabia also reaffirms the importance of
General Assembly resolution 71/203 of 19 December
2016 on the situation of human rights in the Syrian Arab
Republic, as well as General Assembly resolution 71/248
of 21 December 2016 on the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We call

17-0116751/52

S/PV.7863

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for the implementation of those two resolutions and of
all international decisions regarding Syria, particularly
those relating to facilitating access to humanitarian aid
for all who need it, without preconditions, while lifting
the blockade and ending the attempts of the Syrian
authorities to defame their own people.
Saudi Arabia believes that the Syrian people is not
about to end its struggle for liberty and dignity, and
that the oppression by the Syrian regime, conducted
with the support of its Russian and Iranian allies, the
terrorists of Hizbullah and other armed militias, such as
the Iranian Revolutionary Guard, must end. The Syrian
people must be allowed to determine their political
future as they see fit and in full independence.
The President: The representative of Israel has
asked to make a further statement. I now give her
the floor.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): The Islamic State of
Iran, which openly supports and sponsors terrorism
throughout the region, had the audacity to sit here in
the Chamber and spread lies. Besides its perpetration
of the long list of criminal and terrorist acts attributed
to it, Iran does not spare the lives even of its own young
people, since it remains one of the few States in the
world that execute juvenile offenders. Considering
Iran’s utter disregard for human life, it comes as no

52/52

17/01/2017

surprise that it continues to commit unspeakable acts
such as assisting the Al-Assad regime in the ruthless
slaughter of the Syrian people, directly and through its
proxy Hizbullah.
I could not agree more with the Ambassador
of Lebanon’s statement about how impossible it is
to maintain peace and security if States are not held
responsible for their internationally wrongful acts. I
believe that, in his case, self-awareness is operating,
coming as it does from a representative of a State in
which Hizbullah, which has been designated a terrorist
organization, has the honour of being represented in
Parliament and the Government.
I now turn to the comments by my colleague from
Bolivia. Bolivia’s one-sided, biased and unrelenting
attack on Israel is an example of what makes the
Security Council incapable of being more effective.
One might expect that a country that had just joined the
Security Council would appreciate the responsibilities
that such a task entails and would make an effort to try
to understand the complexities of a situation. But for
Bolivia, as for one of its immediate predecessors on the
Council, Venezuela, a seat on the Council is to be used
to brutally attack my country, and thereby severely
damage the credibility of this institution.
The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.

17-01167
