OF
TWENTY-SECOND

th

1
NEW

YEAR

MEETING: 14 JUNE 1967

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/I 360) . , , , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . + , , . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . , . . , . . . , , . , , . , , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . , . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President af the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . . . . . . , I . .
Letter dated 29 May 196’7 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) , , . . . , . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 . . . . . .
Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action by Israel and
withdrawal of the Israel forces from those parts of the territory of the United
Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of an
aggression” (S/7967) . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV. 1360

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .)are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplelment in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTIETH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).

14 june

MEETING
1967, at 11 a.m.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7916)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military action
by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces from those
parts of the territory of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria which they have seized as the result of
an aggression” (S/7967).

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 360)

1, Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent
Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/7902).

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previously taken by the Council, 1 shall now, with the
consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Jordan to take places at the Council table, and the
representatives of Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
Kuwait, Tunisia and Libya to take the places reserved for
them, at the side of the Council chamber, in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.

3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

At the invitutioiz of the President, Mr, M. Kidron (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) and Mr. M, H. El-Farra (Jordan) took places
at the Council table, and Mr. S. Chammas (Lebanon),
Mr. K. Khnlaf (Iraq), Mr. M. Tabiti (Morocco), Mr. J. M,
Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. S. Al-Shaheen (Kuwait),
Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took
the places reserved for them

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).
5. Letter dated 9 June 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
addressed to the President of the Security Council
concerning an item entitled: “Cessation of military
action by Israel and withdrawal of the Israel forces
from those parts of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan and Syria which they have seized as
the result of an aggression” (S/7967).

2. The PRESIDENT:
Before the Council resumes its
discussion of the four items inscribed on its agenda, I
should like to point out that the following five draft
resolutions have been submitted for our consideration: a
Canadian draft dated 7 June [S/7941]; a USSR draft dated
13 June [S/7951/Rev. 2]; a United States draft dated
9 June (S/79.52/Rev.Z]; a three-Power draft dated 13 June
[S/7968/Rev.I];
and another United States draft dated
10 June (S/7971/.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Reprosentatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902)

3. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I trust that my
fellow members of the Council will not think it amiss if I
start by speaking with concern about the role of the
Council and the role that the Council should play in this
world crisis. I do so in the strong and deeply-felt conviction
that only by international understanding and international
co-operation can we hope to overcome the growing dangers
of the world, and my justification for doing so lies in my
respect for the United Nations and my faith, in spite of

Complaint of the representative
of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

1

setbacks and disappointments
of the Charter.

and failures, in the purposes

hold of the situation last month, the war could have been
averted altogether.

4. The United Nations is the forum for the expression of
world opinion. Every Member nation has a voice, every
Member has a right to be heard. So it should be. But in this
Council we are not here only to express our national
policies and to defend our national interests. In the exercise
of the Council’s primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security we, the members of the
Council, are charged with a much heavier obligation.

11. By contrast to earlier delays and hesitation, the
Council has been in almost continuous session since the war
started. Again for nearly two days there was delay and
hesitation. We cannot now calculate the consequences. But
from the time of the first cease-fire resolution (233
(1967)], adopted at 7.15 p.m. on Tuesday, 6 June, we have
acted together promptly and effectively.
12. The representative of Mali said recently that we were
achieving nothing and getting nowhere. On the contrary, 1
believe that the series of actions we took following the first
cease-fire resolution last Tuesday has been necessary and
right and timely. What is more: it was successful. And we
made it clear that we should unhesitatingly condemn any
breach of the cease-fire.

5. I believe that in dealing with the crises and the conflicts
of the world, people everywhere look to us in this Council,
SO I am sure, not to increase the crises, still less to intensify
animosities. We are not here to take sides, to score off one
another, to poison relations, or to intensify distrust.
6. We have all accepted very different obligations. We have
tasks much more difficult. We are here to practise tolerance, to make an effort to understand, to find common
ground, to harmonize the actions of nations, to develop
friendly relations, to seek just and honourable solutions, to
establish and keep a peace firmly based on international
authority,

13. It is worth reflecting, in view of the doubts and
misgivings which exist in tne \,orld about the effectiveness
of our Organization, that no other authority in the world
could have successfully called for a cease-fire and then
successfully insisted on its observance. The United Nations
once again showed itself capable of fulfilling its main task
of stopping a war. Would that it could have prevented that
war. Now we must show that, the war having stopped, the
United Nations can contribute to a just peace. Ifwe are to
do so in the circumstances which now face us, we shall need
understanding and wisdom and courage greater than we
have shown before.

7. Such purposes may seem remote and very difficult to
attain against the background of recent exchanges in the
Council, but they are nevertheless obligations which we
have undertaken and from which we cannot escape. It
would indeed be a disaster if we gave an anxious and
confused world the impression that we are interested not in
peace and justice, but merely in intensifying dispute and
increasing confusion and reproducing hate,

14. If we set out on this formidable journey bickering and
disputing amongst ourselves, we can have little or no hope
of success.We in the Council have acted unanimously and
effectively and successfully for a week. That gives us some
confidence. We can also take encouragement from the way
the representatives of the United Nations in the Near East
have so admirably and successfully represented us. Every
member of the Council takes pride, I am sure, in the
decisive part played by General Bull in bringing about a full
cease-fire, and we all pay tribute to his endeavours and
those of all who have worked so well with him. It is worth
reminding those who enjoy emphasizing the failures and
shortcomings of our Organization that only a United
Nations team couId have acted as it did and stopped the
war in Syria. I am .;ure that we are united in seeing the need
to support and strengthen and expand the United Nations
team which has served us so well, And we are also, I am
sure, united in our demand that General Bull and his staff
should be enabled at once to return to Government House
in Jerusalem,

8. We are all acutely aware that we face a crisis of the
utmost gravity, potentially as dangerous as any the world
has ever faced. We know that the difficulties and the
dangers are immense. We know that intense national and
religious feelings are now fiercer than ever. We know that
millions are involved and that many thousands of innocent
people are suffering. We know what a Herculean task we
face in our effort to restore order and justice.
9. I am ahrmed, to put it at its lowest, to imagine what
the world will think if we give the appearance of inflaming
enmities rather than showing an overriding concern to
search for agreement. As we embark on an endeavour to
carry out such a heavy responsibility I am bold enough to
appeal again, with full respect and sincerity, that we should
make a further supreme effort to work together, and work
in mutual esteem, and work with an overriding sense of our
unique obligation.

1.5. It was the resolutions adopted by this Council, backed
by the speed and skill and bravery of the United Nations
staff on the spot, which now enable us to turn to the
problems of disengagement, withdrawal and the building of
a just and lasting peace.

10. In the hope that we can set out on the second phase of
our work in a better spirit, I shaI1 not go back over the past
three weeks, All I would say about our past debate is to
remind the Council that from the first I advocated the
necessity for the Council to meet and act, and that every
time we have met in the Council the voice and the vote of
my delegation have been on the side of urgent action. We
were amongst the first to wish to endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal as soon as he came back from Cairo. We
still believe that if the Council had done SO and had taken

16. We must at the same time take immediate action to do
everything we can to alleviate the suffering caused to
civilian populations and to prevent a refugee problem even
more disastrous than that which we knew before, The
representatives of Jordan, Syria, Tunisia and Morocco all
2

ke to us movingly

on that question yesterday, This is an
rnational responsibility, and I say now that my GovernIt pIedges that it will participate in any international
dative to deal with the problem. We hope that other
ons will match our action. We recommend, moreover,
when the draft resolution put forward by Argentina,
zil and Ethiopia has been adopted, the Secretary-General,
:o-operation with the Governments concerned and the
ted Nations agencies already established, should as a
ter of special urgency secure for us a thorough report
h on the situation and the need, This is another field in
ch
the effectiveness of international action is already
ved and in which we can and must act at once,

21. I now turn to the question of disengagement and
withdrawal. No one believes that those purposes can be
achieved merely by passing a resolution here, We know that
disengagement and withdrawal cannot in fact and in
practice be secured without discussion and action, not in
New York but on the spot. We know, moreover, from
previous experience-in Kashmir, for instance-how necessary discussion with the military and civil authorities
concerned must be,
22. I suggest to the Council that it is.essential that we
should give our minds to the practical problem instead of
engaging in an exercise in propaganda.
23. How then can we best work for disengagement and
withdrawal? General Bull and the United Nations staff
working with him have already made an important start,
and can no doubt play a very useful role in the future too, I
fully agree with the representative of India when .he urged
the strengthening of United Nations machinery in the area,

I well recognize that this problem of relief and
ibilitation
on a vast scale is no substitute for other
?nt action. But I am sure that it is an essential
iminary to a just settlement, and a vital element in it.
It was with these factors in mind that my Government
mly welcomed the initiative of Argentina, Brazil and
.iopia
in putting
forward a draft resolution
V68/Rev.l]
based on the urgent need to spare the
.ian populations and prisoners of war from needless
‘ering. Indeed, we think that this Council should call for
surances to the civilian and refugee populations that
i’ will be allowed to remain peaceably in their homes, It
mnecessary for me to draw attention to the fact that
er international law the rights of a military occupier to
rfere with the civilian life of occupied territory have
:t Iegal limits. Perhaps the best action to be taken at
e would be to suppIement the assurances given us
:erday by the representative of Israel by a call on the
el Government to permit the immediate entry of a team
>bservers to satisfy the world that there is no truth in
gations that pressure is being brought to bear on the
b civilian population to leave their homes.

24. I agree with him too that the Council should at once
consider whether the Secretary-General should depute a
personal representative, not only to help in reducing
tensions but also in restoring peaceful conditions. The
representative of India further proposed that this special
representative of the Secretary-General should also ensure
the safety and security of the civil population. I am not
sure that this task might not be entrusted to some other
representative or team or organization but, as I have said
already, I fully agree with him that certainly there must be
no delay.
25. I believe that we should go further and be considering
also the appointment
of a mediator who can at once
undertake discussions with the Governments concerned so
that an immediate start can be made in setting the
foundations for a just and lasting peace.

Here in this Council on 10 June [13.55th meeting] I
se for myself on the question of the sufferings of
xent people, including the refugees. I now speak for my
rernrnent too. We have many other tasks to face, but
e is more important and none is more urgent than this.

It is on these practical suggestions that we should
concentrate. Moreover, it is my conviction that every
member of the Council knows very well that it is only by
such practical action that real progress can be made.

26.

I was greatly impressed with the practical and constructive speech made by the Canadian representative last
night. He set a clear course for us to follow.
27.

Speaking in the House of Commons yesterday,
George Thompson, the Minister of State, said:
“Meanwhile we have information that large numbers of
:fugees have already crossed to the east bank of the
iver Jordan. It seems plain that a relief problem of
major proportions is building up. The voluntary organiltions in this country are considering what they can do.
er Majesty’s Government have agreed to make financial
rovision for emergency relief in Jordan and we are
rgently considering what we can provide from British
overnment stocks in Cyprus as a first step.“”

28. Last week we worked together to bring about a
cease-fire and to make that cease-fire effective. By working
together we achieved our purpose. It will be a tragedy not
only for the United Nations but also for the peoples
concerned if an endeavour to create division and dispute
now leads us to frustration.
29. It was only a day or two ago that we finished our first
task of achieving and maintaining a cease-fire. Now that
that has been done, we move to greater tasks of the utmost
complexity and immense difficulty.

ncerely trust that the Council will give its immediate
:ntion to the crying need of the innocent sufferers in all
areas of conflict,

30. There are two roads we can follow. Either we can add
to the anguish and perpetuate the bitterness and divide in
hopeless dispute and deadlock. Or we can make a further
great effort together to give our minds to practical means of
overcoming the formidable barriers before us.

See Parliamentary Debates (Hansard), House of Commons,
cial Reports, Fifth Series, Vol. 748, Session 1966-1967
Idon, I-k Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1967), COI.318.
3

31. The first course, the course of deadlock, may appeal
to some-and I know enough from personal experience how
deep distrust and despair have sunk-while to advocate and
follow the other course of international
succour and
international co-operation in steady and persistent practical
effort to restore order and justice will be unpopular with
some, and may very likely be unfairly misjudged.

shrines of Islam and Christianity are shown disrespectand
the Holy Land, the land of Moses and Jesus and Islam, is, as
Pakistan’s Foreign Minister said in 1947, “nailed and
stretched upon the cross”. Second, the Palestine problem,
in all its phases, is but a manifestation of colonialism, albeit
the most brutal one.
39. Here are the words of a famed Jewish intellectual and
writer, Arthur Koestler, who wrote in his book Promise
and
Fulfilment: “From the point of view of national sovereignty and self-determination, Israel is a historic injustice.“’ There can be no objective dearer to the hearts of
Asians and Africans than the elimination of this injustice.

32. But I repeat that I believe that every speech we make
and every resolution we consider should be judged by the
negative tests of whether they inflame passions or not and
whether they increase animosities or not. They should also
be judged by the positive tests of whether they are directed
towards peace or not, and whether they are likely to
contribute to a just settlement or not.

40. Colonialism has diverse forms but its most virulent
racist form is witnessed as much in the conduct of Israel as
it is in Rhodesia and South Africa.

33. Those are the tests we have sought to apply from the
beginning. It will need some courage and some faith to
apply them from now on. Whatever we do today, I trust
that we shall together continue to keep alive the hope of
establishing order and justice throughout the Near East. I
trust too that we shall never abandon the determination to
make the United Nations an effective iristrument for that
purpose.

41. But, if I appear before the Security Council today, r
am moved primarily by the anxiety which is gnawingat the
hearts of Asia and Africa-indeed, of small countries all
over the globe-about the decline of the morality of this
Organization. The history of the Palestine problem is a
history of the Charter of the United Nations being
systematically torn to shreds. From the last week of May
until today, the Security Council has been on trial before
humanity-before,
at least, that part of it which despises
conspiracies, condemns iniquities, abhors aggression and
refuses to bow before the forces of might.

34. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the members of the Council that I have just received a letter
(S/7984/ from the representive of Pakistan in which he
asks to be invited to participate without vote in the
discussion. Accordingly, if there is no objection, I shall
invite him to take a place at the Council table in order to
participate in the discussion of the questions before us.
There being no objection, I take it that it is so decided,

42. We are pained to observe that the Council has failed in
this trial. Humane opinion all over the world-and I am not
thinking only of Asia and Africa-cannot remain unmoved
if this Organization makes obeisance before the forces of
aggression, Shall we let it prostrate itself before a

35. The representative of Jordan has indicated that he will
yield his seat at the Council table in order to permit the
representative of Pakistan to make a statement. I should
like to express my appreciation to the representative of
Jordan for his courteous gesture. I now invite the representative of Pakistan to take a place at the Council table.

blitzkrieg?

36. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Pakistan to make a statement.

43. This is not the first time that Pakistan urges the
Security Council, or the General Assembly, not to deny
justice to an Asian and African people, the great Arab
nation. In 1947, when twenty-nine Members of this
Organization, a minority of the world community, were
induced into voting for the territorial mutilation of the
Holy Land, we warned, and I quote from the statement of
the Foreign Minister of Pakistan at the 126th plenary
meeting of the General Assembly:

37. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, I am grateful to
you and to the Council for according me permission to
participate in this discussion without vote. I asked for this
permission, under my Government’s instructions, because
Pakistan is directly affected by the immeasurable tragedy
that has been enacted in the Arab homeland. I also wish to
thank the representative of Jordan for the courtesy that he
has extended to me in permitting me to speak from his Seat
at the Council table.

“In the hearts of the populations of all the countries
from the North African Atlantic Coast to Me steppes of
Central Asia, you sow doubt and mistrust of the designs
and motives of the Western Powers. You take the gravest
risk of impairing, beyond the possibility of repair, any
chance of real co-operation between East and West, by
thus forcibly driving what in effect amounts to a Western
wedge into the heart of the Middle East.“3

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan)
took a plnce at the Council table.

In the same statement, he said:

38. Our involvement in the Palestine problem hris diverse
roots. We are concerned with the life and liberty, the
dignity and honour of the AI’& nation. We are one with the
Arab people in their weal and woe. We share with the Arabs
the imperishable heritage of Islam which comprehends the
vital elements of the Judeo-Christian tradition and emancipates us from all bigotry, whether of religion or of race. We
are stirred to the depths of our being when the greatest

“Remember, nations of the West, that you may need
friends tomorrow, that you may need allies in the Middle
2 London, Macmillan, 1949, p. 22.
3 Official Records of the General Assembly, Second Sessio%
Plenary Meetings,, vol. II, 126th meeting, p. 1377.
4

.‘,

‘.

discuss their impact, I must not fail to pay a tribute to
those members of the Council which have upheld the cause
of justice and the purposes of the Charter, The world
applauds their stand on principles. But the fact is that, their
interventions notwithstanding, the whole drift and tenor of
the Council’s proceedings so far has amounted to an
acquiescence in aggression. Permit me to analyse it briefly.

East. I beg of you not to ruin and blast your credit in
those lands.“4
44. Today, twenty years later, Pakistan is impelled to
repeat
the same warning. The circumstances of the last
three weeks have lent it further point and poignancy. To all
those who entertain hopes that, under the heels of the
aggressor, the Arab countries can be made to accept a peace
settlement
that otherwise they would not even remotely
contemplate,
we say, without rancour: “The hope is not
worthy
of you. Please, for the sake of decency and
civilization,
do not try to profit from the calamity that has
befallen
the Arabs, indeed, all Asia and Africa,” It is said in
the Book of Proverbs: “He that is glad at calamities shall
not be uIzpunished,”

50. The Council was convened to consider the situation in
the Middle East in May, following the exercise of its
sovereign rights by the United Arab Republic. The issue of
navigation through the Strait of Tiran was essentially one of
a juridical nature. But it was immediately turned into a
casus belZi by Israel and represented as a threat to
international peace. Before the Security Council could deal
with the crisis which was a direct result of nothing but
Israel’s threats of force, efforts were concerted to formulate
a declaration of maritime powers. It was reported that the
declaration would legalize the use of force by Israel to
break the so-called blockade or at least to provide a
political and legal cover to it.

45. All these years, we have been confronted with a
stranger&stance,
in the Western mind, to an understanding
of the human and moral aspects of the case. First, we were
told
of the. West’s desire to make amends for its centuries-old
persecution of Jews and the genocide practised
by Hitler’s-hordes.
But the truth was that the Jews were
oppressed
and decimated in the West and not in Asia and
Africa.
Repentance and reparation, therefore, should have
come from the Western world and not been exacted from
the Arabs.

5 1, No such declaration by any number of maritime States
could, under the rules of international law, legalize the use
of force that is totally outlawed by the United Nations
charter. The Charter permits the exercise of the use of
self-defence only if an armed attack, I repeat armed attack,
occurs. Even in that contingency, the right of self-defence
can be exercised only until the Security Council has taken
the necessary measures to maintain or restore international
peace and security.

46.
Then, we were told of the surge of sympathy for the
Ziotiists
among the liberals and progressives of Europe and
America.
But, we asked, and we ask today, what principle
of liberalism
and progress could justify the uprooting of a
people
from its land and the planting of an alien population
on it? Is it liberal or progressive to rejoice over aggression
and hail the aggressor as the victor? Does the liberalism of
the West stop at the confines of the West?

52. The denial of a right of passage through the Strait of
Tiran was not tantamount to a blockade of Israel whose
trade with the world still remained unhampered along the
Mediterranean coast, Yet the issue, which, as I have said,
was of a juridical nature, was converted into an issue
threatening international peace and security. The concept
of casus bdi being completely foreign to the Charter, what
we all were made helpless spectators of was nothing but a
reversion to a preCharter mentality.

47.
Then,
again, there was scepticism about Israel’s
expansionist
aims. Certainly, this should have been dispelled by the consistent pattern of Israel’s actions, in 1949
and 1956. But, if it was not, can any doubt still exist after
the most recent statements of Israel leaders that they are
determined
to annex the Arab territories that, by the sheer
perfidy
of their attack, they overran last week?

53. It is this process which created an atmosphere, an
international psychosis, in which Israel was bound to feel
emboldened to launch aggression on its Arab neighbours. It
was bound to foreclose any possibility of peaceful negotiations which had begun to open with the expected visit of
the Vice-President of the United Arab Republic to Washington. Its record of aggression, as recently demonstrated in its
brutally demolishing the village of As Samu on 13
November 1966 and its unmistakable threats against Syria
in May, was completely forgotten. It was forgotten that
Israel is unique among Member States of the United
Nations in having provoked the censure of the Security
Council a number of times. Instead, the image was
cultivated of a small, helpless nation being strangled to
death by its predatory neighbour.

48.
If I refer to the roots of the Arab-Israel problem, it is
because
of the imperative that the United Nations should
not consider it in a vacuum. It should not ignore the chain
of causation
embedded in it. The world knows how
attetnpts
have been made to fasten on the Council a
different
approach. It is an approach which would detach
the Palestine question from the struggle for freedom in Asia
and Africa. It is an approach which ignores the law of the
Charter
and the ethical standards of State conduct on
which
that law is founded, Can the world convince itself
that this approach is even-handed, when it asks the victim
to negotiate
with the aggressor under the auspices of the
Security
Council? We are among those who have been
astonished
and dismayed at the prevalence of this approach.
We do fear that, if the Council succumbs to it, a mortal
blow will be dealt to the future of the United Nations.

54. When Israel took advantage of this situation, as it
could be anticipated it would, and invaded the territory of
Egypt and Jordan on 5 June, what took place was the most
clear-cut act of aggression in the history of the United
Nations. That Israel fired the first shot and, in fact,
subjected both the United Arab Republic and Jordan to a
Pearl Harbor is plain as daylight.

49.
Our fears have deepened as we followed the Council’s
proceedings
during the last three weeks. However, before I
4 Ibid.,

p. 1367.
5

55. I have been wondering all these days how the decency
of mankind will accept, and how generations yet unborn
will understand, the fact that when aggression took place
on the scale and with the clarity that it did on 5 June, the
Security Council’s natural response was effectively blocked.
This response could be none other than one of condemning
the aggressor forthwith and of calling for the immediate
withdrawal of his troops. Instead, what did the Council
do? It called for a simple cease-fire.
56. Nothing is more basic to the law of the United Nations
than that cease-fire is always linked with the withdrawal of
the combatant forces to their respective borders. Here let
me recall what the Security Council did on 20 September
1965; it called on India and Pakistan to cease fire and to
withdraw their forces [resolution 211 (1965/l. But that
precedent was not followed in the present case. At a time
when the armed forces of Israel were on the soil of the
United Arab Republic and Jordan, and no armed forces of
the United Arab Republic and Jordan were inside Israel,
what, in fairness, could be the explanation of the Council’s
failure to call for the withdrawal of the invading armies?
57. It is said that what may be achieved by Israel’s armies
being permitted to remain on the soil of Egypt, Jordan and
Syria is a peace of reconciliation. But we know better. It is
not a peace of reconciliation
which will result from
permitting Israel’s aggression to remain unvacated. It will be
a dikta t.
58. But let me make one thing plain. We will not be a
party to the imprimatur of the United Nations being lent to
any scheme that, in reality, is nothing more than a plan to
humiliate and coerce the Arab countries into submission.
59. It is incredible that the most brazen aggression has
taken place in the history of the United Nations, comparable to any war of aggression by the Nazi hordes in
Europe, yet so far the Security Council has failed to issue a
word of condemnation.
60. It is amazing that misleading statements were uttered
by Israel before the Council even after the cease-fire went
into effect. The records of the Council show that Israel
denied bombing Damascus and advancing on the territory
of Syria precisely at the moment when it was doing both,
To the mass of mankind which assumes that a certain
degree of civilization should invest international relations,
such effrontery is shocking. Yet somehow the reaction of
the Council, which should have been one of outrage, was
curiously inhibited.
61. The evidence regarding Israel’s conduct is overwhelming. Prior to its aggression, its leaders proclaimed that
they had no territorial conquests to make. Yet, after the
aggression, these same leaders swear that Israel will not
return to the armistice lines. Is this not an attitude of utter
defiance of-not to speak of the United Nations-those very
Powers which have solemnly proclaimed that they will
preserve the independence and territorial integrity of all
nations in the Middle East?
62. The United Nations has reached a watershed in its
history. It has allowed considerable damage to be done to
it. There are voices, most laudably the voice of His Holiness

the Pope., being raised in the world frlr 11ptlace basedon
reason and justice, aud not on force, a voice for the
promotion of right and not of territorial aggrandizement,
63. Pakistan is among those who feel that the damageto
the United Nations, in fact, to civilized values embodied in
the Charter, can yet be repaired. There is no way of
repairing it except by taking three measures: first, a
condemnation of the aggression committed by Israel;
second, a demand under Article 39 of the Charter for the
immediate withdrawal of the armed forces of Israel to the
demarcation lines laid down in the General Armistice
Agreements; third, after the completion of withdrawals
active participation by the Security Council in the exploration of ways and means by which the substantive resclutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council on
the Palestine problem can be implemented.
64. These resolutions, it needs hardly to be mentioned,
relate to Israel’s frontiers, to the repatriation of Arab
refugees and the status of Jerusalem. There are somewho
would seek to counsel the parties, in the name of “realisnl”,
to accept what are called “the hard realities” of the
situation in West Asia. Behind these phrases lurks nothing
but the philosophy, if philosophy it can be called, of the
fait accompli. It is only this Machiavellian notion of the fait
accompli which is now being invoked to bless Israel’s
further expansion.
65. In the name of the principles of the Charter, in the
name of justice, and for the sake of the peace and security
of nations that are weak and small and constitute the bulk
of mankind, Pakistan is among those who appeal to the
Security Council to do its duty under the Charter and to
condemn and undo the aggression. We cannot revive the
thousands who lie dead on the plains of Sinai or in the hills
and valleys of Jerusalem. We cannot comfort those who
have lost all they loved. But, surely, we can ensurethat the
international community does not bless a resort to force
nor reward the aggressorwith the fruits of his crime.
66. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated porn Spanish):A
Security Council resolution condemning a Member State
for aggressive activities is a step of such weight and
importance, according to the Charter and United Nations
practice, that it calls for an assessment of the over-all
situation and a careful analysis of the facts.
67. As is necessary in this case, my delegation has analysed
very carefully all the facts submitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General, the parties concerned and other Inembers of the Council. My delegation considers that these
facts provide us with a vague picture of the situation, SOme
aspects of which are controversial.
68. On other occasions, we have not hesitated to condemn
the condemnable, when that course was indicated by an
objective picture of the situation, fleshed out by definite
and concrete facts. In November 1966 we did not hesitate
to condemn Israel vigorously and to support resolution 228
(1966), which, censures that country for the military action
taken against Jordan in the Hebron region on 13 November
1966. The facts placed before the Council on that occasion
left no room for doubt, But we cannot take the samestand

when the facts have not been presented with the same
clarity for our appraisal.

73. Mr. SEYDOUX {France) ftrunslated from French): We
understand the concern which prompted the Soviet delegation to submit its draft resolution. We believe that
conquest by force of arms cannot confer the right to
OCCUPY a territory. As a question of principles, we can only
support the Soviet proposal. But, having said that, what can
we in fact expect from such an initiative? Either the draft
resolution will not be adopted or, if it is, its chances of
being implemented are questionable.

69. My delegation would now like to comment on the
other aspect of the Soviet draft resolution, which refers to
the occupation of part of the territory of the United Arab
Republic, Syria and Jordan and to the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Israel troops.
70. Since its first statement in this debate, my delegation
has consistently contended that the Council’s first task was
to maintain international peace and security by every
possible means. The adoption of three resolutions by the
Security Council brought about an effective cease-fire on
the Arab-Israel frontier. The countries involved in the
conflict accepted the Council resolutions, and made their
acceptance known in the appropriate way. My delegation
therefore considers that the Council’s first task, namely, to
prevent hostilities from spreading and to bring about a
cease-fire, has been fully accomplished, owing particularly
to the sense of responsibility shown by all members of the
Security Council in this emergency,

74. With regard to the future, it is true that the Arab
States may consider that it is difficult for them to hold
talks as long as their territories remain occupied. Israel, for
its part, would like to be sure that the way is open to an
understanding in that part of the world. The French
delegation therefore considers that we should work together to facilitate talks when the time comes which could
lead to agreements acceptable to all parties. My delegation’s
vote on the Soviet draft resolution will be based on these
considerations.
75. Mr. MAKONNEN
(Ethiopia): Thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to explain my delegation’s
position with regard to the draft resolutions now before the
Council.

71, However, my delegation is not ready to leave things as
they now stand, and from the outset has stressed that once
the necessary atmosphere of calm has been created, an
effort must be made to establish conditions conducive to
dealing with the problem of final and permanent solutions.
It is true that the Middle East has been beset by problems
continuously for almost twenty years and that there are as
yet no signs of a desire to seek a peaceful solution. My
delegation, however, believes that a peaceful solution can
and must be achieved, for it involves not only the interest
of the parties concerned, but also the permanent interest in
peace of all the Members of the United Nations. We believe
that no political progress can be made unless the parties lay
down their arms and conditions are established enabling
them to express their desires freely and without hesitation.
ln short, as we have said in previous statements, we believe
that a just and lasting peace cannot be achieved if positions
of force are maintained. We believe that any settlement
reached under the threat or use of force, in violation of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, would be
invalid and would not lead to a definitive solution of the
problem.

76. Taking together the two draft resolutions, the one
presented by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
[S/7951/Rev.2], and the one presented by the United
States of America [S/7952/Rev.2/, my delegation finds
that many of the problems and issues raised in these
documents are also of great concern to our Government.
We agree with the view that now that the Council has
succeeded in ending the military hostilities through its four
successive and unanimous cease-fire resolutions, it should
immediately proceed to the subsequent steps having to do
with the prompt withdrawal of forces to their original
positions in accordance with long-standing principles and
precedents of the United Nations, and should also undertake the creation of conditions that can enable the Council
to obtain a just and equitable settlement of all the issues
involved.
77. The preliminary views of my Government with regard
to subsequent steps to be taken by the Council were stated
in clear terms in my previous statement before this body.
My Government is convinced that an honourable peace
must be based only on an honourable foundation, and that
it is only such a settlement, reached honestly and equitably,
that can bring lasting peace to this troubled region. That
was why we have insisted, and continue to insist, on the
prompt withdrawal of forces and on the creation of just
conditions for a negotiated settlement of what the Secretary-General, in his report, has called the underlying causes
of the present crisis situation in the Middle East. This
demand for prompt withdrawal and for the establishment
of just and impartial conditions for settlement is one that
we shall continue to uphold and advocate, for we believe
that no peace can be lasting if it is not made under
impartial conditions acceptable to all parties concerned.

72. For all these reasons, my delegation is firmly convinced that at this stage it is the Council’s duty to seek to
establish conditions whereby no one will negotiate under
the threat of coercion. We believe that these conditions
cannot be attained unless on the one hand, troops are
withdrawn, and on the other, free passage through international shipping lanes is assured. In a word, this means
abandoning a belligerent spirit and establishing spiritual
conditions conducive to peace. We believe that both parties
should be placed in a position where they can express their
wishes freely. Consequently, we cannot support operative
paragraph 2 of the Soviet draft resolution. Although we
believe that the withdrawal of troops is one of the basic
conditions for peace, neither party should be subject to
pressure. Furthermore, we believe that the Middle East
problem can be solved only by peaceful means, and that the
first step to be taken or the first method to be used should
be the creation of a climate of understanding, which would
facilitate agreement between the parties.

78. We also believe that the United Nations has a very
important and most urgent role to play in promoting the
right atmosphere and creating the right conditions for a
lasting settlement in the Middle Eastern area. It is for this
7

83. Unfortunately, this has not been possible under the
present circumstances. Even though it is true that the draft
~-1 1
proposals have been before us for some time, we, and
believe other delegations, have been under the impression
that there would be time and opportunity to make 1j
suggestions, to suggest amendments, or to find, perhaps, 1
some other way of reconciling the divergent attitudes and
positions taken by the two major Powers. At the sametime,
we have been studying the suggestions made by other ,
delegations. My delegation, for one, found of tltnely
interest and usefulness the suggestions made by the I
representative of India in his statement to the Council on
9 June 1967 (13S2nd meeting].

reason that we favour the reactivation of a United Nations
presence, and we continue to urge that this be done
without delay. In this connexion, we cannot but be
disturbed and dismayed by recent statements reported to
have been made by high-ranking Israel officials, expressing
unwillingness to accept United Nations participation in the
settlement of outstanding disputes and stating the untenable contention that Israel has the right arbitrarily to
decide the disposition of territories of sovereign States now
under Israel’s military control. Such regrettable statements
cannot but be harmful to the prospects for lasting peace in
the area of the Middle East. We therefore urge Israel to
abandon stands which are not compatible with the principles and practices of the United Nations Charter. We
would also appeal to all parties concerned to turn to the
way of negotiation and peaceful settlement of disputes and
to accept the auspices of the United Nations for such
settlement.

84. The Council will recall that in the statement under (
reference the representative of India made a preliminary 1
outline of three steps that he felt the Council could take j
after having ensured the cessation of hostilities. If I
remember correctly, the substantive part of the Indian
suggestion was as follows. First, the representative of India
suggested the prompt reactivation of the United Nations
machinery in the area to enforce the cease-fire and to
secure withdrawal on the fines proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report of 26 May 1927 [S/7906], With
regard to the enfarcement of the cease-fire at present, I
should like to associate my delegation with all those who
have spoken before me, in expressing gratitude to General
Bull and to the United Nations personnel serving under
him, for the excellent work that they are doing on our
behalf,

79. While taking such clear positions with regard to the
issues involved, my delegation has felt duty bound to
counsel, both in private consultations and in the Council’s
meetings here, against taking any action which may increase
already known difficulties by leading to a divided approach
and creating an atmosphere that will not be conducive to
the kind of necessary and urgent action that we feel the
Council needs to take in order to bring peace and stability
to the area. We continue to believe that the cause of peace
in the Middle East can be served best by concerted action
on the part of the Council, and more particularly on the
part of those permanent members that have both the power
and the influence to contribute to a lasting settlement. It is
therefore with some regret and misgiving that we see the
major Powers beginning to take differing and somewhat
conflicting lines on this urgent and vital issue. This certainly
does not augur well for the peace-making so urgently
needed and for finding a just and lasting settlement in the
Middle East.

85. Coming back to the Indian suggestion, the represen.
tative of India invited the Council, also, to consider
whether the Secretary-Gcncral should be requested to
depute a personal representative to the area to help in
reducing tension, in restoring peaceful conditions and in
ensuring the safety and security of the Arab civilian
population in areas occupied by Israel. Finally, and looking
to the future, the representative of India made the useful
and relevant suggestion that the Council should earnestly
consider the steps to be taken to stabilize peace in the area,

80. I respectfully submit that this present time Of grave
crisis is not the moment for big-Power division. Rather is it
the time for concerted action on the part of major Powers
which should act together to save the peace and to bring to
this troubled area confidence and stability, coupled with
the promise of progress and better life for the future,

86. When in my statement of 6 June 1967 I said:
“We consider this”-1 was referring to the cessation of
hostilities-“to be the first vital step that the Council has
to take, and we shall of course continue to add our
modest but genuine efforts to those of the members of
the Council in the urgent steps we must take together la
order to bring a just and lasting peace to this wartormented region,” [1348th meeting, para. 28.1

81. I do no(doubt, of course, the good motives of either
of the authors of the two draft resolutions that are before
us. I hope and pray that, likewise and in the same spirit, the
authors of the draft resolutions will understand and
appreciate our position and difficulty if we are obl+iged to
say to them that neither of their proposals meets fully with
our own view of how best the Council should proceed to
meet the urgent requirements of the Middle East crisis.

I was, of course, thinking of action very much along the
lines suggested by my friend and colleague, the represet+
tative of India,

82. We feel that time and mutual consultation are af the
essence when the Council has to take such far-reaching
steps as those now proposed by the Soviet Union and the
United States of America, respectively, We need time to
study and weigh the terms of the proposals. We need the
opportunity to consult first with the authors of the draft
resolutions themselves, and then with other colleagues,
members of the Council, while at the same time contacting
our Governments with a view to obtaining the necessary
instructions to act for and on their behalf.

87, As things stand, we do not seem to have the
opportunity we had hoped for, to share views on these and
other constructive and far-reaching suggestions; and 1 must
say that the lack of such opportunity for concerted
endeavour and action is a matter of deep regret to the
Ethiopian delegation.
88. If time was allowed for study and consideration of the
draft proposals now before us, then of course my de19
8

would be only too glad to give these documents all
the attention and serious consideration they rightly deserve.
But since the draft proposals are going to be put to the vote
as they now stand, my delegation, in line with the
explanations I have already given, will find itself obliged to
abstain on both drafts-not because we do not share the
serious concern expressed in these draft proposals, nor
indeed becausethey do not contain points with which we
agree, but because we find neither text fully satisfactory in
its present form, We shall therefore abstain from the vote
on both the draft resolution presented by the Soviet Union
/S/7951/Rev.2/ and the draft resolution presented by the
United States[S/79.52/Rev.2].
gation

the very least be described as vague and full of obscurities.
Since the adoption of a draft resolution along these lines
might have far-reaching consequences, the Soviet delegation
objects to a proposal which is like a “cat in the bag”, as it
were. Implementation
of this draft resolution might even
lead to a violation of the United Nations Charter. In view of
what I have just said, Mr. President, the Soviet delegation
will vote against the Canadian draft resolution,
95. With

regard to the three-Power draft resolution
concerning the need to spare the civilian
populations and the prisoners of war in the Middle East
from additional sufferings, the Soviet delegation wishes to
make the following observations. This draft resolution deals
only with one aspect of the probIem; and this in itself
cannot be regarded as satisfactory in the present circumstances and does not meet the requirements of the case.

[S/7968/Rev.l]

89. Mr, IYALLA (Nigeria): In a previous intervention in
this seriesof meetings of the Security Council, I reiterated
my delegation’s firm conviction that the Council should
now proceed to the substantive issues relating to the
re-establishment of peace in the Middle East and that the
very first matter requiring the Council’s urgent attention
was that of the withdrawal of forces to their respective
territories and within their boundaries, as they were before
the outbreak of hostilities. We still think that the Council
should discharge its responsibility in that regard and
embark immediately on the consideration of measures
necessaryfor the immediate disengagement and withdrawal
of forces, no matter what statements and pronouncements
may or may not have been made elsewhere. Thus, on this
issue there canbe no doubt about where we stand.

96. The question of the sufferings of the civilian population, as a result of Israel’s aggression and the occupation of
part of the territory of the United Arab Republic by Israel
authorities, is of course a real one; but in order to put an
end to these sufferings it is essential to take energetic steps
to bring about the withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops
from the territories they have seized. This is the best way of
protecting the civilian population from the calamities of
war.
97. We reject as unfounded the various arguments and
excuses which have just been advanced by certain speakers,
to the effect that the circumstances in which the crime of
aggression was committed are not yet clear, etc., and that it
is not altogether appropriate to raise the question of the
withdrawal of the interventionist forces from the territories
they have seized. After unleashing an aggression and
invading the territory of sovereign Arab States the Israel
forces of aggression have occupied territories and are
refusing to withdraw from them. We would ask those
speakers what further evidence is needed of this most
flagrant violation of the sovereign rights of States, this
violation of our Organization’s Charter, What points are still
obscure? What further evidence is required of this monstrous aggression and occupation?

90. However, the draft resolution in document
SJ79511Rev.2 of 13 June 1967, which we sawin its present
form for the first time yesterday afternoon, touches upon a
number of other far-reaching issues, the implications of
which my delegation woulcl have liked to consider more
carefully; and we would have wished perhaps to consult
more fully with the sponsors and other members of the
Council.
91. There are considerations as to whether our essential
purposes and the ends we seek to achieve would be best
advanced in this manner. There are also questions as to
whether the timing of some of the proposals before us is
the most opportune. While, therefore, we agree with and
support the principles on which these proposals are based,
since we do not and cannot condone aggression from any
quarter and have clearly stated that we strongly advocate
the urgent withdrawal of forces in the present situation in
the Middle East, my delegation would find it difficult to
pronounce itself definitely on the draft resolution in its
entirety, asit stands, at the present time.

98. At the same time, these speakers even take the view
that the interventionist and occupation forces must not be
disturbed, They urge us not to touch them or bother them.
Arguments of this kind are unintelligible to us, and so we
reject them. The peoples of the Arab countries whose
territories have been seized by the aggressor will be exposed
to sufferings until the piratical armies of occupation have
been expelled from Arab territory.

92. I would strongly suggest for your consideration,
b!r. President, that, subject to the agreement of the
representative of the Soviet Union, the draft resolution, if it
is to be put to the vote now, should be put to the vote
paragraphby paragraph.

99. However, in view of the good intentions of the
sponsors of this humanitarian draft resolution, the Soviet
delegation will not vote against it.
100. The PRESIDENT: I call on the next speaker on my
list, the representative of Syria.

93. Mr, FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translatedfrom Russian); Mr. President, the USSR
delegation wishes at this stage to explain its attitude to the
Canadian draft resolution [S/7943].

101. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the supplemental information
which has been received by the
Secretary-General and distributed to the Council since the
start of this meeting. This information is contained in

94. Apart from the fact that this draft resolution has long
since become obsolete, it contains provisions which must at
9

document S/7930/Add.7,
(vi) (c) reads as follows:

dated 14 June 1967; paragraph 1

“Movement of Israel forces approximately 2 km east
along Kuneitra-Damascus Road since 0.5 15 hours, Zebra,
11 June (report from observers, Damascus).”
102. In bringing this matter to the attention of the
Security Council, 1 wish at the same time to invoke
resolution 236 (1967) adopted by the Council on 12 June
1967, operative paragraph 3 of which reads as follows:
‘The Security Council,
<t. . *

‘Aj@/ns that its demand for a cease-fire and discontinuance of all military activities includes a prohibition of
any forward military movements subsequent to the
cease-fire.”

accordance with operative paragraph 2 of resolution 234
(1967), which 1 invoked, we hope that an investigation will
be made on this matter of the refugees and that the Council
will be informed.
107. 1 also wish to confirm here the second point I made
yesterday, and that is the crimes which are being corn.
mitted up to this very moment, when the Council is
meeting, by the Israel occupation forces in a most savage
and barbarous manner against civilians and their property
by means of destruction and annihilation which are still
continuing without abating or stopping. 1 think that those
who want the truth about the real intentions of Israel and
its aggression now have it in the report of the SecretaryGeneral which 1 cited. It is also in resolution 236 (1967)
that was adopted only two days ago by the Council. There
is enough proof there to convince them.
108. The PRESIDENT: As President of the Council, 1 give
the floor to the representative of China.

What was reported in paragraph 1 (vi)(c) of the report of
the Secretary-General, which 1 read out, definitely constitutes a forward military movement of the Israel army of
occupation inside Syrian territory and therefore should be
assessed and considered under operative paragraph 3 of
resolution 236 (1967). It constitutes a condemnation of the
violation of the cease-fire.

109. Mr, LIU (China): My delegation whole-heartcdly
supports the draft resolution submitted by Argentina,
Brazil and Ethiopia [Sf 7968/Rev.2/. The new wave of
refugees, whose plight has been so movingly described by
Ambassador El-Farra of Jordan, is indeed a matter of
serious concern to the international community. The
refugee problem resulting from earlier hostilities in the
Middle East has already occupied the attention of the
United Nations for nineteen years and in the opinion of my
delegation it constitutes one of the underlying causesof the
present conflict. The three-Power draft resolution will hcip
towards alleviating the suffering of the victims of war and I
believe it has a significance over and above its humanitarian
aspects.

103. Therefore 1 invoke operative paragraph 1 of resolution 236 (1967) which states:
“Condemns

any and all violations of the cease-fire.”

That being the case, this same resolution also stipulates the
foff owing in operative paragraph 4:

110. With regard to draft resolution S/7951/Rev,2, my
delegation will abstain from the voting. In doing so, 111~
delegation wishes to make it clear that we are -_opposed
-.. ta.
the use of force, as is enjoined by the Charter of the United
Nations. We are opposed to the use of force for the purpose
of bringing about territirial changes. We are, howcvcr, no1
unmindful of the declarations that have been repeatedly I
made by Israel that it has no territorial designs against its
neighbours. Those declarations, we believe, are solemn
commitments, for history has clearly shown that no secure
peace can be built upon the basis of territorial changesthat
are brought about by the use of force. Now that the
cease-fire has come into effect, we earnestly hope irnmes
diate steps will be taken so that a just and permanent peace
may become a reality and political independence and
territorial integrity may be made secure for all the countries
in the Middle East.

“Calls for the prompt return to the cease-fire positions

of any troops which may have moved forward subsequent
to 1630 hours GMT on 10 June 1967”.
104. 1 think that here we have a clear-cut case of a
violation committed by the Israel forces of occupation
inside Syrian territory. All the operative paragraphs of
resolution 236 (1967) should properly and adequately be
invoked here.
105. This incident is indicative in itself. We listened
yesterday to a very eloquent statement made by the Israel
representative, picturing his State as a peace-loving one that
seeks to have peace with its neighbours. Surely those
measures do not constitute a step towards peace; if they are
anything, they are the negation of the very spirit of peace.
106. At the same time, since 1 have been in communication this morning with my capital city of Damascus, 1 wish
to affirm once more what I said yesterday about two major
developments that have been going on continuously, and
that is the premeditated mass ousting and expulsion of the
Arab population from the occupied territories by the Israel
forces of invasion. Thus we now have in Damascus itself
tens of thousands of Syrians who have flooded the capital
from the area where the Israel army advanced. Since
authority has been given to the Secretary-General in

111. Mr. MATSUI (Japan): My delegation notes with
satisfaction that the parties to the conflict in the Near E3SI
seem to be complying with the cease-fire ordered by the
Security Council. This, as we all know, is the essential first
step towards lasting peace in the area.
112. With the cessation of armed hostilities, it is IloW
urgently necessary to proceed with the utmost dispatch to
the next phase, that of constructing a durable peace: fir%
the settlement of immediate problems resulting from the
10
_il

conflict-and they are many and difficult-and then the
construction of a definitive and lasting peace for the future.

delegations
of
[S/7968/Rev.2/.

Argentina,

Brazil

and Ethiopia

113. The enormous difficulties and extraordinary complexities involved in these important tasks are obvious to
all, But the Security Council, in the interests of humanity
and the peace of the world, dare not side-step these tasks,
dare-not procrastinate, dare not relax in its efforts to deal
with them positively, realistically and constructively.

120. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Israel, to whom I now give the floor.
121. Mr. KIDRON (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the opportunity once again to address the
Council on the matters before it. I should like at the outset
to address myself to the substance of tile draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia on the
question of the civil populations in the area of the recent
armed conflict and the question of prisoners of war. I wish
to assure the representative of the United Kingdom, and
other representatives who have spoken on this subject, that
the Government of Israel is fully aware of its legal
responsibilities and deeply sensible of the human problems
involved. But I would, with great respect, remind the
Council that it is only a few days since the firing stopped.
During this short period, the Israel authorities have made
Herculean efforts to restore normal civilian life in the area.
In the Gaza Strip life goes on fairly normally. Whatever
services existed before, exist and operate today. There has
been no movement of civilians from the area and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees is operating normally. In Jerusalem and the west
bank there was, as I stated yesterday, some movement
eastward away from the sceneof battle. Many of +Lhepeople
moving went to join their families on the east bank; many
of them were Jordanian troops who had cast aside their
uniforms and were fleeing home. But the numbers have
been vastly exaggerated. There hasbeen no mass exodus, as
has been alleged. In fact, there is now a large-scale
movement in the opposite direction acrossthe Jordan, from
the east bank to the westbank.

114. Old concepts of war, outlawed by the Charter, the
equation of national objectives with the spoils or fruits of
war, must give way to the serious tasks of building, on the
basis of equity, justice and humanity, a lasting peace from
the wreckage of hostilities.
115. To fulfil this task, there is no doubt that the most
careful deliberation is required. All elements, related
directly or indirectly to the questions before us, must be
fully considered. There is no doubt, furthermore, that it is
necessaryfor the Council to proceed in complete unity and
full strength in order to achieve maximum results; the
strength of the unanimous will of the Council has been
demonstrated; it should continue to govern further decisions by the Council. Every effort must be made to avoid
divisions in the Council; common ground is our objective;
we should all seek it most diligently. This is the basic
position of the Japanese delegation concerning our further
work in the Council.
116. A draft resolution has been submitted by the
delegation of the Soviet Union [S/79.51/Rev.2/. My delegation has studied it very carefully. It appears to my
delegation that the approach taken by the Soviet delegation
differs from that of my delegation, which I have just
advocated. My delegation doubts that this draft would
facilitate the further unified and co-operative efforts
required by the Council. My delegation, therefore, will
abstain on that draft resoIution.

122. And in the same way that the Israel authorities
neither instigated nor encouraged the movement eastwards,
they are not interfering in any way with the movement
westwards. But why are these people coming back? It is
because in spite of the years of vicious incitements and
propaganda, they have discovered no doubt that the Israeli
is not as bad as he is painted, that his attitude is humane
and decent and that he is making a genuine and sincere
effort to help the civilian population.

117. At this point, I wish to stressthat equitable, just and
lasting solutions, which is what we seek, can only be
achieved on the basis of peaceful means fully acceptable to
all parties concerned. The peace we seek simply cannot and
must not be based upon positions of strength. Any attempt
to construct the edifice of lasting peace on such foundations is doomed to failure.

123. The most abiding impression of life now on the west
bank, and this is reaffirmed and supported by pressreports
which have come from foreign journalists who have been
permitted to go freely to the westbank in the last few days,
is that life is returning rapidly to normal. Local authorities
are functioning nearly everywhere, municipal services,
water, electricity, sanitation and public transport have been
restored. Hospitals, pharmacies and shopshave been opened
and there are ample stocks of food. Public order is
maintained with the aid of the local Arab police. The Holy
Places are protected by Israel police and the ecclesiastical
authorities concerned have expressedtheir appreciation of
the exemplary order maintained.

118. My delegation has already expressed its deepest
sympathy and grave concern regarding the fate of those
innocent victims of the war, the Arab refugees who had
been living in the occupied territory of Jordan. They must
be helped to the fullest possible extent. Also, the maximum
possible humanitarian treatment must be accorded to
civilians and captured military personnel in the occupied
areas. In addition, all parties concerned should do their
utmost to relieve the sufferings of what may be thousands
of hapless soldiers, particularly in the Sinai desert, who,
according to late reports from Geneva, are struggling to
return to their homeland, without water, food or transportation,

124. The Security Council no doubt will be pleased to
know that very little damage wascausedto the Holy Places
and other sites in the fighting. This cost the Israel forces
and the civilian population on the Israel side of Jerusalem

119. For all these reasons, my delegation most wholeheartedly supports the draft resolution submitted by the
11

heavy casualties, as Jordanian artillery was sited among the
Holy Places and the Israel troops were not permitted to
reply and were actually prevented by order from replying
for fear of doing damage to the Holy Places.
125. On the question of prisoners of war, as I stated
yesterday, we have approached the delegation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross which is now in
Israel and requested it to take immediate steps in order to
secure a rapid exchange of prisoners. We hope that the
other side will do the same, as we have certain anxieties on
this score to which I shall advert in a few moments.
126. On this general question of prisoners of war, on
which the Argentine, Brazilian and Ethiopian draft resolution touches in legal terms, I wish to inform the Council of
the Israel attitude.

disquieting news of the treatment of Israel prisoners in the
United Arab Republic. A few days ago, the press carried a
report of the hacking to death of an Israel pilot who had
come down on Egyptian soil. We have since received a
report of two Israel prisoners who have similarly been put
to death in another area in the United Arab Republic. We
also have unfortunate, miserable and tragic memories of the
way in which Israelis who had the misfortune to fall into
Syrian hands during the course of the past seventeen or
eighteen years have been treated. I myself have had
personal experience of this, as for many years I tried to
negotiate through the United Nations and the SecretaryGeneral, who knows this subject very well, through the
International Committee of the Red Cross and through any
international organization which could possibly have any
interest or any concern with prisoners in order to try to get
our people who were held in Syria under the most
unspeakable and inhumane conditions back.

127. The Israel Defence Forces make every effort to
disseminate the Geneva Conventions of August 1949 and to
teach the laws of war to all ranks in the Israel army; the
Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war has been
published in the official publications of the Government. It
has been reproduced in official orders of the General Staff
and it forms part of the syllabuses of the Staff College, the
Administration
College and the War College. Its provisions
form part of the examination arrangements of these
institutions.
Every effort is made to ensure that all
members of the Israel Defence Forces are fully aware of the
Geneva Conventions and of the laws of war and that they
fully abide by them. Strict orders have been issued to
ensure that this is done.

132. For a number of years, the Syrian authorities denied
that there were any Israelis in their prisons. Eventually, at
the end uf 1963 some of them were returned. Of the eleven
who came back, seven were immediately put into mental
homes because they had broken down under the sufferings
and the tortures they had endured in Syrian prisons, and
one of them later committed suicide. A little while later
another four were exchanged, and of those threehad to be
hospitalized under the same condition. And all through this
period, the Syrian authorities successively denied that any
Israelis were in their hands. It was only when Israel had
collected a number of Syrians, terrorists and saboteurswho
had come into the country in order to commit crimes, n
larger number than Israel prisoners in Syria, did the Syrians
disclose that they had Israel prisoners and agreed to
exchange them. It is for that reason that we have a vital
interest that prisoners should be exchan&:d as soon aa
possible and that these victim- of war should be permitteA
to go back to their homes.

128. I wish to assure the Council that the practice of the
Israel Defence Forces in this regard is in full accord with
the precepts. Prisoners of war are treated with humanity
and with full regard to their legal and human rights, as
prescribed in the Conventions. They are housed and fed on
exactly the same terms as members of the Israel Defence
Forces, although, as someone has said rather cynically, this
might not always be an advantage.

133. Finally, I should like to refer to certain expressions
mouthed yesterday by the representative of Jordan. I do
not wish to enter into a sterile polemic with the representative of Jordan. The majority of the members of the
Council are trying to look forward to a constructive
settlement of the situation in the Middle East The
representative of Jordan yesterday was trying to drag US
back to the rancour, the hatred, and the black misery of the
past, but this time he has gone too far, and the honour and
the prestige of the United Nations are involved.

129. It should, of course, be understood that we have no
particular interest in keeping prisrners of war, a;,d we
would be most happy to permit them to return to their
homes and families in precisely the same way we would like
to receive from the United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria
those of our men who were unfortunate enough to fall into
their hands.
130. Besides this approach that we have made to the
delegation of the International
Committee of the Red
Cross, I wish to inform the Council that large numbers of
Egyptian soldiers who are still roaming around the Sinai
desert are being permitted and encouraged to go along. the
only roads leading back to Egypt. They are not being taken
prisoner unless they give themselves up, and although the
Egyptian Government has cut off the water pipeline which
supplied these people in the past, water is being dropped to
these men from the air in order to spare them unnecessary
suffering in the harsh conditions of the desert.

134. The United Nations was built on the bodies of the
millions of victims who fell at the hands of the Nazis and
the Fascists in the last war. Their blood cements its
foundations. Seated around this table are the representatives of nations which suffered nearly mortal blows, who
lost a whole generation of their people in the occupation of
the Nazis and Fascists of their countries: the USSR, France,
Ethiopia, Denmark, Bulgaria, Israel, the Jews-who were
the only people singled out by the Nazis for complete
destruction. Other nations represented here-the United
States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Brazil, Argentina,
India, Nigeria-suffered grievous losses in the war of liberation against the tyrants. The Arabs were not among them.
They were not numbered in this roll of honour. Some Of

131. I should like to mention certain of our anxieties on
this qucrtion of prisoners of war. We have received most
12

rcse up in arms on Hitler’s side. Others were held
I from doing so by huge allied security forces.

141. But the representative of Israel forgot something. I
am sure his memory is not lapsing concerning the massacres
and killings, perpetrated in the most ugly, inhuman,
Nazi-Fascist manner, in Deir Yassin, Kafr Kassem, Qalqiliya
and Gaza, where people were buried alive. It would take me
very long to enumerate all these vast pages of the history of
the Zionist occupation of Palestine, the fatherland. But
there are enough people who saw and witnessed those
atrocities, which are being committed by the Israelis up to
the present time, at a time when the soft-spoken Israel
representative chooses to deceive the Council and to
deceive us here.

Yet, the representative of Jordan yesterday made an
lous attempt to link Zionism, a lofty ideal of national
Ition, with the most unspeakable crimes known to
-the Zionism which was described by the late King
1 of Iraq, who represented the Arab liberation moveat the Versailles Conference in 19 19, in the following
3. I quote from a letter wrirten by him at that time to
leizmann, the first President of Israel:
We Arabs, especially the educated among us, look with
deepest sympathy on the Zionist movement , , . . We
working together for a reformed and revived Near
;t, and our two movements complete one another. The
vish movement is national and not imperialist. Our
ivement is national and not imperialist, and there is
rm for us both. Indeed I think that neither can be a
I successwithout the other.”

142. He talks about the Arabs not having taken part in the
war, but, according to the testimony of Sir Winston
Churchill himself at the end of the war, it was, thanks to
the co-operation of the Arabs during the war, one of the
factors that led to the successand victory of the Allies.
143, But then he alluded once again to the Arabs in a
rather slanderous and derogatory manner. I do not expect
anything else from a Zionist. That is in his nature. The
Zionist leaders, during World War II, co-operated with the
Nazi leaders, and a deal was negotiated between them in
order to achieve some results. I refer you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Council, and the Israel speaker, to
a book called Perfidy’ by no less a man than a great Zionist
himself, Ben Hecht, who uncovered this plot between the
Zionists and the Nazis during the war. But he forgot one
thing. He forgot that during World War I, which led to the
Balfour Declaration-and I think Lord Caradon will bear me
out on that-my own country, Syria, offered 300,000
people, who died of hunger because they were fighting on
the side of the Allies. And among the troops in the Second
World War that liberated Europe from Nazi Germany and
fr.om Fascist occupation, there were Moroccan, Algerian
and Tunisian soldiers-namely, Arabs-who gave their lives
for the cause of the Allies.

this noble vision is what the representative of Jordan
tes with the crimes of the Nazis. This is rank
:ment to race hatred. It is nauseating. It stinks in the
ils of humanity. I reject it with contempt.
Mr. SEYDOUX (France) (translated from French): I
apologizc for taking the floor again for a very short
merit. My delegation reserves the right to express its
; on the problems dealt with in the draft resolution
litted by Argentina; Brazil and Ethiopia when that
ment is discussed. However, it wishes to state today
it has the warmest sympathy for this effort to alleviate
sufferings of civil populations and to prevent the
lie Palestine refugee problem from assuming even
er proportions.
The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
:sentative of the Syrian Arab Republic, to whom I now
the floor.

144. Now this person comes here, after all the aggression
and invasion, in order to accuse Syria. He also has the
audacity to invoke the letter addressed by King Feisal to
Weizmann. But he forgot that King Feisal, like a great many
of the Zionist leaders themselves at that time, was deceived
by Zionism, by Weizmann and his clique.

Mr. TOMEH (Syria): In this constructive approach of
security Council, I would have liked to avoid invectives
controversial subjects. But having listened to the well
en but venom-ridden words of the Israel representative,
Ild not restrain myself.

145. Never at that time did they say that they were going
to occupy Palestine and throw the Arab population out.
The Arabs were good-hearted people. They thought that
those people who were cor$ng and who were being given
homes among them were coming as friends, not as enemies,
annihilators and invaders. But when King Feisal discovered
that this was the case, his letter was repudiated. Anyhow,
the letter was conditional; it assumed that the Israelis, or
the Zionists, would co-operate with the Arabs. Such
co-operation never existed. From the very first time that
the first Israel settlers came into Palestine they ousted the
Arabs, threw them out,

I wish to raise a specific issue concerning paragraph 2
(cl of the Secretary-General’s report [S/793O/Add, 7J
:h was submitted today while the Council was meeting;
paragraph speaks of “Movement of Israel forces
oximately 2 km east along Kuneitra-Damascus Road
: 0515 hours, Zebra, 11 June”. That is after the
:-fire, after the adoption of the cease-fire that was
:tive between the Israel and Syrian forces,
What did the Israel representative choose to say
It that? He criticized the representative of Jordan for
ng, in his own words, dragged us back, But what did he
&nself? He went back eighteen years to a question of
lners between Israel and Syria. And then, in the clear
ish accent that he chooses to intonate in our ears, he
t on to speak about those cruelties.

146. These are only diversionary tactics. I raise this
specific point and I ask the Council to pronounce itself on
this point, which occurs in the report of the Secretary5 Ben Hecht, Perfidy (New York, Messner, 1961).

13

at that time fighting the Nazis. This is something which is
not difficult to establish. History is our witness.

General and which is a clear-cut violation of the resolution
adopted two days ago by the Council /236 (1967)], a
violation that calls for condemnation and should certainly
be condemned.

1.53. My last point is this. The claim was made that the
Arabs of Palestine from the western bank are going back
because they do not think that the Israelis are “that bad”.
These are the words of Mr. Kidron. True, they want to go
back. All the expellees want to go back, not because they
do not think the Israelis are “that bad”, but becausea
home is a dear thing indeed. Living in your own home is
something very dear. Living in a hut or a tent or a cave,or
living in the open with only your blanket to cover your
children, is something no one wants. If the Arabs who were
expelled by force insist on going home now, they go home
because they prefer their own homes to a life in a tent, in a
cave, in a hut, or in the open with nothing.

147. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Jord,an, on whom I now call.
148. Mr. El-FARRA (Jordan): Mr. Kidron was apparently
annoyed by the comparison between the practices of
Nazism and the behaviour of Zionism. I pose the challenge
to Mr. Kidron to show me the difference between them,
when both movements have the concept of expansion;
when both have the concept of race; when both have the
concept of lebensraum; when both have the concept of
force, of acquiring lands by invasion and the use of force;
and when both have fifth-columns, whether they are called
pressure groups or fifth-columns.

154. Mr. KIDRON (Israel): I do not wish to take up the
time of the Council too much, but I have just receiveda
cable From my Government in Jerusalem concerning the
work of UNRWA, and I think it is my duty to inform the
Council of the latest developments.

149. The practice of Nazism is not different from that of
Zionism. They have all elements in common. Let
Mr. Kidron deny the existence of one of the five elements I
just cited. Let him deny one. I would then be happy to
know that Zionism is starting to have a change of heart, a
change of mind, a change of behaviour to something from
that practised by Nazism. It would be a happy hour if
Mr. Kidron were to come now and say: We no more believe
in force; we no more believe in race and superiority; we no
more believe in expansion; we no more believe in fifthcolumns. It would be a happy day indeed.

155. An agreement has been arrived at between
Mr. Michelmore, the Commissioner-General of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees,
and my Government, and I wish to read it out to the
Council. The letter which Ambassador Comay of the Israel
Foreign Office has addressed to the Commissioner-General
contains the terms of that agreement, and these are the
terms:

150. Another thing was mentioned about the practice of
Nazism. It is true that a certain number of Jews suffered
because of Nazism. But should this give the Israelis any
right to practise the same thing against the Arab people of
Palestine? A crime is a crime. Murder is murder. Whether
you kill one million, one hundred thousand or six million,
the crime is the same.

“Dear Commissioner-General:
“I wish to refer to the conversations I have had wit11
you and your colleagues within the last two days and to
confirm our agreement that, at the request of the Israel
Government, UNWRA would continue its assistanceto
the Palestine refugees, with the full co-operation of the
Israel authorities, in the west bank and Gaza Strip areas.

151. Reference was made to the crimes the Nazis committed. But is the answer to the crimes of the Nazis, to
deprive the Arab people of Palestine of their homeland?
Were the Arabs the Nazi movement which committed the
crimes? Are they to pay for the crimes committed by the
Nazi movement in Europe? Should the Moslem Arabs pay
the price of appeasement, the price of relieving the
Christian conscience of Europe? Are we to offer Palestine
because Hitler, who happened to be a Christian, committed
his crimes? Was he our cousin or our brother? Was the
crime an Arab crime? I cannot see the logic.

“For its part, the Israel Government will facilitate the
task of UNRWA to the best of its ability, subject only to
regulations or arrangements which may be necessitatedby
considerations of military security. On this understanding, we are prepared to agree in principle:
“(a) To ensure the protection and security of the
personnel, installations and property of UNRWA;
“(b) To permit the free movement of UNRWA vehicles
into, within and out of Israel and the areasin question;

152. The statement was made that in the last war many
Jews were killed but the Arabs did not suffer or participate,
a charge referred to also by my colleague of Syria. But tens
of thousands were fighting on the side of the Allies in
North Africa. Not only this, but my people, the Arab
people of Palestine, were struggling for their independence,
their nationhood, their statehood, and the minute the war
broke out they stopped fighting for their own cause. I think
Lord Caradon will remember this. My people stopped
struggling against the British for the liberation of their
homeland; they stopped attacking the United Kingdom
because the United Kingdom, the occupier of Palestine, was

“(c) To permit the international staff of the Agency to
move in, out and within Israel and the areas in question;
they will be provided with identity documents and any
other passeswhich might be required;
“(d) To permit the local staff of the Agency to move
within the areas in question under arrangements made or
to be made with the military authorities;

“(e) To provide radio, telecommunications
facilities;
14

and landing

“l(f) Pending a further supplementary agreement, to
maintain the previously existing financial arrangements
with the governmental authorities then responsible for
the areas in question, concerning:
“(i) Exemptions from customs duties, taxes and
charges on importation of supplies, goods and equipment;
“(ii) Provision free of charge of warehousing, labour
for offloading and handling, and transport by rail or road
in the areas under our control;
“(iii) Such other costs to the Agency as were previously met by the governmental authorities concerned;
“yg) TO recognize that the Convention on the Privileges
of the United Nations of 13 February
1946, to which Israel is a party, shall govern the relations
between the Government and UNRWA in all that
concerns UNRWA’s functions.
and Immunities

“The present letter and your acceptance in writing will
be considered by the Government of Israel and by
UNRWA as a provisional agreement which will remain in
force until replaced or cancelled.“6
The Commissioner-General
that letter.

gave the appropriate reply to

156. Finally, I should like to advert in a few words to the
supplemental information
received by the SecretaryGeneral, to which the representative of Syria referred a few
moments ago. I must, of course, express my appreciation
for the kind words used by the representative of Syria with
regard to my so-called eloquence and my accent-although
at a later stage in his remarks he was not so complimentary
about my person.
157. I would refer briefly to point (c) of sub-paragraph
(vi), which the representative of Syria mentioned and which
he maintained furnished proof that Israel had broken the
cease-fire and the Security Council resolutions. I want to
assure the Council that there has been no breach whatsoever of the cease-fire or of the Security Council resolutions.
I must draw the Council’s attention to the fact that the
report in question emanates from observers in Damascus
who are about sixty kilometres away from the scene and
who obviously get their information from local people. In
saying that, it is not my intention, of course, to cast any
doubt on the report. However, if there was such a
movement of Israel forces, it was a movement inside the
lines, and not ahead of the lines. There has been no such
thing as any forward movement, any movement ahead of
the previously held Israel position.
158. I want to assure the Security Council that this
position has been rigorously held by the Israel authorities
ever since the cease-fire came into effect a couple of days
ago. There has been absolutely no change in this position. I
am assured that General Bull confirms this. I would add
that the report does not speak of a violation: it speaks of a

movement. This is a movement behind, not ahead of, the
position held at the time of the cease-fire.
159. Mr. KEITA (Mali) ltranslnted jkom French): Yesterday evening I stated my delegation’s position on the draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet Union[S/79.51/Rev.2].
Our support for that resolution has been further strengthened today by two facts: first, we continue to believe that
there can be no hope of peace while Arab areas remain
under the control of Israel forces; secondly, subparagraph 1 (vi) (c) of the Secretary-General’s report,
submitted this morning in document S/7930/Add.7, indicates that the movement of Israel forces continues in the
Damascus region, despite the adoption of relevant resolutions by the Security Council.
160. Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia have submitted a draft
resolution [S/7968/Rm.I]
dealing with one of the most
humanitarian aspects of the present situation in the Middle
East. We have been informed that Arabs who have been
expelled from their lands are wandering in the desert,
suffering from thirst and all kinds of torments. We should
like to ask whether, through the good offices of General
Bull, United Nations personnel could not be given greater
means of helping more effectiveIy all the people who are
now suffering from thirst in the desert.
161. Reverting to the draft resolution submitted by
Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia, if the sponsors have no
objections, we should like to see’ this draft completed by
the addition of a third operative paragraph, worded as
follows:
“3. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the effective implementation
of this resolution and to report
thereon to the Security Council.”
If the three sponsors would be good enough to accept this
slight amendment, we think it might improve the draft
resolution.
162. The PRESIDENT:
Syrian Arab Republic.

I call on the representative of the

163. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I feel it my duty to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the distortion
engaged in by the Israel spokesman. He denied that the
movement of Israel forces referred to in point (c) of
sub-paragraph (vi) of the Secretary-General’s report
[S,l793OfAdd. 71 was forward movement. But this movement of Israel troops was reported by United Nations
military
observers as a movement approximately two
kilometres east along the Kuneitra-Damascus road. Anyone
familiar with the Kuneitra-Damascus road knows that it
leads to Damascus. Anyone going from Kuneitra to
Damascus is moving forward. Hence, this is undoubtedly a
forward movement, and it is a clear-cut violation of the
cease-fire; it happened after the cease-fire had taken effect.

164. The Israel spokesman said-although he made some
reservations-that the report of the observers is based on
what the local people say. Such an allegation really cannot
6 See Official Records of the General Assembly,Twenty-second be accepted by anyone with intelligence. Do the military
observers ask the Syrian people what is happening on the
Session, Supplement No. 13, annex III.
1.5

and we have heard repeated assertions from several representatives according to which there can be no doubt as to
the existence of belligerency between the parties concerned.

front and then send their reports to the Secretary-General?
Is that the kind of evidence that we are using here?
165. It is truly amazing, to say the least, that the Israel
representative should speak about respect for law, when
this very Council has condemned Israel more than any
other State in the United Nations. No other States,
including the Arab States, have been condemned by the
Security Council so many times as these invaders. One need
only go to the records of the Security Council. I do suggest
that it is an insult to the intelligence of members of the
Council and of the United Nations to perpetrate such lies.
The Israel representative knows that they are lies.

170. As far as the third point is concerned, my delegation
takes note of the statement of the Minister of Defence of
Israel in which, as quoted by Ambassador RafaeI at the
1347th meeting of the Council, he categorically declared
that his country has “no aim of conquest”. That stand is in
accordance with the position of the Brazilian Government
which has been consistently opposed to any territorial
conquest by military means. In connexion with the issue
before us, I should like to say that the problem of
withdrawal cannot be envisaged as an isolated step, To do
so would be tantamount to condemning Israel as the Power
responsible for starting the fighting, as the aggressor.Yet
the evidence before us-that is, the reports of the Secretary-General-offer no grounds for a clear-cut identification
of the Power which struck first. We further contend that
the cease-fire resolutions were but a first step which should
be followed by other measures such as the withdrawal of
troops, military and political disengagement aiming at the
peaceful settlement of the Middle East crisis. It is our firm
conviction that in this manner only can peace in the areabe
restored and enforced on a lasting basis.

166. Mr. SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): Mr. President, with
your permission I should like to put on record the position
of my delegation concerning the draft resoIution submitted
by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics[S/79.51/Rw.Z].
When I first took the floor on the question before us, I
made it quite plain that the Brazilian Government, in view
of the very close ties of friendship which link our nation
both to the Arab States and to Israel, would remain as
objective as possible in the consideration of this question,
167. It is in the light of the foregoing that my delegation
is going to analyse the draft resolution submitted by the
Soviet Union. In our view, this draft contains three main
elements: first, it accuses Israei of having violated the
cease-fire resolutions approved by this Council; secondly, it
accuses Israel of continuing the occupation of part of the
territory of the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan;
thirdly, it demands :

171. We also favour some of the suggestions which have
been submitted to the Council. For instance, we favour the
reinforcement of the Council’s cease-fire call through the
reactivation and strengthening of the United Nations
machinery in the area. Furthermore, we agree that the
Secretary-General should be requested to send a special
representative to the Middle East to consult with the parties
concerned and to help in the reduction of tension and the
restoration of peaceful conditions. In addition, the special
representative could be of assistance in carrying out the
measures relating to the safety and security of the
populations living in the areas in which military operations
have taken place, as contemplated in the joint draft
resolution presented by my country together with Argentina and Ethiopia.

that Israel should immediately
and unconditionally remove all its troops from the territory of those
States and withdraw them behind the armistice lines and
should respect the status of the demilitarized zones, as
prescribed in the General Armistice Agreements.”
“

*

.

.

168. As far as the first point is concerned, I would say in
all fairness that, having in mind all of the information
available-and by all the information available I mean the
reports of the Secretary-General-I
would not be in a
position to state categorically which of the parties involved
in the conflict first violated the cease-fire resolutions. We
should recall that in their acceptance of the cease-fire
resolutions, both parties stated clearly that they would
comply with the said resolutions only if the other party
were to do the same, In view of the conflicting information
in connexion with this point, it seems to my delegation
extremely difficult to single out a party to the conflict and
to condemn it as a violator of the important decisions taken
by the Security Council.

172. For the reasons I have mentioned, my delegation
does not support the Soviet draft resolution and will
abstain when it is put to the vote,
173. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I made some comments
on the draft resolution submitted by the representative of
the Soviet Union last night. Before the vote is taken, I
should like to comment very briefly on the two outstanding
proposals with which Canada has been associated.
174. First of all, there is the draft resolution dated 24 May
[S/790.5/ co-sponsored by Canada and Denmark. That
draft resolution, which was designed to reinforce the
Secretary-General’s efforts to restore calm in the Near East
when he was there on the spot and to urge all Member
States to refrain from any steps which might worsen the
situation, was all too tragically overtaken by events, aswere
subsequent efforts made before 5 June to urge restraint 011
the parties concerned. In the circumstances, I would
suggest, Mr. President, with your permission, that the draft
resolution contained in document S/7905 be withdrawn.

169. With reference to the second point, I would say that
the occupation by Israel of territory of the United Arab
Republic, Syria and Jordan has resulted from the state of
war which does exist between Israel and the abovementioned States. I would go further and recall that this
Council up to now has not called upon Israel to withdraw
its forces from the positions they formerly occupied. In the
issue before us we must keep in mind that this occupation
resulted, as I have already said, from the state of war, either
de facto or de jure, existing between the contending parties,
16

175, I now turn to the proposal submitted in the name of
Canadaalone, contained in document S/7941 dated 7 June
1967. That draft resolution embodies an idea, that is,
effective implementation of the Security Council’s decisions, to which my delegation attaches considerable and
continuing importance. My delegation considers that a
resolution along the lines we proposed on 7 June could still
prove to be applicable and useful, although some revisions
taking into account the constructive comments made
around this table would be useful.

resolution submitted by the Union
Republics in document S/79.51fRev.2.

of Soviet Socialist

182. I should like to ask the representative of the United
States whether he will insist on a vote first on the draft
resolution in document S/7916/Rev. 1.
183q Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I shall
be very glad to respond. There are, in fact, three United
States proposals before the Council, One is in document
S/791 6/Rev.l, to which you, Mr. President, have just
referred. That was our initial proposal, designed to prevent
the outbreak of hostilities by endorsing the appeal of the
Secretary-General. A number of members at that time were
unwilling to support the Secretary-General’s appeal, and the
subsequent outbreak of hostilities has made that draft
resolution out of date. We wiI1 not press it to the vote.

176. Accordingly, my delegation does not insist on
priority over the Soviet draft resolution on which the
representative of the Soviet Union has called far an
immediate vote, Canada does, however, maintain its draft
resolution of 7 June on the table for consideration, perhaps
in a revised form, at the appropriate time, and we would
wish to consult with other delegations on that text, as we
should like to consult on the resolution, in its revised form,
which the representative of the United States has just
circulated.

184, The second United States draft resolution is in
document S/7971 dated 10 June. We introduced it last
Saturday to demand scrupulous respect for the cease-fire
and to call for categoric instructions to military commanders. It was denounced by the Soviet Union for reasons
I found inexplicable at the time and still find inexplicable.
A resolution /236 (1967)/ with identical objectives was
adopted the next day on your recommendation, Mr. President. The United States delegation will therefore not press
draft resolution S/7971 to the vote,

177. The representative of the Soviet Union said that our
draft resolution constitutes a breach of the Charter and
apparently conceals what he called a “cat in the bag”. I
must say that I find it rather difficult to assobiate the very
straightforward language in that resolution with this description. However, I agree with the Soviet representative
that events may have indeed caught up, to some extent,
with the resolution, to the extent that it has been in fact in
the course of implementation by you, Mr. President, and
the Secretary-General in a manner which I hop0 satisfies
him as being within the terms of the Charter. But the
possible revisions of our draft on which I should be glad to
consult all my colleagues may, I hope, bring whatever “cat”
he may believe to have been hidden to his attention for his
satisfactoryexamination.

185, The third United States resolution is our substantive
proposal contained in document S/79$2/Rev.2. We have
now submitted B third revision to that draft which has just
been circulated [S/79.52/Rev.3] and has been referred to
by our colleague from Canada, Ambassador Ignatieff. This
United States proposal, whose purpose I explained in detail
yesterday, is still before the Security Council. My delegation will not ask for a vote on that draft resolution today
because several delegations have indicated to us that they
desire more time for all members to consider carefully all
the complicated ingredients which must go into a truly
meaningful next step towards peace in the Middle East.
Some members have indicated that they will wish to suggest
certain changes in our text. The representative of Ethiopia
made a particularly eloquent plea earlier today that we not
press this draft resolution to a vote.

178, The PRESIDENT: I have no more representatives
who have indicated a desire to speak before a vote is taken
on the draft resolution submitted by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.
,179, In order that the situation may be quite clear, I
would say this: In addition to the draft resolutions which I
mentioned in my introductory remarks this morning, the
Secretariat has drawn my attention to two more draft
resolutions before the Council. The first is contained in
document S/790.5 and has been submitted by Canada and
Denmark. I agree with the Canadian representative that this
draft resolution should be withdrawn since it has been
overtaken by events. The second is contained in document
S/7916/Rev,l of 1 June and has been submitted by the
United States,

186. I want the Council to know that although we have
proposed a draft resolution which expresses our sincere
convictions in the matter, we are open-minded and will be
glad to consider constructive suggestions for improvements
in the United States text. Indeed, many constructive
contributions on how best we may deal with this subject
have been made in the course of our debate. We have been
carefully weighing and considering the proposals which
have been made.

“Principal motions and draft resolutions shall have
precedencein the order of their submission.”

187. What the Council has achieved so far is in conformity
with our objective-that is, not to force votes, but to obtain
unanimity on the best course of action that the Council can
follow to bring about peace in the Middle East. Indeed, we
have been able to achieve unanimity, under difficult
conditions, on the ceasefire resolutions we have adopted.

181. I understand from the representative of Canada that
he will not object to the Council’s voting now on the draft

188. We must remember that a cease-fire is in effect, and
admittedly the process of consultation, conciliation and

180. An immediate vote has been requested by the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
According to rule 32 of the provisional rules of procedure:

17

accommodation of viewpoints on the next important steps
takes time. We are prepared to agree that appropriate time
should be granted for this purpose. We recognize the
urgency of the matter. I think we have demonstrated for
three weeks our willingness to deal urgently with this
situation. But we think it perfectly apparent to all
concerned that the Council has far from exhausted its
possibilities of contributing to the construction of a stable
peace in the Middle East. The fact is that we are not at the
end of our work; we are only at the beginning. Despite this,
we are not going to stand in the way of a request by a
permanent member of the Security Council for consideration of a draft resolution which it has put before the
Council. This is quite consistent with the view that the
United States delegation has always taken: that if a
permanent member or a non-permanent member desires an
urgent meeting, an urgent meeting should take place; if a
permanent member or a non-permanent member desires a
proposal to be put to the vote, that is its privilege. We are
prepared to vote on the draft resolution submitted to the
Council by the representative of the Soviet Union.

193. The PRESIDENT: J apologize to the representative
of the Soviet Union because, contrary to the rules of
procedure, 1 forgot to ask whether he would accept the
request made by the representative of Nigeria for a separate
vote on the individual paragraphs of the Soviet draft
resolution. If he has no objection, I will proceed.
194. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated porn Russian): For all of us the rules of
procedure remain the only basis for our conduct and, in
this respect, the President should of course set us a good
example. There is no need for me to go on developing this
idea; but the fact that you have remembered the rules of
procedure, although a little late, and that you .are now
addressing this request to the Soviet delegation does of
course give us some grounds for being lenient. If we had
been asked this question at the very outset, we should
undoubtedly have met the wishes of members of the
Council and of you, Mr. President, as we invariably do; and
now we wish to state that we have no objections since this
is the wish of several members of the Council. We
understand that they are motivated by good will.

189. The PRESIDENT:
I believe, then, that the situation
is clear. The draft resolution contained in document S/7905
has been withdrawn. The draft resolutions contained in
documents S/7916/Rev.l,
S/7952/Rev.3 and S/7971 are
not being pressed to the vote. Furthermore, the Canadian
representative does not insist on avote being taken now on
the draft resolution in document S/7941; he accepts that
priority should be given to the draft resolution submitted
by the Soviet Union in document S/7951/Rev.2.

195. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I
should like only to observe-and I think I expressnot only
my own view, but that of the Council-that in the most
trying of circumstances the President of the Council has
conducted himself with complete fidelity to the rules of
procedure and has attempted to the best of his ability,
which has been extraordinary, to preside impartially and to
carry out the wishes of the Council.

190. I would therefore suggest to the members of the
Council that if there is no objection we should now proceed
to vote on the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
Union.

196. The PRESIDENT: Before I give the floor to the
representative of the Soviet Union, I want once again to
apologize for omitting to ask the Soviet representative
whether he would agree to the procedure.

191. Some representatives have asked to give an explanation of vote. When we have heard those explanations of
vote, we might adjourn for a couple of hours and then
proceed with our debate. If there is no objection, we shall
proceed accordingly.

197. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Re
publics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we much
appreciate what you have just said. This is the only possible
kind of behaviour for us as members of the Council,
colleagues and plenipotentiary
representatives of our
countries, who are all moved by the same desire to ensure
that the Council’s work shall be as efficient and businesslike as possible. I should like to mention, however, that 1
did not quite understand the comments we have just heard
from the United States delegation. What place do these
solicitor’s depositions have in our discussions? Why do we
need these lawyer’s opinions? You and I were having a
normal, tactful dialogue based on mutual understanding,
but why do other speakers act in the way they do? I am
beginning to get the impression that someone becomes deaf
whenever it suits him-deaf for political purposes, of
course-and that the deaf react and answerquickly but not
to the point.

192. I understand that it is the wish of the representative
of Nigeria that a separate vote should be taken on each of
the operative paragraphs of the Soviet draft resolution
[5/7951/Rev.Z].
I shall therefore first put to the vote
operative paragraph 1.
A vote was taken by a show of hands.
In favour: Bulgaria, India, Mali, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, Japan, Nigeria, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America.

198. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I do
not think that the Soviet representative has to tell me what
to say; I do not tell him what to say.

The result of the vote was 4 in favour, none against, with
11 abstentions.

199. The PRESIDENT: I consider that this dialogue has
now finished, and we shall proceed to the vote on operative
paragraph 2 of the draft resolution contained in document
s/795 l/&v.2.

Operative paragraph 1 was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the affirmative votes of nine members,
18

A vate was taken by a show of hands.

204. The Israel extremists are cynically violating the
United Nations Charter and disregarding the elementary
rules of contemporary international law and morality. As a
result of the aggressiveacts of the Israel military clique and
ruling circles in Tel Aviv, which have launched a chauvinistic campaign of territorial claims, the situation in the
Near East is deteriorating even further,

1?z favour: Bulgaria, Ethiopia, India, Mali, Nigeria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Against:

None.

Abstui&zg:
Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark,
France, Japan, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
T!x? rCXdt Of the Vote
9 abstentions.

WUS

205. It is obvious, however, that at the present time
further discussion of this question in the Security Council
cannot produce the results which, in accordance with the
provisions of the United Nations Charter, the existing
situation requires. The Soviet delegation has already expressed its views on the United States draft resolution
[S/79.52/Rev.2] which is unacceptable, unsound and
designed essentially to help the aggressor.And matters are
not likely to be helped much by any minor changesin this
draft which do not alter its essentially unacceptable
character. The Soviet delegation wishesto state again that it
will object to the United States draft resolution and vote
against it.

6 in favour, none agai[lst, with

Operative paragraph 2 wus not adopted, having failed to
obtairz the affirmative votes of nine members.

200. The PRESIDENT: Under these circumstances, I do
not know whether the Soviet representative will insist that
we vote on the draft resolution as a whole, since no
operative paragraph has been adopted. The Soviet represen
tative does not insist, and therefore, the draft resolution
submitted by the Soviet Union has not been adopted,

206. A short time ago and, so to speak, “just before the
curtain”, as members of the Council must have noticed,
there appeared a new United States draft resolution
[S/7952/Rev.3] which, apart from its verbal embellishments, does not differ in the least from the earlier United
States draft. The Soviet delegation wishes to make its
position perfectly clear. We shall vote against this hastily
concocted United States draft resolution, in exercise of the
right accorded to us in the Council.

201. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, a vote has
just been taken on the Soviet draft resolution which stated
that Israel, in defiance of the Security Council’s resolutions
on
the cessation of military activities, has seized additional
territory of the United Arab Republic, Jordan and Syria
and is still occupying the territory of those countries, thus
failing to halt its aggression and defying the United Nations
and all peace-loving states.

207. We have also expressed our views on the Canadian
draft resolution [S/7941], and in this connexion we
reaffirm our negative attitude towards this draft.

202. The Soviet draft resolution proposed that the
Security Council should vigorously condemn Israel’s aggressive activities and continued occupation of part of the
territory of the United Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan,
regarding this as an act of aggression and the grossest
violation
of the United Nations Charter and generally
recognized principles of international law. The Soviet .draft
resolution also proposed that the Security Council should
demand that Israel should immediately and unconditionally
remove all its troops from the territory of those Arab States
and withdraw them behind the armistice lines, and should
respect the status of the demilitarized zones, as prescribed
in the General Armistice Agreements. These demands,
Mr. President, represent the very minimum action which
the Security Council should take in the present circumstances, in the face of open aggression against a number
of States Members of the United Nations.

208. Thus, Mr. President, owing to the position taken by
certain Powers, especially the United States of America,
and because of the lack of agreement among the permanent
members of the Security Council, some of which (and we
are thinking mainly of the United States of America and
the United Kingdom) are in actual fact supporting the Israel
aggressor, the Security Council is unable to take the
necessary decisions in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Mr. President, this is a fact, a regrettable one, and
it must be faced together with all its consequences,
political, legal and otherwise.
209. Because of this, Mr. President, we must seek other
ways of eliminating the consequences of aggression and
bringing about the immediate withdrawal of the Israel
forces behind the armistice lines. In this difficult hour for
the States of the Arab East the Soviet delegation expresses
its confidence that all peace-loving and progressive forces,
all those who support the cause of the freedom and
independence of peoples and the principles of the United
Nations Charter, will take all necessary steps to help the
peoples of the Arab countries deliver a decisive rebuff
to the forces of Israel aggression, defend their lawful rights,
extinguish the hotbed of war in the Near East and restore
peace in this area.

203. It is regrettable that owing to opposition by certain
members of the Security Council, particularly the United
States, the Council has not been able to do its duty in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and to take all
necessary steps against the aggressor. A heavy responsibility
for this rests with those States which have not done their
duty as members of the Security Council. As a result an
emergency situation has arisen in which emergency
measures must be taken by the United Nations and all
peace-loving countries in order to stop the continuing
aggression in the Near East immediately.

210. The Soviet delegation, Mr. President, is convinced
that, in spite of the difficulties facing the Arab national
19

c

liberation movement,
will triumph.

the just struggle of the Arab peoples

today. The Security Council adopted on 6 June its first
resolution l23.3 /1967/j calling for a Cease-fire,On 7 June
the Council set a deadline for 2000 hours GMT the same
day (resolution 234 (1967)j. At the Council’s 13Szad
meeting on 9 June, the parties concerned were given two
hours to communicate their acceptance of the cease&-e
and their implementation of it /resolution 235 (1967)],

211. Mr. GOLDBERG
(United States of America): The
United States abstained on all aspects of the Soviet draft
resolution for the reasons fully explained in my detailed
speech to the Council yesterday (1358th meeting]. I then
pointed out the essential defect in the Soviet proposal. The
Soviet proposal tried in simple terms to state this, as a
solution to this great problem: Condemn Israel for its
aggression; Israel, withdraw your troops and let everything
go back to exactly where it was before the fighting began
on
5 June. I pointed out to the Council what the
consequences of that proposal would be, Once again,
opposing forces would stand in direct confrontation poised
for combat. Once again, there would be no international
machinery to keep them apart; once again, Aqaba would be
blockaded against the free and innocent passage of all
maritime nations; once again nothing would be done to
resolve the deep-lying grievances on both sides that have fed
the fires of conflict in the Near East for twenty years; and
significantly, once again there would be no bar to an arms
race in the area, an arms race which has so substantially
contributed to tension in that region.

216. Despite the repeated demands of the Council for aa
effective cease-fire, Israel annexed further territory in Syria,
These actions of Israel in defiance of Council resolutions
reinforced the grounds for our voting for operative para
graph 1 of the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
Union, As far as paragraph 2 of that draft resolution is
concerned, my delegation has consistently urged aad
earnestly pleaded that unless the provision of withdrawalof
armed forces to the positions they occupied on 4 June
1967 is linked with the cease-fire, there can bc no reduction
of tension, much less a stable cease-fire, leading to durable
peace. That remains the position of my delegation, and
hence our support for the draft resolution.
217. In this context, I must once again draw attention to
the four points I first enumerated in the Council at its
1352nd meeting, on 9 June 1967. They are relevant not
only to what various delegations have said here but alsoto
any future consideration of the problem either in this
Council or elsewhere.

212. It is our sincere judgement, shared by a broad
majority of the Council, that the Soviet proposal therefore
does not encompass a genuine approach to the solution of
the problems, It cannot lead towards peace. Rather, it
would be a big step backward towards another war, What
the Near East needs today imperatively are new steps
towards real peace, not just a cease.firc, which isjust what
we have today; not just a fragile and perilous armistice,
which is what we have had for eighteen years; not just
withdrawal, which is necessary but insufficient. Real peace
must be our aim.

218. I must thank most warmly the representative of
Ethiopia, my friend and colleague Mr, Makonnen, for his
endorsement of the position my delegation has taken. I
should also like to thank the representatives of Canada,the
United Kingdom and Brazil, who have referred sympatheti.
tally to one or more of the four points.
219. It is not late, even at this stage, to clarify the fact
that the basic foundation of the four points is a correlation
between cease-fire and withdrawal to positions occupied by
Israel’s armed forces on 4 June 1967.

213. Now, we heard nothing from the Soviet Union today
that indicated a desire to move forward, in unanimity
among members of this Council, to seek the way to find
that real peace. Our draft resolution was put forward with
that desire. We indicated flexibility
and a desire to
accommodate our views to that of other members of the
Council in the effort to find a common approach to the
solution of this grave problem,

220. The second and third points-that is, reactivation and
strengthening of the United Nations machinery in the area
to enforce the cease-fire and withdrawal, and the requestto
the Secretary-General to designate a special represew
tative-are also linked with the first point.

214. I interpret the remarks of the representative of the
Soviet Union to mean that, rather than making such a real
effort, there is an attempt to build a case for some other
move which has been publicized in the press in reports
about Soviet intentions, As far as the United Stat& is
concerned, we are not interested in manoeuvres. We are
interested in a genuine effort to arrive at real peace in the
Middle East and to work together in the Council to that
end. What are needed desperately are real steps to solve our
problems. What are needed are not condemnations, which
are rarely effective diplomatic actions, and refusals to deal
with the errors and policies which led to this situation, but
an earnest attempt to find solutions. We are going to
persevere in that attempt.

221, It is only the fourth point on which the Council
would be required to take action, only after withdrawals
have been completed and the aggression has been vacated.
222. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The representative of the
Soviet Union said that he was opposed to the Canadian
draft resolution of 7 June [S/7941]. As I indicated in InY
remarks before the vote was taken on his draft resolution
that I would be consulting on possible revisions cf that
draft resolution, I had hoped that he would not indicate ia
his remarks an unwillingness to consult, not only with
Canada but with other members of the Council, on further
constructive measures-and here I have in mind the sort of
ideas to which the representative of India and others have
referred.

215. Mr, PARTHASARATHI
(India): It should not be
necessary, keeping in mind the statements I have made in
the Council, to make a lengthy explanation of our vote

223. My delegation, and I believe a majority of the
members of the Council, are anxious that consultations ia
20
~-

this Council should continue, and I made this remark last
night: that my Government is strongly of the view that the
permanent members of the Council should continue to try
to concert their actions and should not act in a way which
divides the Council and diminishes the chance for any
useful results to emerge from our work; that they must, on
the contrary, exercise the special responsibilities which the
Charter and history have given them, and co-operate m
finding positive solutions.

delegations of Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia [S/7968/
Rev. ll? What exactly are we going to do?
231. The PRESIDENT: When we resume our meeting later
today, the first thing that will happen will be that the
representative of Argentina will introduce a draft resolution
tabled by Argentina, Brazil and Ethiopia. I understand that
the three co-sponsorswish to have a vote today on that.
232. Further, I have a list of representatives who have
expressedthe wish to speak today,

224. I therefore hope, Mr. President, that in adjourning,
we adjourn on the note that, whatever other measures the
representative of the Soviet Union has in mind to have the
United Nations seized with the positions and points of
views to which he has referred, we should continue to
consult in the Council as we are enjoined to do under the
responsibilities which we have assumed here.

233, That is what we are going to do. I cannot, unfortunately, tell you what those speakersare going to say.
234. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): Thank you very much for
your explanation, Mr. President.

225. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers listed as
wishing to explain their vote. I would therefore, with the
indulgence of the members, upon instructions from my
Government explain my vote in my capacity as representative of DENMARK.
226. In the opinion of my delegation, the most important
purpose of the further activities of the Council in relation
to the Middle East should now be to bring about lasting
arrangements for a stable peace in that area. In our view,
the Council will have to approach this problem in the light
of the political realities. We have succeeded in re-establishing peace in the Middle East; what the world can now, with
all reason, expect from us is that we endeavour to
contribute to arrangements that will reflect the primary
responsibility
of the Council: to maintain international
Peace and security. We do not believe that that purpose is
served by the adoption of one-sided resolutions placing all
responsibility for the present situation on one party to the
conflict. The recent history of the Middle East is far too
complicated to allow for such judgements. Neither do we
believe that that purpose is served by the presentation of
demands to one party without any reciprocity.

23.5. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the United Arab Republic,
236. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): My delegation cannot but view with the utmost regret the outcome of
the Council’s deliberations. It is the belief of my delegation
that the Council, by failing to take action with regard to
the ‘assessment of the aggressionand the condemnation of
the aggression, as well as by failing to order the prompt,
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the aggressor’s
forces as prescribed in the draft resolution presented by the
delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, has
not discharged its primary duties in the maintenance of
peace and security.
237. The failure of the Security Council to act in the case
before it will certainly raise genuine and grave concern
among the peoples of the world. That failure may indicate
that the Security Council will not be able even to erasethe
consequences of aggressionin a casein which two imperialist Powers, like the United States of America and the
United Kingdom, place all obstacles in the way of, and in
fact object to, suchjust and imperative action.

227. If we are to achieve lasting solutions to the problems
of the Middle East, if we are to hope for a stable peace in
that area, comprehensive and well-balanced solutions have
to be sought, solutions which are equitable and just to all
concerned. We acted in unanimity to bring peace back to
the Middle East. It is our conviction that only by
continuing to act together will it be possible to maintain a
stable and durable peace in that area.

238. May I ask: Who can fairly and objectively oppose the
call for the withdrawal of an aggressor from territory
belonging to the victim of that aggression?
239. The vote taken by the Security Council today will be
another injustice to be added to the many injustices
directed against the Arabs and their just cause.
240. The Government of the United States has been
saying time and again that the Viet-Nam problem should be
dealt with in the Security Council. By this hypocritical
suggestion it believes that it can fool the world and cover
up its sinister designs in Asia. The attitude of the United
States delegation in this Council is a warning to those who
still entertain the hope that the Council could act in cases
not favoured by the United States Government.

228. For those reasons, my delegation abstained from the
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/795 l/Rev.2.
229. And now, speaking as PRESIDENT, I shall adjourn
the meeting until 5 o’clock this afternoon, in accordance
with the agreement we reached a little while ago.
230. Mr. IYALLA (Nigeria): Mr. President, I have no more
wish than any other member to delay the Council, but
corhd I have some guidance from you as to what we shall be
engaged in, specifically, when we reassemble? Is it to take
up the outstanding draft resolution submitted by the

241. I should like to express our sincere thanks to the
delegations that voted in favour of the Soviet draft
resolution, They are upholding the Charter of the United
Nations and standing beside the victims of aggression.
21

242. I should like to tell the Council, and specifically the
representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom, that the Arabs will not accept this injustice and
that they will see to it that the injustice is undone.

support for the just cause of the Arabs in this conflict, We
are also grateful to the members of this Council who have
been working day and night in an attempt to support the
rights of the Arabs.

243. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Soviet
Union has indicated a desire to speak.

250, The second reason why we have not beenparticipating in these discussions is that we have been watching from
the sidelines in disbelief, disillusionment and disgust-if I
may be permitted, as one of the aggrieved parties, to use
that word. We have been watching meetings of the Council
dragging on for hours and hours in order to allow the
aggressor to occupy as much territory as possible, Those
manouevres of some members, permanent members, of the
Security Council are so clear to everyone that no explanation is needed. I would refer to what took place with regard
to the Israel aggression against Syria and the cease-fire.
Each time the Council was convened to be informed of
continuing advances by the aggressor, some delegations
would say, “We are not sure. We want further clarification.
We want further information”, The reason was clear to
everyone. They were conniving with the Israel aggressor in
order to ensure that that aggressor would achieve its designs
in respect of Syrian territory. And that is exactly what
happened.

24.4. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist RCpublics) (transluteed porn Russian): Mr. President, will you
please state exactly when WCshall be meeting again?
245. The PRESIDENT:
One other representative has
asked to speak before the adjournment of this meeting, I
have been informed that he will speak for only about five
minutes. After he has spoken, it is my intention to adjourn,
with the Council’s agreement, until 5 o’clock. Of course, I
am in the hands of the Council, but I think the agreement
wasthat we should adjourn for about two hours.
246. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Iraq. Since the Security Council table has been filled as a
result of the invitations that have been extended to four
representatives, the representative of Syria has indicated his
willingness to withdraw temporarily from his place at the
Council table while the representative of Iraq makes his
statement. I appreciate this gesture by the representative of
Syria, and I now call on the representative of Iraq to take a
place at the Council table and make his statement.

251. My brothers of the Arab States at this table and the
representatives of other States-the Soviet Union, Bulgaria
and others-have emphasized the collusion of some Powers
in the Israel aggression against the Arab world. Aircraft
were sent to bomb Arab installations and positions. And I
am referring to United States aircraft.

247. Mr. KHALAF
(Iraq): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for allowing me to make a statement to the
Security Council. As I have promised, I shall speak for only
a few minutes, I would start by saying that there are two
reasons why we have not been participating in these
discussions during the past few days.

252. The United States Government has denied many
times that it has used its aircraft. But suppose for
argument’s sake that we agree and allow this argument of
the United States Government to be accepted. There are
two points that could never be argued or disputed, All of us
know of the close fraternal or paternal relations between
Israel and the United States. All of us know of the
importance of United States interests in the Middle East.
All of us are aware of the concern of humanity regarding
the possibility of a world war. All of us, I repeat again,
know of the relations between the Israel aggressorsand the
United States Government. Are we going to be convinced
that the United States Government did not, because of
those very important reasons, give the green light to the
Israelis to attack? Are we going to be convinced that the
Israelis did not get the permission of the United States
Government to go ahead with their attack on the Arab
countries?

248. The first reason relates to the physicaI seating
arrangements in the Council chamber. It was decided-with
our agreement, of course-that the representatives of only
three Arab countries would sit at the Council table
throughout the discussions. Those three representatives
have carried out their task with distinction. They have
explained the points of view of the Arab countries as a
whole. The representatives of the United Arab Republic,
Jordan and Syria, the countries most directly concerned,
have been sitting with you, Mr. President, and the members
of the Council for the past few days. Of course, to say that
they are the countries “most directly concerned” is not to
give the entire picture. For all the Arab countries are
directly concerned, Indeed, it is nqt only the Arab
countries that are directly concerned: all the peoples of the
world are and should be directly concerned with this naked
aggression by Israel against the peoples of the Arab
countries. One proof of that has been the appearance
before the Council this afternoon of the representative of
Pakistan, who, in his own words and with his own
emotions, explained how important this question is to all
Members of the United Nations and all the peoples of the
world. I repeat: this matter is the concern not only of the
Arab countries, but of all peoples of the world who cherish
liberty, justice and independence.

253. Millions of dollars of United States tax-exempt
money is being collected now in this country from the
people of the United States. How can those millions of
dollars be allowed to go to the Israel aggressorswhen we
know that the City of New York has been looking around
for months now for a few million dollars to relieve the
plight and poverty of the coloured people of the City of
New York? I even heard about a fight that was reported on
the radio this morning between the Mayor and others
concerning the $6 million that is going to be added or
subtracted because the New York City budget cannot allow
that sum of money to take care of some of the misery of
the people who have been living here under conditions of

249. We are very grateful to the representative of Pakistan
and to the Government and people of Pakistan for their
22

discrimination. How, for heaven’s sake, cm we understand
ihe millions and hundreds of millions of dollars that are
being collected with impunity to be sent to Israel? That is
onething.

2.59. I do not need to say that in this case the Security
Council should not act on behalf of the aggressors, as some
people have been doing. Paragraph 2 of Article 24 states:
“In discharging these duties, the Security Council shall
act in accordzmce with the Purposes and Principles of the
United Nations.”

254. The other is this: Are we going to be convinced that
there was no mutual understanding between the United
States authorities and the Israel aggressors concerning
intelligence and information ? We know very well that as
one of the biggest Powers in the world, the United States
Government must have the facilities to find out what is
going on in territories in all parts of the world. One of my
colleagueshas already referred to the U-2 planes and the
other information vessels and satellites. So we are convinced only for those two reasons-and we say there
arethree-that the United States Government is as responsible as the Israelis concerning the attack against our Arab
\vorld.

Thus the Council acts on behalf of the Members and also
for the purposes of the United Nations. I say this with
reference to what has just been said by the representative of
the United Kingdom whose Government is as responsible as
the Government of the United States in each and every
single aspect of the situation. Of course, the delegation of
the United Kingdom was not as active in speaking in the
Council as the United States, but it does share the
responsibility with the United States.
260. The reason I refer to the responsibilities of the
membership of the Security Council is because of what I
heard the representative of the United States, Ambassador
Goldberg, say when he spoke of his duties in the Security
Council. Mr. Goldberg said:

255. May I also mention the pressures and the dharches

tllat have been made by the United States Government in
the capitals of the world and here in the United Nations to
try to stand in the way of the undoing of the Israel
aggression.This is apparent to all concerned and to all the
peoplesof the world.

“I do not imply that any member of the Council in
appearing here represents anybody other than his
country.” [135&h meeting para. 71.1

256. This morning Lord Caradon, the representative of the
United Kingdom, spoke about the responsibilities of the
membersof the Security Council. I am not here to tell the
members of the Council about their responsibilities. But
being an aggrieved party, we again read the Charter of the
United Nations.

I thought that the members of the Council represented the
United Nations. Then he continued:
“We speak for our countries, we state their policies”the policy is to condone, encourage and protect Israel
aggression in the area- “and we attempt to the best of our
abilities to present the point of view of our countries to
this Council.” [Ibid. J

257, Chapter V of the Charter concerns the Security
Council. Article 23, paragraph 1, states with regard to
election of Security Council members:
“The General Assembly shall elect six other members of
the United Nations . . . due regard”-that is to complete
the membership of the Security Council-“being specially
paid, in the first instance to the contribution of Members
of the United Nations to the maintenance of international
peace and security and to the other purposes of the
Organization, and also to equitable geographical distribution,”

I do not need to go further into that. I think I have made
my point. If I need to add to it, it is simply to say that all
that the United States Government has done here is to
protect Israel aggression.
261. If I may, I should like to take two or three minutes
more. Since the crisis started, all of US recall that famous
United States commitment
to safeguard the territorial
integrity of all the countries in the area. A week or so
before the outbreak of hostilities, we heard the representative of the United States very eloquently and repeatedly
mention that the commitment of the United States is the
safeguarding of the territorial integrity of ail. And those of
us who were here remember very well the emphasis that
Ambassador Goldberg used to put, before the outbreak of
hostilities, on “all”; indeed, he used to say: “all parties”.
Then the outbreak of hostilities took place. The Israel
invaders went into our homeland. It was mentioned just’
once in the beginning, but the “all” was not as loud. Since
that time, I think we heard it only once because, in
effect-and this can be verified by the dispatches from
Washington concerning the position of the State Department-whenever
representatives of the United States
Government were asked, “What do YOU mean by ‘au’ “,
dley said that there was no comment. But the “all” before
the Israel invasion meant rxe thing, which everybody
knows.

That reference to “equitable geographical distribution”
means that members of the Security Council do not
representtheir countries only; they represent the entire
membership of the United Nations, and they have to
@old the principles and functions of the United Nations
Charter,
258. Article 24, paragraph 1, states:
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action by the
United Nations, its Members confer”-we, the 122 Members of the United Nations-“on
the Security Council
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, and agree that in carrying out
its duties under this responsibility the Security Council
acts on their behalf.”
The Security Council is required to act on behalf of the
United Nations.
23

which the representative of Iraq made that “perhaps we can
pass over this one” means that he and his colleagues have
now at last come to recognize the falsity of that particular
charge.

262. Mention was made here-it was started by the United
States delegation and repeated by some members of the
Council-about
negotiations between the aggressor and the
victim of aggression. If you believe that the victim of
aggression can negotiate with an aggressor, then, Mr. President, the history of your own country would tell you the
truth. The Danish people did ‘not negotiate with the Nazi
aggressors. The French people did not negotiate with the
Nazis. The Russian people, who fought.heroically up to the
gates of Moscow, did not negotiate with the aggressors.The
Ethiopian people did not negotiate with the Fascist Italians.
How do you want us to negotiate with the aggressors? To
give the fruits of aggression to the aggressor? To negotiate
under blackmail, international or otherwise?

268, With regard to his perhaps more fundamental and
even more egregious complaint that the United States gave
a “green light to Israel aggression”, as he put it, I should
just like to remind the members that, as frequent statements here have proven, the United States, both inside and
outside the Council, exerted its very best efforts to prevent
a conflict from breaking out. Those of you who were
engaged in the discussions and efforts to get a resolution
ensuring that the Council would take pre-emptive action to
avoid a conflict, and the efforts to get a cease-fire the
moment the conflict broke out, will know where the truth
lies.

263. Already in The New York Times this morning-as
was said by one of my colleagues, The New York Times
now has a monopoly on the news-there was a story about
the Israel Government starting to build an atom bomb. I am
sure you have all read that. This is part and parcel of the
manoeuvres, This is part and parcel of the blackmail. As if
we did not know the Israelis have been doing this for some
time now. What do they want to tell us? “Unless you
accept, you will be annihilated by an atom bomb.” And
with whose technical assistance and advice is this atom
bomb being made?

269. Finally, in order not to detain the members tpo long,
I should like to clarify only one point of policy on the part
of the United States Government about which the represem
tative of Iraq appears to be confused. I take it from his
comments about that newspaper that he is an avid reader of
The New York Times. But I think he did not read this
morning’s New York Times carefully enough. If he had, he
would have seen that as recently as yesterday United States
policy with regard to the territorial integrity and political
independence of all States in the Middle East was reaffirmed personally by President Johnson.

264. Mr. President, I think I have taken enough of your
time. One thing that I should like to say is that even though
we have had setbacks, even though we have had defeats, we
are right, we will attain our rights, and we will repulse the
invader. We will-and this is addressed not only to the
invader, it is addressed to others-not forget, we will not
forgive.

270. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Iraq has ~
asked for the floor in exercise of his right of reply.
271. Mr. KHALAF (Iraq): Just to set the record straight, 1
did not say, concerning the participation of United States
planes in the aggressive action against our homeland, that
we can pass over this one. I only said that, suppose for
argument’s sake, we would pass over this one.

265. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
the United States in exercise of his right of reply.
266. Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): I am truly
sorry to have to detain the Council further before its
Bell-deserved recess, but I find it completely impossible to
let this meeting adjourn without commenting on, the
monstrous allegations which we have just heard from the
representative of Iraq. I shall try to confine my remarks to
something less than five minutes, which he promised that
his presentation would take, but I think there are two or
three points which must be made in this connexion.

272. With regard to reading The New York Times, what
can we do? ‘Practically the only newspaper that is available
when we open our eyes in the morning is The New York
Times, and that is what we read.
273. As to the commitment of the United States Govern
ment, in The New York Times this morning it is said that
the President did not offer any explanation, and that State
Department officials would not want to go into details as to
what they meant by this commitment.

267. First of all, we heard a repetition of the allegation
that United States planes were involved in the recent
conflict. My delegation has denied that allegation so often
that it hardly seems necessary to do so again. But lest the
old technique of repeating a lie frequently make it true and
bear any fruit here, I find it necessary once more to state
categorically that that is an absolute falsehood. We have
repeatedly offered to accept impartial United Nations
investigations of these charges, an offer which I may say has
not yet been taken up. I can only hope that the remark

274. The PRESIDENT: I have no further speakers on my
list. Since it is now about 3.20 p.m., I would propose that
we adjourn the meeting until 5.30 p.m., if this is agreeable
to the Council. There being no objection, the meeting is
adjourned until 5.30 p.m.
The meeting roseat 3.25 p.m

24

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publicstion~.may
the world.
Consult
your
bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler publications
dea
dlpositaires
du monde
Nations
Unies, Section

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from boolrstores
and distributors
Nations,
Sales Section,
to: United

LLS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

in U,N.

UN/ES

Nations
Unies
sonl
en vente
dans ler llbrairies
et les agences
entier.
Informer.vour
aup&
de votre librairie
ou adressez+our
bl
des venter,
New York ou Genitve.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de los Nacioner
Unldas
esfdn
en todar
parter
del mundo.
Conrulle
a IV librero
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

throughout
New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.50

(or

equivalent

en vcnfa
a dirllare

UNIDAS
en lib&as
a: Nacioner

in other

currencies)

y casas distribuidoras
Unidar,
Sccci6n

de

35651-January

1971-1,100
