136

39 /177.

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Long-term financing and the future role of
the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 7/ 142 of 17 December 1982
and 38/ l 77 of I 9 December 1983, in which it called upon
the Secretary-General to submit a report on long-term
financing arrangements for the United Nations Institute
for Training and Research which would place its financing
on a more predictable, assured and continuous basis,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General5 9
and the statements made by the Executive Director of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research on 9
and 14 November 1984 on the financial difficulties of the
Institute, 60
Taking note of the priorities and work programme for
the biennium 1984-1985 approved by the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research,
Noting with concern that the 1984 United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities, held on
7 and 8 November 1984, 61 was unable to provide the
General Fund of the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research during 1985 with the level of resources considered by the Board of Trustees of the Institute as the
minimum required to maintain the Institute as a viable
entity,
Acknowledging with regret that the system of voluntary
contributions, instituted to provide resources for the operation of the Institute, has thus far failed fully to guarantee
the minimum level of resources needed by the Institute for
its General Fund,
Noting with regret that the three options for long-term
financing arrangements for the Institute recommended by
the Board of Trustees, namely, the setting up of a reserve
fund, the adoption of a replenishment system and the
establishment of an endowment fund, have not been found
acceptable by the major contributors, 62
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report;
2. Endorses the view of the Secretary-General about
the continuing importance of the role of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive study on the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research, its activities in training and
research, its funding and its future role, keeping in mind
related activities within the United Nations system and
the relevant provisions of the Statute of the Institute, in
order to determine the most effective manner of discharging those functions;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit his
report, together with the comments of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research thereon, to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session;
5. Decides to grant the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research up to $1.5 million, on an exceptional basis, to supplement the funds raised through voluntary contributions for the General Fund of the Institute,
in order to enable the Institute to carry out a minimum
5 9 A/39/ 148.
60 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth S,·ssw11.
Second Committee, 38th meeting. paras. 11-20: and 41 st meeting, paras. 1-8
61 See A/CONF.126/SR.l-3.
62 A/39/148, para. 8.

training and research programme in 1985 at a level to be
decided by the Board of Trustees of the Institute at its
forthcoming special session, but not exceeding $3 million;
6. Requests that the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research and, if it
agrees, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, examine urgently the programme
and budget proposals of the Institute for I 985, with a view
to obtaining savings in its budget;
7. Decides to take a decision at its fortieth session on
the basis of the report of the Secretary-General on the
future, programmes and funding arrangements of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research.
/03rd plenary meeting
17 December /984

39/178.

United Nations Institute for Training and
Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ I 77 of 19 December 1983 on
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
Having considered the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research, 63 covering the period from I July 1983 to 30
June 1984, and his introductory statement of 9 November
1984, 64
Recalling the important role assigned to the Institute for
the purpose of enhancing the effectiveness of the United
Nations in achieving its major objectives, in particular in
the maintenance of peace and security and the promotion
of economic and social development,
Recalling also the need for the Institute to continue to
evolve clear, long-term priorities in the training and
research programmes of the Institute that would emphasize its role in the promotion and strengthening of the
development process,
Noting with satisfaction the emphasis being placed by
the Institute on the revitalization of its programme, the
dissemination of the results of its research and the
improvement of its management, and on the mobilization
of adequate resources to enable it to perform its functions
satisfactorily,
Sharing the concern of the Executive Director that only
a small number of States are contributing to the General
Fund of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research, as well as his concern over the inadequacy of the
resources available to the Institute for its work,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research and of the measures taken in 1984
to improve the management and the budgeting process of
the Institute;
2. Also takes note of the priorities and work programme for the biennium 1984-1985 approved by the
Board of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research:
3. Welcomes the continuing emphasis of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research on economic
and social training and research and the inclusion of spec1 fic projects on the problems that exist in the areas identi" 1 0/fic,al Records of 1he (ie11eral As<emhlv. Thirt1·-ntnrh S,•s.11011, Supple
ment No. 14 (Ai39/14)
64 lb1d.. Th,r11·-ninth \csswn. Second ( ·omm1ttec. 38th meeting. paras. 11~(1
