S/PRST/2008/36

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 September 2008
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5979th meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 September 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Maintenance of
international peace and security: mediation and settlement of disputes”, the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council recalls the Purposes and Principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and reaffirms its commitment to the pacific settlement
of disputes, including through mediation, in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations, in particular Chapter VI. The Council recalls all its relevant
previous statements and resolutions.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of mediation as a
means of pacific settlement of disputes, and encourages the further use of this
mechanism in the settlement of disputes. The Council reaffirms the crucial role
of the United Nations in this regard.
“The Security Council affirms that, as the organ with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, it has a
responsibility to promote and support mediation as an important means for the
pacific settlement of disputes.
“The Security Council emphasises the importance of the actions
undertaken by the Secretary-General, in using his good offices and his
representatives, special envoys, and United Nations mediators in promoting
mediation and in the pacific settlement of disputes. The Council takes notes of
the establishment of the Department of Political Affairs’ Mediation Support
Unit, which provides expertise for supporting the mediation efforts of the
United Nations, regional and sub-regional organisations.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
ensure that mediation processes conducted by or under the auspices of the
United Nations are guided by the Purposes and Principles of the Organization
and that mediators are experienced, impartial, have a good knowledge of all
the stakeholders, facts and circumstances of any dispute to which they have
been assigned, and are provided with the necessary support and flexibility to
approach mediation according to the specificities of the disputes; to this end,
the Council encourages the Secretary-General to consider ways to strengthen
the Secretariat’s capabilities.

08-51716 (E) 230908

*0851716*

S/PRST/2008/36

“The Security Council notes the important contribution of regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and other stakeholders to the pacific
settlement of disputes, in particular through mediation, and commends them
for their efforts. The Council is resolved to strengthen United Nations support
to such mediation efforts through improved cooperation, in particular in
Africa; the Council encourages other bilateral and multilateral partners to do
likewise.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of engaging the
potential and the existing capacities and capabilities of regional and
subregional organizations in mediation efforts, and welcomes the promotion of
regional approaches to the pacific settlement of disputes.
“The Security Council notes that women have an important role to play
in the settlement of disputes, stresses the importance of their equal
participation and full involvement in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security, and calls upon the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the heads of regional and subregional organizations to take
into account the gender aspect during mediators selection, as well as the
approach and perspective that women can render in mediation processes.
“The Security Council highlights the importance of considering
peacebuilding and recovery requirements in the mediation process to help
build the foundations for sustainable peace, and stresses that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a role to play in the promotion of mediation.
“The Security Council emphasises the need to ensure the coherence of
mediation processes by or under the auspices of the United Nations, through
the improved coordination of efforts with others actors, including regional and
subregional organizations, in order to enhance the effectiveness of
international efforts.
“The Security Council also stresses that no mediation initiative can be
viable without ownership and full involvement of all relevant parties to the
dispute throughout the process. The Council reaffirms that conflict prevention
and pacific settlement of disputes, should be at the core of mediation efforts.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to submit, within
six months of the adoption of this statement, a report on mediation and its
support activities, which takes into account experiences of the United Nations
and other key actors, and makes recommendations for enhancing the
effectiveness of United Nations mediation.”

2

08-51716
