S/PRST/2007/38*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 October 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5762nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 October 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council, recalling its previous statements on GuineaBissau, and having considered the latest report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (S/2007/576), reaffirms its
support for the continuing efforts to consolidate peace in that country.
“The Security Council notes with deep concern the threat posed by drug
and human trafficking which can undermine the important gains made with
respect to rule of law, democratic and transparent governance. The Council
further notes that the danger posed by drug trafficking in Guinea-Bissau could
have negative implications towards the region as well as other regions.
“The Security Council is especially concerned over the security and
safety of Bissau-Guinean officials involved in combating drug trafficking and
organized crime. The Security Council therefore calls upon the government
with appropriate support from the international community to take concerted
action to safeguard the safety and security of those officials who are involved
in combating these activities.
“The Security Council welcomes the decision by ECOWAS to convene
later this year a regional conference on combating drug trafficking, aimed at
developing a regional plan of action to deal with this challenge. The Security
Council calls for urgent consideration of how the UN System might improve
its support for Guinea-Bissau’s fight against international drug trafficking and
organized crime. The Security Council recognizes the importance of
containing and reversing the threat of drug trafficking to the peace
consolidation process in Guinea-Bissau. The Security Council further
recognizes in particular the important role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The Council requests the Secretary-General to
report on this matter as soon as practicable. The Council further welcomes the
initiative to hold an international conference in Lisbon, Portugal, on drug
trafficking on Guinea-Bissau in December 2007.
* Reissued for technical reasons.

07-55369* (E) 241007

*0755369*

S/PRST/2007/38

“The Security Council also expresses its concern with the fragility of the
democratization process in Guinea-Bissau as well as persistent economic and
social crisis.
“The Security Council welcomes the scheduled convening of legislative
elections in 2008 and calls on all segments of Bissau-Guinean society to
ensure that the elections take place in a peaceful and orderly fashion. The
Council further appeals to the international community to provide the
necessary logistical and technical support to ensure the effective and timely
organization of the polls.
“The Security Council further welcomes the improved dialogue between
the Government of Guinea-Bissau and the Bretton Woods Institutions and
urges the Government to continue to implement its commitments in the areas
of fiscal responsibility, reforms of the justice Sector and good governance. The
Council also welcomes the assistance provided to Guinea-Bissau by bilateral
and multilateral partners, in particular the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the European Union and the World Bank, and encourages
their enhanced constructive involvement in the country.
“The Security Council encourages the authorities of Guinea-Bissau to
carry out their commitment concerning Security Sector Reform. The Council
also takes note of the announcement made by the European Union and
ECOWAS to make resources available in support of Security Sector Reform.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of a holistic approach
in resolving the complex and multidimensional situation facing Guinea-Bissau
and request the Secretary-General to present proposals on how best the United
Nations could provide effective assistance in an integrated and holistic manner
to national efforts in order to contribute to the sustainable stabilization of
Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council takes note of the letter from the Prime Minister of
Guinea-Bissau requesting Guinea-Bissau be placed on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission and expresses its intent to consider the request as a
matter of priority.
“The Security Council reaffirms that peace and stability in GuineaBissau are critical for peace and security in the West African sub-region. The
Council recognizes the importance of the regional dimension in the resolution
of the problems faced by Guinea-Bissau and, in this regard, welcomes the role
being played by the African Union, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), and the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries
(CPLP), in the peace-building process in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council recognizes and commends the important role
played by the Representative of the Secretary-General and the staff of
UNOGBIS, as well as by the United Nations country team, towards helping
consolidate peace, democracy and the rule of law, and expresses its
appreciation for their activities.
“The Security Council will keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under
active review.”

2

07-55369
