S/2010/564

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 November 2010
Original: English

Report of the Security Council Mission to Afghanistan,
21 to 24 June 2010
I. Summary
1.
In a letter dated 16 April 2010, the President of the Security Council informed
the Secretary-General of the Council’s intention to send a mission to Afghanistan in
June 2010. The terms of reference for the mission were subsequently approved by
the Council (see annex I to the present report). The mission, led by Ambassador
Ertuğrul Apakan, Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations,
comprised representatives of all current members of the Security Council:
Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting (Austria), Deputy Permanent Representative
Mirsada Čolaković (Bosnia-Herzegovina), First Secretary Christiano Sávio Barros
Figueirôa (Brazil), Ambassador Wang Min (China), Ambassador Gérard Araud
(France), Ambassador Alfred Alexis Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon), Ambassador
Yukio Takasu (Japan), Ambassador Nawaf Salam (Lebanon), Ambassador Claude
Heller (Mexico), Ambassador Raff Bukun-Olu Wole Onemola (Nigeria), Minister
Alexander A. Pankin (Russian Federation), Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda
(Uganda), Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland) and Ambassador Susan E. Rice (United States of America). The
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations, Ambassador Zahir
Tanin, joined the mission for parts of its visit.
2.
This was the Council’s fourth visit to Afghanistan since 2001, having
previously visited in November 2003, November 2006 and November 2008. The
mission left New York on 20 June and concluded its work on 24 June. The mission
met with the President of Afghanistan, Hâmid Karzai, and members of his Cabinet,
including the ministers of Defence, Finance, Foreign Affairs, Reintegration,
Education, Social Affairs, Justice and Governance, and acting ministers of Interior,
Public Health and the National Directorate for Security. It also met with key Afghan
representatives, including the Speaker of the lower house (Wolesi Jirga) of the
National Assembly, Yunus Qanooni, and chairs of the steering committees of the
lower chamber; the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commissioner; the
Independent Election Commission Chairman and Chief Electoral Officers; the
Electoral Complaints Commissioners; and civil society organizations, women’s
activists and opposition leaders. International interlocutors included the Commander
of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and the Senior Civilian
Representative of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO); the Office of the
Special Representative of the European Union for Afghanistan; members of the
10-53949 (E) 051110

*1053949*

S/2010/564

diplomatic community; and senior staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations country team. In Kabul, the mission
paid a visit to the NATO Military Training Mission. The mission also visited
Jalalabad, and Sheikh Mesri New Township, where it met tribal elders, university
students, the Governor and the provincial reconstruction team, as well as members of
the United Nations country team engaged with the resettlement camp (see annex II
for schedule of meetings).
3.
The timing of the mission was significant in the light of the Consultative Peace
Jirga held in early June, the preparations for the Kabul Conference on Afghanistan
in July, and the forthcoming legislative elections. The mission emphasized the
Council’s continued support to the people of Afghanistan and the long-term
commitment of the international community to stability, reconciliation and
reconstruction. In particular, it expressed support for the role of the United Nations
in supporting Afghan-led efforts in these areas.

II. Key issues
Security situation
4.
The mission noted its concerns at the significant rise in insecurity, especially
the trends by insurgent groups towards complex suicide attacks, the near-doubling in
the use of improvised explosive devices, indiscriminate attacks on civilians and the
high number of targeted political assassinations, all of which threaten to overshadow
political advances and which constitute the main obstacle to Afghanistan’s
stabilization efforts.
5.
President Karzai outlined the progress made in developing Afghan security
institutions and increasing the operational capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces. In partnership with international forces, the Afghan National Security Forces
had started to seize control from the Taliban in strongholds in the south. Intermittent
discussions by some international allies over withdrawal, however, created concerns
regarding the sustainability of progress. President Karzai highlighted the importance
of long-term international commitment and regional cooperation for a secure
Afghanistan. High-level dialogue was under way to resolve practical differences and
to forge new cooperative relations with neighbouring countries and other States and
organizations in the region on both the security and the economic agendas.
6.
Parliamentarians echoed the concern that statements declaring the military
campaign unsuccessful and calling for international withdrawal risked giving the
Afghan people the perception that the Taliban and Al-Qaida were winning. According
to legislators, the conflict was having regional implications concerning Pakistan, with
the Afghan and Pakistani Taliban now waging war against these two countries. The
Speaker of Parliament underscored the critical role of international military support
and the need for its continued presence in Afghanistan. He highlighted the importance
of a shared understanding among the Afghan Government and its international
partners of the nature of insecurity in Afghanistan and its contributing factors.
7.
Afghanistan’s experience demonstrated that only a combined political and
military effort would defeat the armed opposition. One Afghan interlocutor
estimated that only 20 per cent of the Taliban were irreconcilable and should be
addressed through military pressure. The remaining 80 per cent joined the Taliban

2

10-53949

S/2010/564

for non-ideological reasons, such as a lack of economic opportunities, intimidation
by the Taliban and local Government authorities and mistreatment. That category of
armed opposition could be reconciled through a political process.
8.
The Minister of Defence acknowledged the increased level of violence and
attributed it partly to the introduction of ISAF forces in volatile areas. ISAF
interlocutors agreed that security incidents had increased 88 per cent over the past
12 months owing to an increased operational tempo. All sides were agreed that
building self-sustaining, capable Afghan security forces remained critical to the
successful transition of security responsibility to the Afghan National Security
Forces. The prediction for the months ahead was that violence would remain high,
with the tipping point expected early next year. Much would depend on the
extension of the Government’s authority, the steps taken by Pakistan to curb
insurgents’ freedom of movement, international political and military will and
stronger civil-military coordination to stabilize local districts.
International Security Assistance Force and the Afghan National Security Forces
9.
Describing the ISAF Campaign Plan, the Commander of ISAF emphasized its
focus on the growth and development of the Afghan National Security Forces and
highlighted the progress made, noting that the Afghan National Army was ahead of
schedule. He stressed that, after having received basic military training, only a
limited number of units could be considered battle-ready and that the task of ISAF
was to increase the current ratio. Collaboration between ISAF and Afghan security
ministries was positive; as at June 2010, 85 per cent of Afghan National Army
kandaks were being mentored and 46 per cent of Afghan National Police were being
partnered with or mentored by ISAF forces. The Commander documented the 121
“key terrain districts” that were the main focus of joint efforts by ISAF and the
Afghan National Security Forces and drew a distinction between these areas and
more stable areas where “economy of force” operations were in place.
10. The Commander of ISAF explained that regional command operations in the
South were geared towards creating spaces of contiguous security that would enable
movement of goods and people. Increasing ISAF and Afghan National Security
Forces troop concentrations in Regional Command South remained a priority;
102,000 troops would be stationed there by the end of this year, with an additional
increase of 30,000 next year. The forthcoming Kandahar operations would focus on
Kandahar City and key surrounding districts. Security operations would focus on
building a ring of security around the city through increased checkpoints, increased
presence of ISAF, Afghan National Security Forces and Afghan National Police
presences and greater prevalence of Afghan National Civil Order Police in and
around the city. Political efforts would include greater engagement with traditional
leadership structures (shuras), resolving land disputes, improving ISAF contracting
methods and increasing electricity supply. Significant and sustainable security
improvements would take time, although progress was expected to be quicker within
Kandahar City.
11. During its visit to the Kabul military training centre, the mission met with
ISAF and Afghan trainers, and observed new Afghan National Army recruits. The
mission was told that recruitment had increased, as had the number of instructors
and the quality of training, including longer-term professionalization programmes. A
key challenge remained the need to strengthen leadership staffing and capacities of

10-53949

3

S/2010/564

the Afghan National Security Forces, whose growth and development continued to
be hampered by high attrition rates and retention challenges. Another key issue was
giving due consideration to ethnic balance and a ratio between army and police that
best supports security requirements and the transition to giving the Security Forces
lead security responsibility. Salary increases were expected to have a positive
impact. The Commander of the NATO Training Mission in Afghanistan explained
that training programmes stressed quality over quantity and emphasized literacy,
with 30,000 members of the Security Forces in some form of educational
programme, but noted that only 50 per cent of National Army troops had completed
training. He also underlined the importance of having a sufficient number of trainers
to meet the needs of the Afghan National Security Forces. With regard to mentoring,
ISAF interlocutors noted that 40 per cent of district-level security operations were
partnered between ISAF and the Security Forces. Partnering enables better
intelligence collection and allows ISAF forces to hold the Security Forces to
account.
12. The NATO Senior Civilian Representative described current NATO civilian
priorities as stabilization, transition, reconciliation and a comprehensive approach.
He pointed to significant improvements at the senior levels of the Afghan and
Pakistani authorities, which were yet to be matched at the working level and in
institution-to-institution exchange. ISAF commanders explained the current
parametres of practical cooperation, which included four Afghanistan-Pakistan
border centres staffed by military personnel. They further explained that Al-Qaida
maintained a close relationship to the Pakistani Taliban, although a more enduring
relationship existed between Al-Qaida and the Haqqani network.
13. ISAF interlocutors referred to a significant reduction of civilian casualties
generated by ISAF and the Afghan National Security Forces compared with the
same period a year earlier. All operations by special forces were jointly planned
with the Afghan Government. Night operations were undertaken to reduce civilian
casualties. Of those operations conducted at night, 78 per cent were conducted
without a single shot having been fired and only 1.8 per cent resulted in civilian
casualties. Afghan commandos, not their ISAF counterparts, were the first to enter
houses. Reductions in civilian casualties, however, had yet to produce the desired
and corresponding effect of change in Afghan perceptions. The Senior Civilian
Representative of NATO noted that reducing civilian casualties was a key priority in
NATO’s comprehensive approach, together with stronger civil-military coordination
in stabilization, transition and reconciliation efforts. Detention remains a sensitive
issue for many Afghans, and the importance of transparent transition to Afghan lead
could not be overemphasized. Efforts were currently being undertaken to ensure
appropriate levels of Afghan participation and stringent Afghan-led review
processes for detainees.
14. The Special Representative of the European Union for Afghanistan outlined
the complementary efforts of the European Union rule of law and civilian police
training mission in 16 provinces, with the active cooperation of the Ministry of
Interior, to improve the sustainability of training recruits. The new operation plan of
the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan focused resources on regional
training centres and “train-the-trainers” programmes to support more sustainable
police development. The lack of parallel development of Afghan corrections and
judicial capacity remained a serious concern.

4

10-53949

S/2010/564

15. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
highlighted improved civil-military coordination with close cooperation among
ISAF, the NATO Senior Civilian Representative and the Special Representative of
the European Union. There was a feeling of mutual support among international
institutions in Afghanistan and, although each operated under different mandates
and priorities, they were working closely to coordinate and deliver coherent
messages. Their common goal was to help achieve a stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, while remaining respectful of Afghan culture, traditions and
sovereignty. Regarding security transition, UNAMA continued to underscore the
importance of incorporating governance and development processes, aligned with
Afghan national priorities, in assessments and activities, the need for an equitable
approach across provinces and transition arrangements adaptable to diverse local
needs and conditions.
Reconciliation and reintegration
16. The importance of a comprehensive reconciliation and reintegration strategy
reflects the wide consensus that there will be no military solution in Afghanistan in
the absence of a political process. The London Conference on Afghanistan, held on
28 January 2010, endorsed a proposal to establish a fund for reintegrating mid-level
insurgents, and for the Afghan Government to develop a comprehensive peace and
reintegration programme. The head of this programme, Minister Massoom
Stanekzai, explained how the initiative provides for the economic reintegration of
insurgents and sets out a political reconciliation strategy addressing all levels of the
insurgency. Its components include: a package of incentives, such as removal from
the United Nations sanctions list or potential exile to a third country, or
reconciliation among senior Taliban leaders; direct transitional assistance to
individual insurgents for 90 days after their reintegration; district and communityled reintegration packages that benefit entire villages and communities; the
establishment of a public work corps and an agricultural conservation corps to
create employment opportunities for ex-combatants; and a literacy, vocational
training and de-radicalization programme for ex-combatants and disenfranchised
youth.
17. The reconciliation agenda was given further momentum by the Consultative
Peace Jirga in early June, provided the parametres of and the framework for
commencing talks and setting conditions. President Karzai characterized it as an
important gathering, based on the Afghan tradition of inclusive decision-making,
and stressed the decisive presence of women, with 21 elected secretaries of the
28 committees. Irrespective of some concerns voiced about the participatory nature
of the jirga, it seemed that the grassroots was generally satisfied with the outreach
efforts. The main recommendations and steps towards an inclusive peace process
included the creation of the High Peace Council, a review of detention records, with
a view to releasing those in custody without adequate evidence, and the request that
the Security Council de-list individuals on the 1267 sanctions list of individuals and
entities associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as a concrete confidence-building
measure.
18. In the context of the recent visit of the Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee, President Karzai requested Security Council assistance
with expediting the de-listing process and eventually extending the review process.
With 137 names associated with the Taliban on the list and two weeks left prior to the

10-53949

5

S/2010/564

conclusion of the review, the mission explained that reviews were conducted on a
case-by-case basis and guided by the principles of renouncing violence, laying down
arms, breaking ties with Al-Qaida and fully respecting the Afghan Constitution. Much
would be contingent on the ability of the Government of Afghanistan to promptly
provide sufficiently detailed documentation to conclude the review.
19. Afghan legislators were united in emphasizing that peace in Afghanistan could
be achieved only through an inclusive political process that should be compatible
with the Afghan Constitution and not compromise the achievements of recent years,
especially with regard to the status and rights of women, access to education, public
health and other basic human rights. This opinion was also shared by interlocutors
from the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and civil society
organizations. Some parliamentarians noted that the Consultative Peace Jirga failed
to address how to identify Afghanistan’s enemies or how to structure the
reconciliation process. It further failed to develop a common approach between
Afghanistan and the international community on reconciliation.
20. One legislator suggested that it was now necessary to develop practical and
structured frameworks and mechanisms for reconciliation jointly between the
Afghan Government, civil society and the international community to reach out to
the Taliban and Hezb-e Islami and bring them into the reconciliation mainstream.
This could include the convening of an international forum resembling the Bonn
Conference, where Afghan representatives, including the Government, civil society,
the Taliban, Hizb-e Islami and anti-Taliban forces would negotiate peace under the
aegis of the United Nations. The agenda could include such topics as frameworks
for reconciliation, resolution of constitutional problems and processes to achieve
stability and peace. The conference and its decisions should be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned, with the United Nations and the international community serving as
guarantors of agreed conference outcomes.
21. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General reiterated that the
reconciliation process itself had to be led by Afghans, but noted that the United
Nations looked forward to playing a role in developing confidence-building
measures and fostering dialogue among the various actors in Afghanistan. Similarly,
he stressed the importance of fostering constructive engagement with regional
players and the linkage between regional and national reconciliation efforts.
Elections
22. The months preceding the mission’s visit had been marked by an intense
debate over the constitutionality of a Presidential decree that questioned the holding
of national legislative elections prior to any substantive long-term electoral reform,
based on lessons learned from the presidential elections of 2009. Ultimately, there
was general consensus that elections should go ahead, as the nomination of 2,677
declared candidates, 400 of which were women, indicated popular demand.
Elections were also deemed essential for advancing democratic processes and
reinforcing the much-needed legitimacy of Afghan institutions. Agreed
implementation guidelines confirmed the change in the Independent Election
Commission leadership, the appointment of the two international members of the
Electoral Complaints Commission with an effective role and a reinforced guaranteed
constitutional quota for women. The major difference with the previously held
elections was the primary emphasis of greater Afghan sovereignty and ownership

6

10-53949

S/2010/564

geared towards better elections and a more transparent process. The international
community’s main area of support would be in building up credible and independent
electoral institutions and balancing the need for capacity-building of the
Independent Election Commission with ensuring they were given all the requisite
assistance to be operational on the ground.
23. Afghan legislators, civil society representatives and the Chair of the
Independent Election Commission all identified electoral security as the greatest
challenge for the conduct of elections. Afghan legislators expressed concerns about
the capacity of the Government to develop a coherent action plan for the opening of
polling centres. With 80 per cent of districts insecure, failure to provide secure
polling centres would further undermine public confidence in the freedom and
overall legitimacy of elections, in addition to increasing the risks of perceived fraud.
Insecurity further limited equal opportunities for electoral candidates to campaign,
since many constituencies remained inaccessible, vulnerable to intimidation of the
electorate, especially women, and in some areas, to direct threats by the Taliban and
Hezb-e Islami towards candidates and their families.
24. The Independent Election Commission stressed the need to secure all polling
centres, as only those that could be secured would open on polling day. Securing
polling centres was crucial to mitigating the potential for fraud and protecting
ballots and ballot boxes. The electoral law gave the Commission the authority to
postpone elections in some constituencies, an option that needed to be considered at
the right time. In terms of the infrastructure that would be used for polling centres,
the Chair of the Commission explained that given Afghanistan’s limited
infrastructure, there were no alternatives other than to use schools and clinics, while
trying to avoid using private facilities.
25. The Chair of the Independent Election Commission remained committed to
holding credible elections, and thus far the problems encountered had not been
insurmountable, with all deadlines met, the final list of candidates published and the
election campaign period declared open. The Commission was committed to the
principles of independence, transparency, fairness, inclusiveness and security, and to
building on lessons learned from last year’s elections. To ensure a level playing
field, the Electoral Media Commission, part of the Election Commission had
promulgated regulations applying to all candidates and has issued guidelines on
private media coverage of the elections.
26. The Independent Election Commission valued the importance of a complaints
mechanism for transparent elections and was reassured that the independent
Electoral Complaints Commission, with offices in all 34 provinces, was mandated to
adjudicate electoral complaints at the provincial level. The Electoral Complaints
Commission members described themselves as a quality control mechanism, not
running the elections, but certifying the results, which needed to be done relatively
swiftly lest the legitimacy of the process be undermined. By their own account, the
three Afghan Electoral Complaints Commission commissioners were fully united
with their two international counterparts, working together to set up provincial
offices and amend Electoral Complaints Commission internal regulations. They had
thus far reviewed and adjudicated 428 challenges to the list of candidates. The
34 provincial tribunals gives the Electoral Complaints Commission a better chance
of ensuring improved elections according to the principles of law enforcement and

10-53949

7

S/2010/564

justice, equal access for all, impartiality and close coordination with the
Independent Election Commission.
27. The Independent Election Commission outlined the nature of its improved
relationship with the United Nations, which was predicated on the understanding
that the Independent Election Commission was the sole authority on elections and
that the United Nations provided support in the form of technical and operational
assistance, with advice provided and no decisions imposed. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General reinforced the message of Afghan
leadership. UNAMA and the United Nations Development Programme and the
Independent Election Commission jointly engaged to make these better elections
than last year by balancing international support with respect for Afghan
institutions.
28. The first example of this cooperation coincided with the mission’s visit and
was related to the ongoing vetting process, which risked seeing very few candidates
excluded for their links to illegally armed groups. While the Electoral Complaints
Commission had previously been responsible for vetting candidates, with assistance
from UNAMA and ISAF, it was acknowledged that this year the Vetting
Commission, chaired by the Independent Election Commission, consisted of
representatives of the Ministries of Interior and Defence, and the National
Directorate of Security. The very low indicative number of candidates to be
excluded raised concerns over management of the vetting process, and raised public
concerns from civil society and opposition figures. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, together with the Independent Election Commission,
registered dissatisfaction with the process, and together drew this issue to the
attention of the President and the competent ministries. As a result, the list was
further reviewed and an estimated 32 candidates were excluded.
Governance, rule of law and human rights
29. International interlocutors warned that improvements in governance and service
delivery were limited. Interlocutors pointed to corruption as the main factor affecting
the confidence of the population in Government. Controlling, reducing and ultimately
eliminating private armies remained a priority. Governance objectives revolved
around increasing numbers and quality of Afghan Government civil servants. Filling
the civil servant staffing chart (Tashkil) had been difficult due to insecurity and the
lack of economic incentives and numbers remained disappointingly low.
30. President Karzai and his ministers noted the significant strides made in social,
economic and development affairs, and highlighted the strengthening of institutional
structures and marked improvements in the sectors of rural development, health and
education and counter-narcotics. They acknowledged the need for enhanced efforts
against poppy cultivation and drug production, trade and consumption, noting that a
considerable share of related profits was being channelled to finance the insurgency,
terrorism, corruption and criminal activities, including from abroad. Anti-drug issues
would be further addressed under regional cooperation agendas. They stressed that
counter-narcotics efforts were more successful in the Afghan-led provinces, where
local Governments could make better use of controls and incentives. They added that
with the build-up of security institutions, governance would follow, and that
Afghanistan already rating high on the World Bank list of countries with checks and
balances in place. They further countered the criticism of widespread corruption,

8

10-53949

S/2010/564

much of which was instead attributed to the international community, in a country
that is trying to rebuild its structures after 30 years of conflict.
31. The President stated that one of his priorities was governance, which involved
building a functioning State that extended throughout the country and ensuring an
independent and accountable civil service. The success of the transition to full
Afghan sovereignty depended on the extent to which governance could be
restructured around a vision shared and articulated with the Afghan people. Given
the country’s geology and potential for national growth and regional connectivity,
this vision is economically feasible. In a country that still ranks 181 out of 182 on
the Human Development Index, has the highest infant mortality rate, the secondhighest under-five mortality rate and the highest risk of maternal death in the world,
clearly much more needs to be done. Afghanistan has the potential to be
self-sufficient if it develops its resources effectively and responsibly, and establishes
sub-national government that can deliver in practical terms. The Government
planned to launch this new vision at the Kabul Conference, which was not a
pledging conference but a renewed commitment to the Afghan people and
partnership with the international community. This plan, which involves realigning
funds behind Afghan priorities, will be practically implemented in a 100-day
programme.
32. The mission was further updated on the challenging human rights situation in
Afghanistan, which included the issues of violence against women, arbitrary
detention and release of prisoners without an adequate legal framework, civilian
casualties and a culture of impunity, in addition to little progress in meeting the
objectives of the 2005 action plan on peace reconciliation and justice.
Long-standing human rights problems associated with dysfunctional governance,
entrenched impunity, weak rule of law and justice sector institutions and the
marginalization of women pose significant challenges in the immediate and the
longer term. UNAMA documented preliminary figures of 968 conflict-related
civilian casualties between January and May 2010, up 18 per cent from the same
period in 2009. Anti-Government elements remain responsible for the largest
proportion of civilian casualties (69 per cent of total civilian casualties) since
January. Most civilian casualties were caused by suicide attacks and the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices as anti-Government elements
continued to carry out attacks in a manner that failed to discriminate between
civilian and military targets, or to take adequate precautions to prevent civilian
casualties. Tactical directives adopted by ISAF appear to have had a positive impact
in reducing the number of civilian casualties.
33. Violence against women and girls, including harmful traditional practices,
such as the use of girls in marriage to settle disputes (baad), so-called “honour”
killings, early and forced marriages and rape, is persistent and widespread. Women’s
participation in public life remains restricted and the political space for women to
advocate for their rights has contracted. Attacks on, threats against and harassment
of women in public life, or those working outside the home, often by
anti-Government elements, occur frequently and, in most cases, go unpunished.
Sexual violence against Afghan women and girls continues to be underreported. The
misplaced stigma of sexual violence falling on the victim rather than on the
perpetrator, as well as lack of access to any form of justice or remedies for victims,
has ensured that sexual violence remains largely unaddressed either by
Afghanistan’s law enforcement institutions or by Afghan society. The UNAMA

10-53949

9

S/2010/564

Human Rights Unit was observing all processes, including the drafting of recent
legislation, to regulate traditional dispute mechanisms and to advocate for further
guarantees on women’s rights.
34. Representatives of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
highlighted four main areas of concern: a lack of transparency, legitimacy and
public support for the Peace Jirga and peace process it initiated; a culture of
impunity, which is tolerated by the international community and feeds the
insurgency; civilian casualties, especially those perpetrated by anti-Government
elements; and the potential for increased displacement owing to security concerns
and the lack of income-generating opportunities. The Commission noted that the
Government is widely perceived not to take justice issues seriously and that
corruption creates mistrust by local communities. It refuted the belief that there is a
contradiction between human rights and Afghan culture or religion, insisting that
people, even in rural areas, know and want their rights to be respected. However,
they noted the importance of the way in which these issues are approached.
35. The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission called on the Security
Council to note that the lack of justice and the impunity for those who committed
crimes feeds insecurity. They asked that “spoilers” be thrown out of the system
rather than allowing them to exert pressure on the President and influence
appointments of senior officials and judges. Representatives of the Agency
Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief reiterated that the withdrawal of the
international military further fuelled impunity, with undertrained security forces,
often linked to warlords as those troops were hurriedly replaced.
36. All civil society representatives highlighted the need for economic
opportunities and basic social services, and noted the move from rural to urban areas
and the trend towards renewed economic migration from Afghanistan. The Agency
Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief pointed out that NGOs work in all 34
provinces and gain access through community acceptance by being inclusive and
accountable. It highlighted the need for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to be present and active throughout Afghanistan.
37. The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission noted that education
served to empower the entire population and, in particular, noted the need for
women to access health care and birth control. The Agency Coordinating Body
pointed out the effectiveness of microcredit as a means of women’s empowerment,
but warned that economic development was not enough; political action was also
required. The Commission called for positive discrimination to enable women to
build their capacity in the workplace and posited that the Taliban would never
accept equal rights for women as enshrined in the Constitution. The Agency
Coordinating Body pointed out that the Taliban were aware of the importance of
education and directed attacks against not only girls’ schools but also teachers,
students and parents. The Commission noted that of 330 schools closed by the
Taliban, 207, or 60 per cent, were girls’ schools.
Aid coherence and economic development
38. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General stressed that UNAMA
supported the Government’s effort to “Afghanize” aid across all three pillars of the
Afghan National Development Strategy — security, governance and development —
to deliver on its proposed renewed commitment to the Afghan people at the Kabul

10

10-53949

S/2010/564

Conference. This would be achieved by helping the Government to substantially
increase aid flows through the national budget, align aid with its national priorities,
improve the effectiveness of off-budget aid and successfully transition to more
Afghan control. The Kabul Conference, and the Kabul process it will set in motion,
would present, for the first time, a prioritized national agenda for economic
development, public finance and administrative reform. This agenda would to be
implemented through national priority programmes which, if effectively linked,
could provide a framework for a more coherent overall approach and a potential
framework for a more targeted and coordinated effort in Afghanistan that could, in
turn, shape transition in ways that contribute to prospects for peace.
39. As a potential facilitator of a national-led effort that consolidates and propels
these processes, UNAMA, as the co-chair alongside the Government, will engage
the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board as the primary vehicle for creating a
framework for all partners to guide, monitor and oversee progress on an agreed
vision and priorities. It would seek to promote alignment behind the Government’s
prioritized agenda and national programmes for governance, economic and social
development; support the translation of that prioritized national agenda to provinces
and districts; encourage sustained efforts to build Afghan leadership capacity at
national and subnational levels; promote and support effective partnerships and
enhanced mutual accountability in the implementation of the Kabul process; and
promote inclusive engagement of communities and civil society actors in this
national effort.
40. UNAMA priorities in this area for 2010 would include: (a) enhanced alignment
behind the Government’s prioritized development strategy (“the clusters”);
(b) greater mutual accountability, including through improved effectiveness of offbudget aid; and (c) greater focus on capacity-building at the national and
subnational level. In support of its aid coherence mandate, UNAMA will strengthen
its partnership with the European Union Special Representative and the
strengthened NATO/ISAF Senior Civilian Representative, as well as the World Bank
and the Asian Development Bank, in support of Afghan development priorities.
41. The Special Representative highlighted the appointment of an aid coherence
adviser and a realigned aid coherence section in UNAMA. He further added that the
comparative advantage of the United Nations in Afghanistan was its large number of
agencies and its presence in all 34 provinces. With 21 provincial and regional
offices and more than 700 international and 6,000 national staff, the United Nations
could support the planned transition of provincial reconstruction teams to civilian
control and boost Afghan capacities to lead this transition. The United Nations had
been in Afghanistan since the 1960s and would remain there for the long term. The
United Nations country team — with 31 agencies, funds and programmes
(23 resident, 8 non-resident) and an annual throughput of USD 1 billion —
supported the delivery of crucial, tangible services to the Afghan people and worked
to build the capacity of the Afghan Government to deliver those services. Only a
small number of provinces, primarily those where troop-contributing countries are
based, receive the lion’s share of funding from bilateral donors. As part of efforts to
address this problem, the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for
2010-2013 aimed to align agency work with the priorities set out by the Afghan
Government in its National Development Strategy and joint United Nations
programmes for under-resourced provinces.

10-53949

11

S/2010/564

III. Observations
42. The mission took note of the considerable building blocks required to
empower the Afghan Government to lead a comprehensive process of transition to
greater security, better provision of services and inclusive dialogue, by setting an
Afghan-owned and prioritized agenda. The mission was concerned, however, by the
increasingly complex security situation in Afghanistan and, in particular, by the
increase in violent and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, illegal armed
groups, criminals and those involved in the narcotics trade, which have resulted in
threats to the local population, national security forces and international military and
civilian personnel. Those activities negatively affected the capacity of the
Government to guarantee the rule of law, provide security and basic services to the
Afghan people and ensure the improvement and protection of their human rights and
fundamental freedoms. The Council was seriously concerned about the increasingly
high number of civilian casualties, the large majority of which were caused by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremist groups, and called for all appropriate
measures to be taken to ensure the protection of civilians. The Council was also
concerned about the protection of children affected by armed conflict.
43. In that connection, the mission reiterated the need for a transparent, credible
and democratic process that preserves stability and security throughout the
forthcoming electoral period. It recognized the interconnected nature of the
challenges in Afghanistan, reaffirming that sustainable progress on security,
governance, human rights, the rule of law and development, as well as on the crosscutting issues of anti-corruption, counter-narcotics and transparency are mutually
reinforcing. The mission stressed the importance of a comprehensive approach in
addressing the challenges in Afghanistan and noted the synergies in the objectives of
the Afghan Government, UNAMA and the international community. The mission
stressed the need for strengthened cooperation, coordination and mutual support,
taking due consideration of their respective responsibilities.
44. The mission reiterated the importance of increasing the functionality,
professionalism and accountability of the Afghan security sector through a
comprehensive framework of appropriate vetting procedures, training, mentoring,
equipping and empowering both women and men to accelerate progress towards the
goal of self-sufficient and ethnically balanced Afghan security forces that will
provide security and uphold the rule of law throughout the country. The mission
noted requests for the international community to extend its assistance so that the
Afghan National Security Forces would be properly armed and equipped, and
thereby able to increasingly assume lead responsibility for security in the country.
45. The mission welcomed the Afghan Government’s commitment to develop and
implement an effective, inclusive, transparent and sustainable national peace and
reintegration programme and expressed appreciation for UNAMA’s work in
supporting the programme. The mission hoped for increased support from the
international community to assist the Government in its efforts, including through a
peace and reintegration trust fund.
46. The mission further welcomed the Afghan Government’s commitment to
preventing irregularities and misconduct during, and to ensuring the integrity of, the
2010 national legislative elections, which are of vital importance to Afghanistan’s
democratic development. The mission hoped that every effort would be made to

12

10-53949

S/2010/564

ensure the credibility, safety and security of the elections. During its visit, the
mission was apprised of the challenges facing the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission, but recognized the need for those two
bodies to effectively perform their functions of preparing and monitoring elections.
The Government of Afghanistan would need to work together with UNAMA to
ensure that both entities are strong, independent and provide the proper checks and
balances required by the Constitution.
47. The mission was concerned by the effects of corruption on security, good
governance, counter-narcotics efforts and economic development, and encouraged
the Afghan Government, with the assistance of the international community, to
enhance its efforts to establish a more effective, accountable and transparent
administration. Nonetheless, the mission was heartened that Afghan institutions,
including the executive and legislative branches, had begun to cooperate on
legislative and public administration reform with a view to ensuring good
governance, with full representation of all Afghan women and men, and
accountability at both the national and subnational levels, and encouraged further
international efforts to provide technical assistance in this area.
48. The mission looked forward to the outcome of the forthcoming Kabul
Conference, which would build on the commitments made at the London
Conference Afghanistan, held on 28 January 2010, and which presented an
important opportunity to improve aid coordination and effectiveness, including by
ensuring mutual accountability.
49. The mission stressed its expectation of full respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms and international humanitarian law throughout Afghanistan.
During its visit, the mission had the opportunity to observe the work of UNAMA
with relevant international and local non-governmental organizations and the
Government to monitor the situation of civilians to ensure their protection and
promote accountability. These efforts were vital in ensuring the full implementation
of the fundamental freedoms and human rights provisions of the Afghan
Constitution and international treaties to which Afghanistan is a State party,
including those regarding the full enjoyment by women of their human rights. It was
important to guarantee access to all Afghan prisons and places of detention, and to
ensure respect for relevant international law, including humanitarian law and human
rights law. Similarly, it would be important to continue progress in the
reconstruction and reform of the prison sector in Afghanistan.
50. The mission appreciated the opportunity to observe the work of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission in monitoring respect for human rights in
Afghanistan and its efforts to promote the emergence of a pluralistic civil society. It
stressed the importance of regional cooperation and dialogue, in particular the
initiatives of regional countries in political and economic issues, and was pleased to
learn that regional cooperation had become a pillar of Afghan political and security
strategies. It encouraged all relevant actors to work with the Commission in support
of broad engagement across Government agencies and civil society towards the
realization of the mutual commitments made at the London Conference, and those to
be made at the Kabul Conference.
51. The mission was encouraged by the work of the United Nations, with the
assistance of the international community, in support of the Afghan Government’s
priorities on the issues of security, governance and economic development and

10-53949

13

S/2010/564

regional cooperation. It expressed its full support for the three political priorities of
UNAMA, elections, reintegration and reconciliation and regional cooperation, and
its focus on aid coherence in ensuring that the international community, donors and
the contributions of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes alike were
realigned behind Afghan Government priorities. It further emphasized the crucial
work of UNAMA on human rights. The mission underscored the critical role of
UNAMA in assisting the Afghan Government in the transition towards Afghan
leadership, including by supporting preparations for the Kabul Conference to be
held on 20 July.
52. Finally, the mission expressed its full support for the work of the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative and all United Nations personnel in fulfilling
their difficult but important tasks and commended their efforts to implement their
mandate in Afghanistan. The mission strongly appealed to Member States to provide
all necessary human and financial resources to ensure the mission was sufficiently
prepared to best deliver on its mandate.

14

10-53949

S/2010/564

Annex I
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission
to Afghanistan
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s continued support for the Government and
people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country, strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace and constitutional democracy and assume their rightful place in
the community of nations;
2.
To review the progress made by the Afghan Government, with the assistance
of the international community, including through capacity-building initiatives, in
addressing interconnected challenges in the areas of security, governance, rule of
law, human rights, women’s rights and empowerment of women, the protection of
children affected by armed conflict, economic and social development, regional
cooperation and counter-narcotics;
3.
To assess the status of implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1806 (2008), 1868 (2009) and 1917 (2010), as
well as of mutual pledges and commitments made by the participants to the London
and Istanbul Conferences held in 2010, and looking ahead to the Kabul Conference;
4.
To underline the central and impartial role that the United Nations continues to
play in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan by leading the civilian efforts
of the international community; to express strong support for the ongoing efforts of
the Secretary-General, including in the area of staff security, and of his new Special
Representative for Afghanistan; to reiterate the priorities set out by the Security
Council in its resolution 1917 (2010); and to display solidarity with the women and
men of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA);
5.
To review the implementation of the key coordinating role assigned to
UNAMA and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General by the Security
Council in its resolution 1917 (2010), taking into account the need for a
comprehensive approach and the principle of reinforcing transition towards Afghan
ownership and leadership;
6.
To review efforts by the Afghan authorities, in support of an Afghan-led
development and stabilization process and, with the assistance of the international
community, to address the threat to the security and stability of Afghanistan posed
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, illegal armed groups, criminals and those involved in the
narcotics trade and in the diversion of chemical precursors;
7.
To reaffirm the importance of the effective implementation of measures and
application of the procedures introduced by the Council in its resolutions 1267
(1999), 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) and other relevant resolutions, and to express
support for the cooperation of the Afghan Government and UNAMA with the
relevant Security Council sanctions Committee;
8.
To review the humanitarian and development situation in the country,
including the efforts to increase the proportion of development aid delivered
through the Afghan Government and the role of the provincial reconstruction teams,
taking into account development priorities of Afghanistan;

10-53949

15

S/2010/564

9.
To assess the cooperation, coordination and mutual support between UNAMA
and the International Security Assistance Force, including on humanitarian and
human rights issues and in supporting the electoral process, in accordance with their
respective mandates;
10. To assess the status of preparation of legislative elections to be held later this
year, as well as their credibility, safety and security;
11. To reaffirm the crucial importance of advancing regional cooperation and
dialogue as an effective means to promote governance, security and development in
Afghanistan.

16

10-53949

S/2010/564

Annex II
Schedule of meetings of the Security Council mission
to Afghanistan
Monday, 21 June 2010
2130

Arrival in Kabul from Istanbul

2200-2230

Meeting with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and security briefing

Tuesday, 22 June 2010
0800-0930

Briefing by the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and representatives of the United Nations country team

1015-1145

Visit to the Kabul Military Training Centre

1230-1430

Working lunch with Hâmid Karzai, President of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan

1500-1630

Joint meeting with the Commander of the International Security
Assistance Force and the Senior Civilian Representative of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, briefing on transition

1700-1830

Meeting with Afghan civil society organizations (Afghan Women’s
Network, Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, Agency
Coordination Body for Afghan Relief, Afghanistan Human Rights
and Democracy Organization)

1930-2130

Reception hosted by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral

Wednesday, 23 June 2010

10-53949

0900-1025

Meeting with the Independent Electoral Commission

1030-1130

Meeting with the Electoral Complaints Commission

1200-1230

Meeting with the European Union Special Representative

1330-1630

Working lunch with the Minister for Foreign Affairs and meeting
with cabinet ministers

1700-1815

Meeting with the Speaker of the Wolesi Jirga and the Chairs of two
standing committees

1815-1915

Brainstorming session with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

1930-2200

Dinner hosted by the Ambassador of Turkey

17

S/2010/564

Thursday, 24 June 2010

18

0730-0800

Travel from Kabul to Jalalabad

0800-0830

Meeting with the Governor of Nangarhar province

0830-1000

Visit to Sheikh Mesri New Township, meetings with elders and
students

1020-1100

Meeting with civilian and military personnel of the Jalalabad
provincial reconstruction team

1100-1130

Travel from Jalalabad to Kabul

1200-1245

Press conference at the airport

1300-1900

Travel from Kabul to Istanbul

2000-2200

Reception for the mission and Istanbul retreat participants hosted
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey

10-53949
