UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/25
21 May 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3665th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 May 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council condemns the recent violations of the Tehran
cease-fire agreement of 17 September 1994 (S/1994/1102, annex I), in
particular the planned and organized offensive by the armed Tajik
opposition in the Tavildara region. It strongly deplores the loss of life
of civilians and of members of the CIS Collective Peace-keeping Forces as a
result of acts of violence. It affirms that such acts are totally
unacceptable.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern that all such
actions further aggravate the already serious humanitarian situation in
Tajikistan. It demands the immediate cessation of the offensive actions
and acts of violence.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the
inviolability of its borders.
"The Security Council emphasizes its support for the extension of the
cease-fire agreement for the whole duration of the inter-Tajik talks, and
notes that the Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan (IRMT) has agreed to
extend the cease-fire, albeit only for further three months. It calls upon
the parties to demonstrate their commitment to peace by strict compliance
with the cease-fire and other obligations which they have assumed, as well
as with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It also reminds
the parties that the mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) is subject to the proviso that the cease-fire agreement
remains in force and that the parties continue to be committed to an
effective cease-fire, to national reconciliation and to the promotion of
democracy.

96-12719 (E)

210596

/...

S/PRST/1996/25
English
Page 2

"The Security Council commends the personnel of UNMOT for their
contribution under difficult circumstances. It expresses its concern at
the restrictions placed upon UNMOT by the parties and calls upon them, in
particular the Government of Tajikistan, to ensure the safety and freedom
of movement of the personnel of the United Nations and other international
organizations.
"The Security Council calls upon both parties to resolve their
differences over the functioning of the Joint Commission, including the
issue of security guarantees for Commission members, and to recommence the
operations of the Commission as soon as possible.
"The Security Council is concerned that the worsening humanitarian
situation makes it all the more urgent to obtain the required resources and
calls upon Member States and others concerned to respond promptly in
support of the humanitarian relief efforts of the United Nations and other
international organizations.
"The Security Council invites the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to continue their efforts aimed at the earliest possible
resumption of the inter-Tajik talks and calls upon the countries and
regional organizations acting as observers at those talks to render all
possible support to those efforts."

-----
