THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd

1983

MEETING: 12 JANUARY 1977

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 983) . , . . , . , , . . , . . . . . , , , . . , . . . . . , . ,
Opening statement by the President ..............................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

3

Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative ,of
Botswana to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Securrty
Council (S/12262) . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . I . , .

3

1

S/PV.1983

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1983rd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

12 January

1977, at 3 p.m.

and our long-standing friendship with that great Asian
Power, which firmly occupies a position of non-alignment,
is being ever intensified and deepened to the great benefit
of the peoples of both countries and of universal peace.
This feeling of sympathy and solidarity describes our
attitude with regard to the peace-loving foreign policy of
India. Everyone knows of the great contribution made by
India to the work of the United Nations and we are sure
that its contribution to the work of the Council will be
extremely valuable and useful.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

5. In the Soviet Union, we are following with a great deal
of sympathy and attention the international activities of
Mauritius, which is pursuing a constructive foreign policy
and has taken many initiatives. This yea;, Mauritius is
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity @AU) and
I am sure that, under its leadership, the whole of the African
continent will make an important contribution to the early
conclusion of the process of the decolonization of Africa
and to the struggle of peoples for peace and progress.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l983)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint of the Government of Botswana against the
illegal re’gime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the
letter dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Botswana to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12262).

6. The President of Venezuela’s visit to the Soviet Union
in the autumn of 1976 raised to a new level the relations
between the USSR and Venezuela, thus undoubtedly
serving the interests of both countries and peoples, as well
as the interests of peace and progress. As pointed out in the
joint Soviet-Venezuelan communique issued on 29 November 1976, the Soviet Union and Venezuela will both
actively strive to see to it that international detente is
deepened and intensified and that it becomes a constant
factor in international relations. I am sure that in this spirit
the delegations of our countries will co-operate in the
United Nations and particularly in the Security Council.

The meeting was called to order at 3.35 p.m,

Opening statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): Since
this is the first meeting in the new year, I should like to
make a statement to everyone here by way of greeting.
2. Today, at the first meeting of the Council for 1977, I
should like most cordially to congratulate my new colleagues-the representatives of States members of this
important body of the United Nations, the SecretaryGeneral and the staff members of the Secretariat. I should
like to wish everyone good health and continued successin
their fruitful and co-operative work for the good of
international peace and in the interests of the security of all
mankind.

7. As regards Soviet-Canadian relations, last year proved to
be an important milestone in the further consolidation of
good neighbourliness and mutually advantageous co-operation. Such development of our relations is entirely in
keeping with the spirit and letter of the Final Act of
Helsinki.
8. The Federal Republic of Germany is today one of our
major partners in our mutually advantageous co-operation
with the West. We very much hope that the fruitful
co-operation between the Soviet Union and the Federal
Republic of Germany-the foundations of which have been
laid in previous years-will constantly be extended and
intensified in all areas.

3. We are very pleased to be able to welcome here the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council elected
for a two-year term-Canada, the Federal Republic of
Germany, Mauritius and Venezuela-and I cannot refrain
from expressing my satisfaction at the way in which the
links and co-operation between the Soviet Union and these
States are being established.

9. In welcoming here the new non-permanent members of
the Security Council, we look forward with confidence to
their participation in the Council’s work. We are sure that it

4. Close political and economic co-operation with the
Republic of India is a constant policy of the Soviet Union,
1

be of invaluable assistance and will be a pledge of
SUCCeSSin the sohtion of the important and complex
problems confronting the Council.

Nations imposes upon the Council a major responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The successof the Council’s work depends, to a very large
extent, on the constructive co-operation of all its members
and on their desire and readiness to make a positive
contribution to the common cause. We are counting on
such an attitude of understanding and co-operation on the
part not only of the permanent members of the Security
Council, whose particular role and responsibility in our
affairs are well known, but also of all the other members of
this important body, each of which will make an important
contribution to solving the problems facing the Council.

will

10. 1 think that I can, on behalf of the Council, give
ammum
of our great esteem for the outgoing nonpermanent members and express our sincere gratitude for
their invaluable contribution to our work. Tfis year we
shall no longer enjoy the co-operation of Guyana, Italy,
Japan, Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania. 1
should like to point out that, during their tenure in the
CoUnC&
those
countries made a great positive contribution
to its work. Tanzania, Guyana and Sweden were often
sponsors of draft resolutions on the basis of which
important decisions were taken by the Council. Representatives of all five countries did a great deal for the
attainment of mutual understanding in the Council and in
the search for constructive ways and means of solving
complex problems.

15. As we enter the new year of 1977, all countries are
taking stock of the ground that has been covered and plans
are being made for the future. We, as members of the
Security Council, more than anybody else, are aware that
peace and stability in many parts of the world, indeed
throughout the world, cannot be considered secure until we
have eliminated the hotbeds of military tension, until we
have called a halt to and reversedthe arms race, until we see
the total and complete implementation of the historic
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and until we achieve the final
elimination of the still existing hotbeds of colonialism and
racism in the world. I hope that the Council will devote
particular attention to those problems and do everything in
its power to bring about their solution in accordance with
the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the world.

11. Permit me also to welcome the representatives of
Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama and
Romania, as well as the representatives of the permanent
members of the Council, with whom we are sure we shall be
continuing our fruitful co-operation.
12. I should like to discharge one more pleasant duty, that
of officially thanking the representative of the Socialist
Republic of Romania, Ambassador Ion Datcu, who, with
great diplomatic tact and extraordinary political mastery,
conducted the proceedings of the Council last month. I can
tell from the documents of the Council and the’responses
of colleagues, that he performed his functions brilliantly
and ensured the effective consideration of the complex
problems facing the Council. As representative of the Soviet
Union, I cannot refrain from pointing out that the relations
between our two countries, which are both members of the
socialist community, are marked by traditional comradely
co-operation, which is becoming more and more manysided in character on the basis of the Treaty of Friendship,
Co-operation and Mutual Assistance between the USSR and
the Socialist Republic of Romania.

16. As for the delegation of the Soviet Union to the
Security Council, I can assureyou that we shall support all
constructive proposals aimed at strengthening and consolidating international peace, strengthening detente and converting it into an irreversible process. The core of this
policy was very distinctly expressed by the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union, Comrade Brezhnev, who
recently said:
‘L. . . We are of course aiming at peace; but we are also
aiming at a stable peace. And we are not only striving for
it but also doing everything in our power to achieve that
goal. The only peace we have in mind is a just, democratic
and genuinely universal peace; in other words, one
founded not on the principle of ‘might is right’ but on
equality and freedom for all peoples and States, great or
small, industrially developed or still developing. Such a
peace would be in the interests of all and, at the same
time, of each of us.

13. I wish to express my sincere hope that the co-operation between the members of the Council and the President
will be as effective and fruitful in January as it was last
IROIlth.

14. Turning now to my responsibilities as representative of
the Soviet Union in the United Nations and the Security
Council, entailing the immediate assumption of the presidency of the Council, I am deeply conscious of the great
task entrusted to me. Indeed, in the world today there are
no more urgent and vital problems than those of maintaining and strengthening international peace and security.
The truth of this is shown by the experience of the work of
the Council, including its work in 1976. Suffice it to recall
that, last year, the Council held 113 official meetings
devoted to the Middle East question and its various aspects,
problems of Africa, the Cyprus question and also what were
at times extremely acute political questions of the admisslon of new Members, This truly record number of Council
meetings by itself demonstrates that the significance of our
work is constantly growing, The Charter of the United

“A stable peace is one of the prerequisites for replacing
international tensions and the remnants of the ‘cold war’
by an easing of tension and a stable, consciously
strengthened peaceful coexistence. That, in our view,
would be the best possible guarantee to all peoples that
they would be able, quite independently and without any
outside interference, to choose their own course of
development in accordance with their own concepts of
social progress.”
17. In that we see the goal and purport of the whole of
our work in the United Nations, and to that goal we shall
subordinate all our actions and initiatives.
2

Adoption of the agenda

on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We wish you a fruitful term as
President of the Council. We are also grateful to you and
the other members of the Security Council for having
responded so readily and positively to our request for this
meeting of the Council.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint of the Government of Botswana ‘against the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia concerning violations
of its territorial sovereignty, as contained in the letter
dated 22 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Cnuncil (S/12262)

24. My delegation has requested this meeting to consider
the rather grave situation which is developing along
Botswana’s border with the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia. You, Mr. President, and the other members of
this Council will no doubt have seen press reports about the
rapid deterioration of the security situation along Botswana’s border with Southern Rhodesia. There have been
about 36 violations of Botswana’s territorial integrity by
the security forces of Southern Rhodesia since our accession to independence in 1966. Those Incidents have
included murder, arson, kidnapping and the destruction of
houses by explosives. When they started, those incidents
were directed at refugees from Southern Rhodesia; but that
is no longer the case. They are now directed also at
Botswana nationals and have increased in frequency and
seriousness.

18. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): As
President of the Security Council, I have received letters
from the representatives of Botswana, Morocco and Zambia
in which they ask to be invited to participate, without the
right to vote, in the Council’s consideration of the item on
the agenda. In accordance with the provisions of Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Council, and taking into account established practice, I propose, if there are no objections, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
19. I therefore invite the representative of Botswana, the
Minister for External Affairs, to take the place reserved for
him at the Council table.

25. I shall not attempt here to list all the violations of
Botswana’s sovereignty by Southern Rhodesia since 1966. I
shall mention only some of the more recent examples of
the Smith regime’s acts of provocation and aggression
against my country.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A.M. Mogwe,
(Botswana) took a place at the Council table.

20. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): 1
invite the representatives of Morocco and Zambia to take
the places reserved for them ’ at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that they will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when they wish
to address the Council.

26. At about midnight on Saturday, 11 October 1975, the
Botswana police mobile unit base camp at Kazungula on
the Zambezi River, and very close to the Botswana/
Southern Rhodesia boundary, was attacked from the
direction of Southern Rhodesia by a party using automatic
weapons. The camp was fired at from a distance of
approximately 100 metres and it is estimated that 60 to 70
rounds of ammunition were fired. The attackers apparently
fired high, for bullet marks were found on the surrounding
trees but not on the tents or vehicles at the camp.

At the invitation of the FFesident, Mr. KY. Zaimi (Morocco) and Mr. S.G. Mwale (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
should like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to the fact that, this morning, document S/12273,
which has direct bearing on this discussion, was circulated.
It contains a letter from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Morocco, Chairman of the African
Group for this month, stating that the African Group fully
supports the request by Botswana for the convening of the
Council to consider the situation resulting from the acts of
aggression committed against Botswana by the illegal
regime of Southern Rhodesia and expressing the hope that
the Security Council will take the necessary measures in
this connexion. In addition, another document has been
circulated under the symbol S/11227. It contains a letter
from the Permanent Representative of Botswana to the
President of the Council, providing additional information
about the acts of aggression committed against Botswana
by the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia.

27. Eight days after the attack on the police camp, a 15
to 20.strong patrol of Southern Rhodesian soldiers fired
shots Into the Ramokgwebane River bed from the Southern
Rhodesian bank of the river and later into the Botswana
village of Matsiloje, where the shots hit a dairy and a clinic.
The buildings were unoccupied at the time, but many
onlookers witnessed the incident from nearby. On the
following day, a Botswana police mobile unit patrol found
39 bullet marks on the dairy and the clinic.

22. The first speaker is the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana on whom I now call.

28. On 12 June 1976, a Southern Rhodesian army patrol
shot and killed a national of Botswana named Mokhipeni
Ramonwana. Mr. Ramonwana had entered Southern
Rhodesia to recover his t:ttle which had strayed into that
country. He found the cattle and was driving them back
home when he was spotted and killed by the Rhodesians as
he was crossing the Shashe River, which also marks the
boundary between Botswana and Southern Rhodesia. Mr.
Ramonwana was accompanied by his elder brother, who
managed to escape unharmed.

23. Mr, MOGWE (Botswana): I wish to start by extending
to you, Sir, my congratulations and those of my delegation

29. On 15 July 1976, five Rhodesian helicopters were seen
flying over the Nxai Pan in Botswana, The helicopters,
3

battle-green in colour, were flying in close formation at a
height of approximately 170 metres. Then they fanned out
as if they were searching for something. During the evening
of the same day more helicopters flew over the same area
and on the following day four helicopters again circled over
the Nxai Pan and then flew ,back into Southern Rhodesia,
whence they had come. The exercise was repeated by the
same number of helicopters on the evening of the next day.
On the third day, one helicopter flew twice over the Pan
and then back to Rhodesia. Subsequently, an official of the
illegal regime arrogantly telephoned an official of the
Botswana Government stating that the helicopters had
entered Botswana in pursuit of freedom fighters.

tered Botswana illegally and abducted two , Batswana,
Mr. Abel Maphane and Mr. Jota Bango. In addition, the
Rhodesiansburnt down six huts and a truck belongingto
Mr. Maphane. Three days later, the Rhodesiansabducted
Mr. Brunyeu Ndlovu of Moroka village and burnt down a
houseand adjacenthuts aswell asa storeroombelongingto
Mr. Aspon Mogadla of the same village. Then, on 17
December, the Botswana police mobile unit camp at
Francistown was attacked at night by what we believewere
Southern Rhodesiansecurity forces.The police mobile unit
succeededin repelling the attack andthe attackersfled.
35. On 20 December, the Southern Rhodesia security
forces entered Botswana at about 9 p.m. and attacked
Mr. Gobgwe’shome in the Matshelagabedi
area,300 metres
from the border. The Botswanapolice mobileunit patrol in
the area immediately returned the fire and forced Smith’s
forces to flee across the RamokgwebaneRiver into
Southern Rhodesia.In their retreat, the rebel forces threw
two hand grenades,which causedsubstantial damageto
Mr, Gobgwe’shouse.

30. Hardly a month after the helicopter incidents, a
helicopter carrying eight Southern Rhodesian soldiers
landed some 80 kilometres inside Botswana. The soldiers
searched the premises of a Mr. Motlhabane, a Botswana
citizen, and interrogated him on the alleged presence of
freedom fighters in the area. On the same day five white
soldiers crossed into Botswana from Southern Rhodesia
near Maitengwe village. They searched and interrogated
several Batswana in connexion with the whereabouts of
freedom fighters and Botswana police patrols.

36. The latest incursion occurred only yesterday at 11
a.m., when a Botswana police mobile unit patrol came
acrosssome Southern Rhodesiantroops on the Botswana
side of the RamokgwebaneRiver near the village of
Senyawe. The Southern Rhodesiantroops fired at the
Botswana police patrol, which returned the fire. The rebel
forces withdrew into Southern Rhodesiaand there were no
casualties.

31. The Botswana authorities are also aware of the
activities of the so-called Selous Scouts of the Smith
regime. This is a band of men, many of them former
freedom fighters, who are used by the regime to track down
and obtain intelligence on freedom fighters. We know that
one unit of the Selous Scouts is currently under training in
Southern Rhodesia for raids into Botswana with the aim of
attacking guerrillas alleged to be based there. We are aware
that the Selous Scouts have a reconnaissance wing which
operates clandestinely inside Botswana.
32. On 11 November 1976, a patrol of white Southern
Rhodesian soldiers entered Botswana and challenged one
John Mpofu, a Botswana national, who was herding cattle,
and fired at him when he did not respond to their call.
Mr. Mpofu fled and escaped unharmed. Later, 18 empty’
cartridge cases were recovered from the scene of the
incident.
33. On 19 November, at about 2.40 a.m., two suitcase
bombscompletely destroyeda housein Francistown belong
ing to the Nkomo wing of the African National Council
of Zimbabwe. The bombsalsodestroyed two vehicles and
damagedseveralhousesin the vicinity. Fortunately no one
waskilled or seriouslyinjured becausethe occupantsof the
house,having been awakenedby the persistentbarking of
their dog, went out to investigateand managedto get out
of their house before the bombs exploded. The assailants
then fled before they could light the fuses of two other
bombs,which were later detonated. Investigationsinto the
incident revealed that the assailantshad escaped into
Southern Rhodesia in two vehicles and that they were
agentsof the Smith regime.
34. On 25 November, two black soldiersfrom Southern
Rhodesia entered Botswana illegally and abducted a
16-year-old boy named Disang Modiakgotla, of Moroka
village in the north-east district of Botswana. On 11
December, Southern Rhodesiansecurity forces again en4

37. Thoseare only someof the examplesof the incursions
into Botswanaby the security forcesor other agentsof the
illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia. Members of the
Council will have noticed from these examples that
incursions by Southern Rhodesiainto Botswana are becoming more frequent and more serious.They amount, in
effect, to unprovoked acts of war by the illegal regimein
Southern Rhodesiaagainstthe people of Botswana;and, as
the council is no doubt aware, the illegal rt$lme has
declared the entire Botswana-SouthernRhodesia border
area a war zone. The purposeof theseactionsis obviously
to intimidate the Government of Botswanainto changing
its present policy of giving refuge and assistance
to victims
of oppressionin Southern Rhodesia.I should,however, like
to restate the determination of the Government of Botswanato continue to open Botswana’sdoorsto thosewho
are persecutedand oppressedfor political reasonsin their
own countries. This is like an article of faith as far asthe
Government and the peopleof Botswanaare concerned.No
amount of intimidation will makeus changeour resolveto
assistthe victims of oppressionin southernAfrica.
38. The Batswanaare a smalland poor nation. They can
therefore ill afford to pour their limited resourcesinto the
developmentof an army. They prefer to usetheir resources
for the implementation of more productive projects. The
Southern Rhodesianaggression
againstBotswanatherefore
posesa seriousproblem for us. Our viewsabout building up
an army remainunchanged,yet we cannot at the sametime
fail to seethat the incursionsinto our country by the forces
of the illegal Smith rdgimeposea threat to the security of
our country which we are not adequately equipped to
counter. In the circumstances,
the BotswanaGovernment
_.

has decided to increase substantially the size of its police
mobile unit and to equip the unit with such weapons as will
enable it to put up a greater resistance to the activities of
the security forces of the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia.

not for this problem, I should not be here today. The
Security Council should therefore also use this opportunity
to reaffirm its belief in the inalienable right of all the
people of Southern Rhodesia to self-determination and
independence on the basisof majority rule.

39. But my Government was completely unprepared for
this important development relating to the security of our
country, for the substantial increase in the size of our
paramilitary force is being forced upon us by the rapidly
deteriorating security situation along Botswana’s borders
with Southern Rhodesia. We could not, in the face of
repeated acts of aggression against our country, continue to
behave as though all was well around us. Like any
Government, we had to do something to improve the
security of our country.

43. I have tried to give as full a picture as I can of the
situation along Botswana’s border with Southern Rhodesia.
But I know that the picture I have given cannot possibly be
complete. The complete picture can be obtained only on
the spot in Botswana. And, as we have absolutely nothing
to hide, I should like to invite a mission to Botswana to
assessour needs on the spot and report back to the Council
with appropriate recommendations.
44. Once again, let me express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President and, through you, to all the members of the
Council for having made this possible, The people of
Botswana have been greatly shaken by the recent events
and incidents along their border with Southern Rhodesia.
They will be eagerly waiting to hear of the outcome of this
meeting. I hope the decision of the Council will be such as
to strengthen their faith in the United Nations.

40. Unfortunately, whatever we decided to do to
strengthen our security was bound to be done at the
expense of some of our development projects. Having
decided to expand our police mobile unit, we immediately
started looking at our various development projects to see
where we could delay project implementation or stop it
altogether, in order to make funds available for improving
the capability of our security forces. This exercise is under
way and it is estimated that the expansion of our police
mobile unit will cost approximately 25 million Pula-that
is, about $29 million-over the next four years. This,
needless to say, will cut a huge hole in our development
programme, a hole we cannot hope to close unassisted. We
therefore wish to appeal to the United Nations and to the
international community in general to provide financial
assistance to Botswana so that our development plans may
not be too adversely affected by the exercise of our
fundamental responsibility to provide greater security for
our people in the face of the repeated attacks against us by
the illegal rdgime in Southern Rhodesia.

45. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
should like to inform the members of the Security Council
that I have also received a letter from the representative of
the United Republic of Tanzania, containing a request to be
invited to take part, without the right to vote, in the
discussion of the item on the agenda of this meeting of the
Council. In accordance with Article 31 of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, and also
taking into account established practice, I propose to invite
the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to
take part, without the right to vote, in the consideration of
this item. Since there are no objections, I therefore invite
him to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when he wishes
to speak.

41. We are here today to reaffirm our continued belief in,
and dedication to, the cause of International peace and to
condemn the acts of aggression by Southern Rhodesia
against our country and people. It is because we believe
that the present conflict in Southern Rhodesia could
eventually spread into other parts of southern Africa, that
we have decided to bring this matter before the Security
Council. In other words, the present acts of aggression on
the part of the regime in Southern Rhodesia could, if they
continue unchecked, eventually engulf the whole of
southern Africa in the sort of racial conflagration which we
all wish to avoid. For it is quite clear that, as the war of
liberation against the illegal regime intensifies, the rdgirne
will become more and more desperate and look for
scapegoats. The attacks against Mozambique and Botswana
and the threats against Zambia are clear manifestations of
the aggressiveintentions of the Smith regime. We consider
it necessary, therefore, that the Council pronounce itself
without equivocation on this issue, in the hope that the
regime in Southern Rhodesia will desist from further acts of
aggression against neighbouring States.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. A. Salim (Llizited
Republic of Tanzania) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

46. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, I have
visited the African Department of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and 1
have roamed through the Kremlin, but, alas, I did not have
the pleasure and the honour of meeting you in either of
those two great centres of our world. Indeed, I met you for
the first time only yesterday during our official consultations, and yet I feel that I have known you for the best
part of my adult life. I therefore welcome you very warmly
to the United Nations and extend my full co-operation to
you and your delegation.
47. I consider it a great honour and privilege to be
participating for the first time in the deliberations of the
Security Council in my capacity of sole representative of
Mauritius, now a full and “permanent” member of this
body, albeit only for two years, under the presidency of
your great and proud socialist country, a founding Member
of our Organization and a truly permanent member of the

42. The unprovoked aggression against Botswana by the
Smith regime stems from a more fundamental problem,
namely, the denial of the right of self-determination to the
vast majority of the people of Southern Rhodesia. If it were
5

Council, so ably represented by you, Mr. President. In the
same breath, let me say how sad I feel at the absence from
this chamber of my colleague and great personal friend,
Ambassador Ma& whom I had come to regard as a main
furture , if not the chief pillar, of this Council. I take solace
in the hope that the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Malik, is looking after the long-term interests and
welfare of developing Africa in the great metropolis of
Moscow,

tended to believe they held the monopoly of knowledge
and wisdom. Nevertheless, now, representing a country
which is a full member of the Security Council, I naturally
take the view that, as far as humanly possible in most
circumstances, the successof the Council lies in the intense
informal consultations among all its members and in the
due taking into account of all views and interests. Such an
exercise can be possible only among equals. I can assure all
my colleagues around this horseshoe table that my delegation will promote negotiations as the main form of our
work. We shall be only too happy if all decisions are
adopted by consensus.

48, I should also like to congratulate the outgoing
President, Ambassador Datcu of Romania, who presided
over this Council in a manner which reflects extremely well
the universally appreciated message of Romanian foreign
policy. All Council decisions during his tenure of office
were adopted by consensus,including the re-election of our
esteemed Secretary-General.

54. At the same time, in view of the nature of some issues,
resort to voting will probably be necessary.I hope that the
permanent members of the Council will not obstruct, by
sheer misuse of the power invested in them, the adoption of
those proposals which serve the objective requirements of
our time.

49. Mauritius is participating in the activities of the
Security Council, fully aware of the complexity of the
issues of which it is seized as well as of the role it must play
in their settlement.

55. The prestige and efficiency of the Security Council
should be enhanced. For this reason I wish countries would
resort to it at an early stage and not when it is too late and,
I hope, always for the purpose of actually finding peaceful
solutions to problems which are within the competence of
the Council.

50. The issues before the Council represent, in the last
analysis, attempts to solve disputes by force, attempts to
dominate other people in order to perpetuate colonialism in
various forms, attempts to interfere in the domestic affairs
of other States and, in some cases, actual acts of armed
aggression against the independence and sovereignty of
States or their territorial integrity. These issuesare manifestations of an obsolete policy which contradicts flagrantly
the spirit of our times. We are committed to building a new
international order, a better, more just and democratic
world based on ful1 equality of all peoples and on respect
for the sacred right of every people to self-determination
and independence in accordance with its sovereign will,
History proves that attempts to solve international disputes
by force can only lead to further conflicts endangering
international peace and security.

56. Coming to the item before us today, I should like to
state that I shall address myself to it not only as a member
of this Council but also as the representative of the current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity.
57. Last Monday, 10 January, my Prime Minister, Sir
Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, received from Sir Seretse Khama,
President of the Republic of Botswana, a message which
was addressed to him in his capacity as current Chairman of
the Organization of African.Unity and which reads in part
as follows:
“Continued violations of Botswana’s territorial integrity
by armed forces of the rebel regime in Rhodesia are
causing grave concern to my Government and its people.
The incursions into Botswana have resulted in murder,
arson, kidnapping and destruction of property by explosives. Botswana is wholly committed to the liberation
of Zimbabwe, and acts of aggression by the illegal regime
in Rhodesia will not intimidate Botswana into abandoning its policy to give refuge to the nationalists fighting
against the rebel r&me. In the light of the grave threat to
Botswana’s security, my Government has requested the
United Nations Security Council to meet on 12 January
to consider the ways and means by which the deteriorating situation can be arrested.”

51. That is why I consider that the United Nations and the
Security Council should, first and foremost, seek by all
means at their disposal the prevention of conflicts and the
settlement of disputes by political and peaceful means, the
promotion of good-neighbourly relations among States and,
eventually, the elimination of force from international
relations.
52. That is the spirit in which we intend to act in this
body. We shall spare no effort to confirm the confidence
placed in my country by the States Members of the United
Nations when they elected it to the Security Council. We
intend to carry out the honourable task and lofty responsibilities entrusted to us in the same spirit of mutual respect
and co-operation as has always characterized the activities
of all African States in this organ.

58. We have just heard the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana, who elaborated on the incidents which
prompted his Government to request that this meeting of
the Security Council be convened. Those incidents are
indeed very serious, as they are threatening the sovereignly,
independence and territorial integrity of a Member State, In
the view of my delegation, those incidents can only be
characterized as acts of aggression and should be treated by
the Council as such. The African Group as a whole supports
the request of the Government of Botswana that the

53. I, personally, have appeared quite frequently, over the
past eight years or so, before this Council in the defence of
truth and justice. I have done so without fear or seeking
favour, sometimes to the irritation of some who could not
face facts and whose senseofjustice seemed, to me at least,
either tainted or selective and others who, perhaps imbued
with the wealth or might of their respective countries,
6

Council deal in a responsible and adequate manner with the
situation now prevailing in the country as a result of those
acts of aggression.

economic hardship confronting Botswana as a result of the
need it now feels to divert funds from ongoing and planned
development projects to unplanned military and security
expenditures required for the defence of its independence
and territorial integrity. We should therefore respond
positively to the request for assistancepresented to us by
the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana.

59. To place the request of Botswana in its proper
perspective, it should be recalled that the armed struggle
being waged in Southern Rhodesia by the gallant freedom
fighters of Zimbabwe has the full backing of the whole
membership of the Organization of African Unity and that
this position of OAU is in conformity with the relevant
United Nations resolutions. In those resolutions, the United
Nations has affirmed and reaffirmed the legitimacy of the
struggle of all peoples striving for the enjoyment of their
fundamental freedom and rights, particularly in southern
Africa. In this connexion, it should be noted that, at its last
session, the General Assembly reaffirmed the legitimacy of
the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe to secure, by all
means at its disposal, the enjoyment of its right to
self-determination, freedom and independence [resolution

62. In due course, a draft resolution along the lines I have
indicated will be submitted for the Council’s consideration,
63. Mr. President, I should like to thank you very much
indeed for the warm welcome you have extended to my
country as a member of the Security Council and for the
kind words you have expressed to my delegation.
64. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Mauritius for his kind words to
me and to my country. I should also like to thank him for
his good wishes to my predecessor, Deputy Foreign
Minister Malik. I shall convey those words to him and I am
sure that he will be very grateful.

311154 A].

60. The people of Zimbabwe has been waging its war of
liberation for the last 10 years and it is to the credit of the
Zimbabwe people’s army that the struggle has now reached
its final stage. Instead of negotiating, in good faith, a
peaceful settlement of the conflict, the illegal white
minority regime in Salisbury has resorted to a dangerous
military build-up with the assistanceof South Africa and to
increasingly repressive measures against the people of
Zimbabwe. The situation now prevailing in Southern
Rhodesia has rightly been characterized as a threat to
international peace and security in the region, because the
Government of Ian Smith has extended it to neighbouring
States through the so-called “hot pursuit” of the freedom
fighters. Under this insane and criminal policy of hot
pursuit, the Rhodesian army has conducted raids into
Mozambique and Zambia. The Rhodesian arrny is now
engaged in similar acts of aggression against Botswana and
has stepped up acts of subversion, murder and kidnapping
against its people. According to Ian Smith, these criminal
acts are justified because there are freedom fighter bases in
Botswana. But, as the Minister for External Affairs of
Botswana told us, it is a policy of his Government not to
permit Botswana to be used as a launching pad for attacks
against neighbouring States. The Minister assured us that
there were no bases in Botswana from which freedom
fighters could launch attacks against Southern Rhodesia.
The fact is that Botswana is committed to giving refuge to
all those fleeing from the oppression and repression in
Southern Rhodesia and that Ian Smith is determined to
coerce the Botswana authorities into reversing their policy.

65. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Morocco. Accordingly, I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
66. Mr. ZAIMI (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to welcome you to the
diplomatic community of the United Nations, We are most
happy that one of the tasks entrusted to you within the
framework of your mission here is to preside over the
Council, particularly at a time when it must consider one of
the aspects of the question of the liberation of the African
continent. In your person I greet the representative of a
great country with which my country, the Kingdom of
Morocco, maintains excellent relations based on friendship,
understanding and mutual respect.
67. May I then, through you, thank all the members of the
Security Council for having been so good as to authorize
the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco, whose turn
it is in this month of January to have the honour to serve
the Group of African States, to participate in this important debate.
68. It is obvious that the question that is before the
Security Council today is one of the nefarious consequences of the illegal and tragic situation from which the
people of Zimbabwe have been suffering for more than 11
years. The repeated acts of aggression against Botswana,
and likewise against Mozambique and Zambia, are indeed
merely the results of an initial aggressionperpetrated on 11
November 1965 against African dignity, when Ian Smith
thought that he could, with impunity, proclaim a lopsided
independence, thus installing in Southern Rhodesia a
minority racist regime. Immediately after that illegal
proclamation, the people of Zimbabwe, who number more
than 6 million, became on its own soil a nation of
second-class citizens at the service of the European minority, which does not exceed 200,000 persons. It is quite
normal that such an ignoble regime should meet with
determined resistance on the part of the oppressed people
of Zimbabwe and with unanimous condemnation by the
international community.

61. The illegal minority regime is becoming more and
more desperate and is seeing enemies and enemy bases all
around. Southern Rhodesian refugee camps in Mozambique
have been treated as bases for freedom fighters. Now the
illegal minority regime is blindly engaged in acts of
aggression against Botswana. The whole 400-mile border
between Rhodesia and Botswana has, in fact, been declared
a war zone by the Rhodesian authorities. A state of war
virtually exists between Botswana and Southern Rhodesia.
The Security Council should therefore treat the situation as
a threat to peace in the area and act decisively before it is
too late. It should also take into consideration the special
7

74. The repeated aggressions of the Ian Smith regime
against Botswana are the consequence of this firm policy,
based on morality, on a keen sense of duty and on a
profound awareness of a common destiny. This moral
position has led the leaders of Botswana even to review
their own development programme in order to meet the
requirements of security and national defence. This illustrates the extent to which the illegal situation in Southern
Rhodesia threatens the peace and stability of the entire
region and its development opportunities.

69. It is not my intention to repeat the history of the
question of Southern Rhodesia which members of the
Council already know very well. On several occasions this
Council has in fact had to consider this problem and take
the necessary measures, in particular by adopting a system
of sanctions against the rebel British colony. The General
Assembly, for its part, has had to deal with this question
and adopt several resolutions condemning the illegal regime,
recalling the responsibilities of the United Kingdom as the
administering Power and, above all, appealing to all
Governments and specialized agencies of the United Nations system to show their solidarity with the oppressed
people of Zimbabwe and to come to its aid.

7.5. The international community in general, and the
Security Council in particular, are in duty bound to
appreciate the true worth of the noble attitude of the
Government of Botswana and to extend it every aid and
encouragement. The Council should therefore take the
appropriate measures to enable Botswana to safeguard its
security and not to abandon its development plan. It should
see to it that an emergency assistance programme is
established for Botswana, in co-operation with the specialized agencies of the United Nations system. In that way,
the Council will have effectively contributed to shortening
the time left before the coming into being of a just majority
regime in Zimbabwe and thus strengthened the chances for
peace and stability in southern Africa.

70. Therefore it was not surprising that Botswana, like the
other countries bordering on Rhodesia, should do its duty
as dictated by its location and by a common destiny as well
as by the international obligations set out in the Charter of
the United Nations and by the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly. We are therefore bound to pay a
heartfelt tribute to the Government and people of Botswana for their praiseworthy effort of active solidarity,
which they continue to exert in favour of the refugees and
victims of the savage oppression of the Ian Smith regime.
71, That regime, which has usurped power, knows full
well that it is living its last hours and this has made it more
and more desperate and, therefore, more and more inhuman. This explains its threats and attacks against Zambia,
Mozambique and Botswana. Not only do regular forces of
the illegal Rhodesian regime carry out almost daily incursions into Botswana, but a special commando force is at
present undergoing special training to carry out criminal
missions of sabotage and the abduction of innocent
persons, Violations of Botswana’s territorial integrity are
thus becoming more and more frequent. One day the target
is a peaceful village, ‘another day a hospital or, quite simply,
the abduction of civilians.

76. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Morocco for the kind words he
addressed to the members of the Security Council as well as
to my country which, as he rightly pointed out, has very
friendly relations with the Kingdom of Morocco. I also
thank him for the courteous words he addressed to me.
77. I wish to inform the members of the Council that, as
President of the Council, I have received a letter from the
representative of Lesotho, in which he requests to be
invited to participate, without the right to vote, in the
discussions of the Council on this item. Pursuant to Article
31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure and in accordance with established practice, I
propose to invite the representative of Lesotho to participate, without the right to vote, in the Council’s discussion
of this item. Since there are no objections, I invite the
representative of Lesotho to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber on the under=
standing that he will be invited to take a place at the
Security Council table when he wishes to speak.

72. We are profoundly aware that no remedy can take the
place of a true solution of the Rhodesian problem-that is
to say, the end of the racist minority regime and the
establishment of majority government. There, too, Ian
Smith and his clique are desperately trying to delay the
inevitable by assuming the deceptive trappings of a power
that no one grants is theirs. The dilatory tactics to which
Smith recently resorted at the Geneva Conference will avail
him naught: his regime is doomed to perish and it will
perish.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. Makeka (Lesotho} took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

73. Nevertheless, we must remain vigilant. This vigilance
means that the international community must remain loyal
to the courageous people of Zimbabwe in this decisive
moment in its history. This is exactly what Botswana has
realized full well. The people and Government of Botswana
have set an example for the international community by
accepting enormous sacrifices. Botswana grants political
asylum to refugees coming from Rhodesia and provides
them with food and lodging, an activity which has already
taken a very heavy toll of the economy of the country. But
Botswana is, above all, firmly in solidarity with the
Zimbabwe liberation movement, despite all sorts of difficulties which that noble position entails. Botswana is
determined never to abandon this position, regardless of the
consequences.

78. Mr. BOYA (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, my delegation is happy to welcome you
among us here at the United Nations, and particularly to
the Security Council, over which you have the great
privilege of presiding during this month of January 1977.
My delegation wishes to assure you of its faithful collaboration and takes pleasure in the friendly and co-operative
relations linking the Soviet Union with the People’s
Republic of Benin.
79. I should also like to take this auspicious opportunity
to welcome our new colleagues who have just joined the
8

now clear that the Smith clique, seeing the mounting and
invincible rebellion of the people and following the advice
it has received from international imperialism, is seeking to
internationalize an internal situation which is becoming
ever more untenable.

Council. The many and diverse relations between their
countries and my own are .a good augury for the successof
the Council’s work in 1977.
80. My delegation would like also to pay a well deserved
tribute to those colleagues whose tenure on the Council
terminated in December 1976. Their sense of co-operation,
understanding and responsibility enabled the Council to
overcome many an obstacle. We hope that the same will
prove true this year.

86. The people of Zimbabwe, having had enough of lies,
hypocrisy, honeyed words and sordid calculations, refuses
to & fooled any longer and wants to settle its aCCOUnt With
those racist torturers and oppressors. The people of
Zimbabwe, which has made such great sacrifices, WI retreat
no further. The people of Zimbabwe is perfectly well aware
who jts principal enemy is: it is imperialism, whose zealous
servants constitute the racist clique of Smith.

81. The Council has before it today an item to which the
People’s Republic of Benin attaches particular importance.
The acts of aggression and provocation, as well as all the
other indescribably inhuman acts committed daily by the
Smith clique against independent African States of the area,
constitute a genuine and constant threat which we would
be wrong to minimize.

87. The imperialist Powers, with hands dripping with the
blood of the martyrs of Zimbabwe, are mistaken if they
still think they can fool fighting Africa so easily by the
scenario they have arranged at Geneva in order to breathe
new life into the Smith regime. That is an illegal regime
which will inevitably and inexorably be eliminated, thanks
to the courageous determination of the people of Zimbabwe supported by all the anti-imperialist forces of the
world.

82. Ever since that illegal racist minority regime appeared
in Southern Rhodesia with the blessing of international
imperialism, the Smith clique has considered that it has the
right to do anything it wishes and is playing dangerous
games with the arms furnished by its friends from the
imperialist West. Meanwhile, the African States of the
region, because of their militant fraternal and unswerving
support for the valiant people of Zimbabwe, struggling for
its self-determination, freedom, dignity, independence and
national sovereignty, have been the victims of repeated acts
of aggression. Thus, the peoples of Zambia, Mozambique
and Botswana have been obliged and continue to be obliged
to put up with barbaric and repeated incursions by the
“sorcerer’s apprentices” of the Smith clique.

88. My delegation wishes to hail the courage and determination of the people of Botswana whose support for the
fraternal people of Zimbabwe has never failed. My delegation considers that the personal responsibility of the United
Kingdom, the colonial Power in Rhodesia, is very much
involved in this affair. It is important that that Power
understand that African patience has its limits.
89. The Council must examine this item objectively and
with consistency. The situation of Botswana warrants our
whole-hearted attention. All necessary assistance should be
granted to that country so that it can face the unfortunnte
consequences of the acts of aggression committed against it
by the Smith clique.

83. The Council should realize, in particular, that the
people of Botswana, a peaceful and hard-working people
whose courage and determination should be praised here,
has never given way to the dangerous acts of provocation of
which it has been a victim. Indeed, during the 10 years
since its accession to independence, Botswana has been
obliged to devote considerable resources, that it could well
have used for development projects, to security and the
day-to-day protection of its inhabitants against the inhuman acts of the racist clique of Rhodesia. For 10 years
the people of Botswana have been demonstrating admirable
patience.

90. It is now quite clear that those who, by their
collaboration and assistance, give protection to the Smith
regime and allowed it to continue to exist, are committing a
flagrant action of aggression against all the States of
international imperialism for all its crimes against Zimbabwe. My delegation denounces all the hypocritical
initiatives with their wilfully confused content designed to
lull the vigilance of the peoples of the world.

84. But for some time now, the Smith clique, which
believes it is endowed with a certain impunity because of
the illegal nature of its oppressive regime, has been stepping
up its acts of aggression, using more modem means of
intervention such as sophisticated weaponry and helicopters. The more intense the liberation struggle becomes
and the more victories it claims, the harder the line adopted
by the Smith clique and the more blindly that clique
commits itself to those acts of aggression against the States
in the area that support the people of Zimbabwe, a people
which is determined to seize its dignity and freedom by
force of arms, since they are possessionstoo precious to be
bargained for at a negotiating table.

91. The people of Zimbabwe will triumph and safeguard
peace and security in the area and throughout Africa.
92. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I
thank the representative of Benin for what he said about
my country and me.
93. Mr. KIRHIA (Libyan Arab Republic): Mr. President, I
mould like first of all to take this opportunity to express,
on behalf Of the delegation of the Libyan Arab Repubfic,
our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January.Also, please accept our warmest salutations on
Your appointment as Ambassador Extraordinary and PleniPOtentiW Of the union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to the

85. The question we are entitled to raise is: Why does the
Smith regime with its back to the wall involve itself so
shamefully in premeditated aggression as a policy? It is
9

United Nations. It is always a great pleasure for my
delegation to welcome a representative of a Member State
Wit11 which We share understanding, respect, co-operation,
assistance and friendship. We are confident that you will
assume your duties and responsibilities with the same
enthusiastic fervour and keenness as did your predecessor,
Ambassador M&k.

security forces have come to our notice. There have
obviously been many more which have not been reported
to the Government. Twelve out of the 31 violations have
taken place this year and they are also becoming far more
serious. They include murder, arson, kidnapping and the
destruction of dwelling houses with explosives.” [See
S/I22621

94. MY delegation would like to welcome His Excellency
the Minister for External Affairs of Botswana and to thank
and congratulate him for his proper and clear presentation
of the complaint of his country against the illegal minority
regime of Ian Smith.

99. From the very beginning, the Security Council, in its
resolutions 216 (1965) and 217 (1965) of November 1965,
condemned the unilateral declaration of so-called independence made by the racist minority in Southern Rhodesia
and determined that the situation resulting from that
proclamation was extremely grave and constituted a serious
threat to international peace and security. Also, the
Council, in its resolution 217 (1965), called upon the
United Kingdom to quell the rebellion of the racist
minority in Southern Rhodesia and to take all appropriate
measures which would prove effective in eliminating the
authority of the usurpers and in bringing to an end the
illegal minority rule.

95. MY delegation also wishes to express its appreciation
and admiration for the dedication and earnestness with
which the representative of Romania, Ambassador Datcu,
presided over the Council during December. We are
extremely grateful for the able and sincere manner in which
he undertook
his responsibilities as President of the
Council.
96. We should also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the representatives of the new members of the
Council: Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, India,
Mauritius and Venezuela. We are sure that, in the months to
come, we in the Council shall have the same co-operation as
we had from their predecessors, the representatives of
Guyana, Italy, Japan, Sweden and the United Republic of
Tanzania. We shoutd like to say how extremely grateful we
are, in particular, to Ambassador Salim of Tanzania and
Ambassador Jackson of Guyana for their steadfast and
enduring struggle for human freedom, equality, justice and
the cause of all oppressed peoples. Their fight against all
forms of imperialism, colonialism and racism, their championship of liberation movements and their nobility of
purpose have been significant resources in providing directives to the Council. Together with our other colleagues
who have left the Council-Ambassador
Rydbeck of
Sweden, Ambassador Vinci of Italy and Ambassador Abe of
Japan-they have proved that wisdom and impartiality
towards the issues of primary concern to all of us here are
admirable and necessary qualities in the enormous task of
maintaining peace and security in the world. They all
deserve our sincerest and profoundest gratitude and congratulations.

100. It is a fact that the situation caused by the frequent
violations and acts of aggression committed by the racist
minority Smith regime against the neighbouring countries
of Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana constitute a critical
and fearful threat to international peace and security in
that region.
101. Real peace in Southern Rhodesia will not be achieved
if the people of Zimbabwe continue to suffer from the
shameful and unforgivable racist rule of aggression and
discrimination imposed by the racist minority in Southern
Rhodesia. Peace will not be achieved if the people of
Zimbabwe are not allowed to exercise their right to
self-determination and independence, as laid down in
General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV). The achievement
of peace and security must be based on the recognition of
the legitimate rights of the people of Zimbabwe to
self-determination and independence.
102. It is a fact that, since the collapse of Portuguese
colonization and the consequent independence of Mozambique and Angola, the collusion between the illegal minority Smith regime in Southern Rhodesia and the racist
minority Vorster regime in South Africa has become more
furtive and extensive, The independence of Angola and
Mozambique and the courageous and honourable decision
taken by Mozambique to close its border with Southern
Rhodesia caused the Smith regime to find itself with only
one outlet to the outside world, namely through South
Africa, whose Prime Minister has committed himself to
extending all assistance and encouragement to the racist
Smith regime.

97. At the beginning of this year, the Security Council
meets to discuss another flagrant and vicious act of
aggression committed by the illegal racist minority regime
in Rhodesia against an independent African State, Botswana, member of the Organization of African Unity and
Member of the United Nations.
98. This latest act of aggression committed by the illegal
minority Smith regime against Botswana occurred between
17 and 19 December 1976. I should like to mention that
this is not the first act of aggression committed by Smith’s
regime against Botswana but one of more than 30 violations
against the territorial sovereignty of that State. It is of great
importance at this point to refer to the following statement
made by the Vice-President of Botswana in the HOUSO of
ParBament on 17 December. He said:
“Since
territorial

103. The question under discussion is very clear. It is a
serious complaint from a Member State confronted by and
subjected to frequent and vicious violations of its territorial
sovereignty by the illegal minority regime which came to
power through extortion more than 11 years ago in
Zimbabwe. The Security Council and the General Assembly
have made many decisions and have adopted many resolutions in an attempt to put an end to that regime and it is
reasonable to assume that, had all Member States acted to

27 December 1966, 31 violations of our
sovereignty by members of the Rhodesian
10

enforce those resolutions, we should no longer be called
upon to listen to distressing complaints about the acts of
terror and aggression committed by the illegal Smith r&me
of Southern Rhodesia.

109. I cannot fail to congratulate my Latin American
colleague, Ambassador Jackson of Guyana, for his brilliant
performance in this Council as a representative of Latin
America during the previous period.

104. With regard to the continual criminal acts of aggression committed by the regime of Ian Smith against the
Republic of Botswana and other countries in the region, in
blatant defiance of the many resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and in defiance of world
public opinion, my delegation urges the Security Council:
first, to take all appropriate measures to put an end to the
illegal minority regime in Zimbabwe and to give the people
of Zimbabwe the right to self-determination and independence; secondly, to condemn the racist regime strongly for
its aggression against the Republic of Botswana and to give
all support and assistance to the Government of Botswana
in order to protect its sovereignty and its people from any
aggressionlikely to be committed in the future by the racist
minority regimes in the area; and, thirdly, to call upon
those States which have not done so to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly concerning sanctions against the illegal re’gime in
Southern Rhodesia and, in view of the fact that the Vorster
regime blatantly defies world public opinion and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, to expand those
sanctions to include the racist regime of South Africa.

110. I represent a small country of the third world which
felt no hesitation in accepting membership in the Council
for the years 1977 and 1978, for we never had any doubt
of our peaceful vocation and becausewe are convinced that
it is only by means of conciliation and peace that our
peoples can progress. We are a country without conflicts.
We come to the Council to make a contribution which will
no doubt be modest but also no doubt valuable: a
contribution of goodwill and candour. We are committed to
the cause of international justice and for that cause we are
and shall be militant.

105. In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm that my
country, the Libyan Arab Republic, pledges to support any
effective and relevant action that will be taken by the
Security Council against the illegal minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia, and will spare no effort to ensure its
support for the peoples of Botswana, Zimbabwe and
Mozambique in their noble struggle against the racist
minority regime of Southern Rhodesia.

111. We are meeting for the first time in 1977 to consider
a problem of Africa, a problem which is not exclusive to
Botswana nor to Africa since, in fact, it concerns us all.
Since its accession to independence, Botswana has demonstrated that it is a friendly and peaceful country and one
with countless difficulties, the greatest of which is undoubtedly that of being surrounded by the countries in
Africa practising apartheid. Until Namibia obtains its
independence and present conditions in Rhodesia and
South Africa are changed, the situation of Botswana will
remain complex and difficult.
112. At a time when the idea has spread and gained
ground throughout the world that the illegal regime of Ian
Smith is sincerely prepared to accept the course of
negotiations-the only possible course for the Prime Minister and those he represents-we are faced with evidence
such as that submitted to the Council by the Permanent
Representative of Botswana and that contained in the
statement just made to us by the Minister for External
Affairs of Botswana, indicating the opposite. They show
that Mr. Smith has not abandoned the idea of the use of
force. This is certainly disturbing, becausewe wish for the
people of Zimbabwe democratically to recover its rights
and exercise them without interference.

106. Since Ambassador Scranton is likely to leave the
Council next week and since this is probably the last time
that I shall be speaking here before his departure, I should
like to tell him that we wish him alI successand happiness
in whatever activities he undertakes in the future. My
delegation has been impressed by the qualities he has
shown. He has won our admiration. His honest and
unimposing manner, his integrity and, above all, his sincere
efforts will always be remembered.

113. We express the hope that the Security Council will
fmd suitable means of solving the issuesexplained by the
Minister for External Affairs of Botswana, to whom we
extend our sympathy and solidarity. I shall speak again in
the debate should it be necessaryand should my delegation
deem it appropriate.

107. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic for
his kind wishes to me and for what he said about my
country. I entirely share his assessment of the friendly
relations between our two countries.

114. Lastly, I wish to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for your words of welcome to our delegation
to the Security Council and for your cordial reference to
the visit of the President of Venezuela to the Soviet Union,
as well as to the joint communique which was then signed
by our two countries. I feel that, starting with that visit and
that communique, the relations betweenVenezuela and the
Soviet Union will become ones of friendly co-operation and
mutual respect.

108. Mr. CONSALVI (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): The Security Council is meeting for the first time
in 1977 to consider an item of concern to Africa and,
consequently, also of concern to Latin America. Since this
is the first statement I have made on behalf of Venezuela, I
consider it opportune to welcome you, Mr. President and,
in particular, to mention the coincidence of your arrival
among us with your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We consider this to be a sign of the fruitful times
which are beginning for you in New York.

115. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I
thank the representative of Venezuela for the kind and
generous way in which he referred to me personally and to
the relations between our two countries.
The meetingrose at 5.15 p.m.
11

Unitad
Nations
Publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adresser-vous
A : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
JCAK

JIOJW’IHTb

COMO

Litho

In United

Nations,

CONSEGUIR

IiBflAHNIi

OPIYAHH

PUBLICACIONES

3AlJ&f&i

DE

LAS

OD’bEaNHEHHhIX

NACIONES

HAllHa

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

New York

in other

Price: $U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

70001-April

1977-2,20dT ,..
