S/2014/579

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 August 2014
Original: English

Letter dated 8 August 2014 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
agreed to send a mission to Europe and Africa from 8 to 14 Augus t 2014. The
mission plans to visit Belgium, the Netherlands, South Sudan, Somalia and Kenya.
The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the mission,
which are annexed hereto.
Several members will co-lead the different legs of the mission. In Belgium, I
will be co-leading the mission with Mr. Michael Bliss. In the Netherlands,
Ambassador Cristián Pedro Barros Melet and Mr. Olivier Jean Michel Maes will be
co-leading. In South Sudan, Ambassador Samantha Power and Ambassador Eugene
Richard Gasana will be co-leading the mission and in Somalia I will be co-leading
the mission with Ambassador Usman Sarki.
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Mr. Mario Oyarzábal (Argentina)
Mr. Michael Edward Bliss (Australia)
Ambassador Mahamat Zene Cherif (Chad)
Ambassador Cristián Pedro Barros Melet (Chile)
Mr. Zhao Yong (China)
Mr. Alexis Lamek (France)
Ambassador Dina Kawar (Jordan)
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė (Lithuania)
Mr. Olivier Jean Michel Maes (Luxembourg)
Ambassador Usman Sarki (Nigeria)
Ambassador Oh Joon (Republic of Korea)
Mr. Alexander Pankin (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana (Rwanda)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland)
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Mark Lyall Grant
President of the Security Council
14-58995 (E)

130814

*1458995*

S/2014/579

Annex
Security Council mission to Europe and Africa: terms of reference
Belgium
Co-leads: Australia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
To commemorate the centenary of the First World War. To pay tr ibute to the
sacrifices of all those who served their country during that war.
To draw lessons from the First World War to assist the Security Council in
discharging its mandate in maintaining international peace and security. To engage
in discussions with representatives of civil society and academic institutions on the
tools that the Council could deploy to better prevent conflict and loss of civilian life
in situations of conflict.
To engage with the Government of Belgium on matters of mutual interest.
The Netherlands
Co-leads: Chile and Luxembourg
To underline the commitment of the Security Council to the international
courts and tribunals located in The Hague in the light of the common objective of
settling international disputes peacefully and establishing accountability for serious
international crimes.
To express the support of the Security Council for the work of the International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, to visit the
premises of the Court and to receive an update regarding its caseload and other
developments.
To reaffirm the relationship between the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court, to receive an update on the work of the Court and to discuss the
interaction between it and the Council.
To reaffirm the relationship between the Security Council and the international
criminal courts and tribunals located in The Hague and mandated by, or established
with the support of, the Council (the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon and the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone) and to get first -hand
updates on their activities and other developments.
To express gratitude to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) for its close collaboration with the United Nations, including
through the OPCW-United Nations Joint Mission, established to implement Security
Council resolution 2118 (2013) and eliminate the chemical weapons programme of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
To receive an update on progress in eliminating the chemical weapons
programme of the Syrian Arab Republic.
To engage on matters of mutual interest with the Govern ment of the
Netherlands.

2/5

14-58995

S/2014/579

South Sudan
Co-leads: United States of America and Rwanda
To convey its deep alarm regarding the deteriorating political, security and
humanitarian crisis in South Sudan resulting from the internal Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement political dispute and the subsequent violence caused by the
country’s political and military leaders, and to condemn actions that perpetuate the
crisis.
To demand that all armed groups immediately cease all forms of violence,
including sexual violence, renounce force as a means of resolving political
grievances, comply with the cessation-of-hostilities agreement of 23 January 2014
and allow full access for the monitoring and verification teams of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IG AD).
To engage directly with all parties in the IGAD-led multi-stakeholder political
negotiations and to urge engagement in an open and fully inclusive national
dialogue seeking to establish lasting peace, reconciliation and good governance
through a transitional agenda and a government of national unity, including through
the full and effective participation of youth, women, diverse communities, faith
groups, civil society and formerly detained SPLM leaders.
To reiterate the serious concerns of the Security Council about the protection
of civilians, including foreign nationals, and to emphasize the need to protect
civilians under threat of physical violence, irrespective of the source of such
violence.
To reaffirm the support of the Security Council to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and to receive a briefing on the implementation of
Council resolution 2155 (2014), in particular as regards the reconfiguration of
UNMISS in response to a more focused peacekeeping mandate.
To assess the situation of the more than 1 million internally displaced persons,
including those seeking refuge in UNMISS compounds, to underscore the
seriousness of the humanitarian crisis, which may soon reach the thr eshold of
famine, and to advocate for the creation of the conditions necessary for the delivery
of humanitarian assistance, including the security and freedom of movement of
United Nations, humanitarian and associated personnel.
To express serious concern at persistent restrictions placed upon and
obstructions to the movement and operations of UNMISS, to strongly condemn the
attacks by government and opposition forces and other groups on United Nations
personnel and facilities and to call upon the Government of South Sudan to
complete its investigations of these attacks in a swift and thorough manner and hold
those responsible to account.
To emphasize that dismantling barriers to the full implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) will be achieved only through a dedicated
commitment to women’s empowerment, participation and human rights, and to
emphasize the importance of the full and effective participation of women at all
levels, including through providing support to women’s civil society organizations,
incorporating gender expertise in peace talks and increasing the deployment of
women in the military, police and civilian components of UNMISS.

14-58995

3/5

S/2014/579

To demand that all parties follow up on the commitments they recently made
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict.
Somalia
Co-leads: Nigeria and the United Kingdom
To recall the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political unity of Somalia.
To underline the support of the Security Council to the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia. To emphasize the support of the Council to the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). To get an update from
UNSOM on the implementation of its mandate, as set out in Council resolution 2158
(2014). To get an update on stabilization efforts in areas recovered from Al -Shabaab
control.
To express its gratitude to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
To receive an update on the implementation of Security Council resolution 2124
(2013), in particular on progress in the AMISOM and Somali nation al army’s
military campaign against Al-Shabaab. To receive progress reports on AMISOM
efforts towards reducing civilian casualties, including the establishment of a civilian
casualty tracking, analysis and response cell.
To receive an update from the Federal Government of Somalia on the
implementation of its requirements under the terms of the partial suspension of the
arms embargo, as set out in Security Council resolution 2142 (2014). To reiterate to
the Federal Government of Somalia that any decision on the continuation of the
partial suspension of the arms embargo shall be taken in view of its efforts to
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
To reiterate to the Federal Government of Somalia the urgent need for progress
in the development of a federal system, the review and implementation of the
Somali Provisional Federal Constitution and a clear plan for elections in 2016.
To reaffirm the important role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding. To get an update on the impact of the efforts of the
Federal Government of Somalia to promote increased representation of women at all
decision-making levels in Somali institutions.
To underscore the concern of the Security Council at the ongoing incidence of
sexual violence in Somalia. To highlight the support of the Council for, and get an
update on, the action plan of the Federal Government of Somalia to end sexual
violence, as well as the plan for implementing the joint communiqué of the Federal
Government of Somalia and the United Nations on the prevention of sexual
violence. To get an update on the work done by the United Nations to assist in
preventing and responding to sexual and gender-based violence, including the
strengthening of the justice and security sectors.
To reaffirm the importance of the swift and full implementation of the action
plan of the Federal Government of Somalia to end and prevent the recruitment and
use of children by the Somali national armed forces as well as the action plan to end
the killing and maiming of children, both signed in 2012.

4/5

14-58995

S/2014/579

To reiterate its deep concern at the humanitarian situation in Somalia. To get a
better understanding of some of the challenges in delivering h umanitarian assistance
and ways in which the international community can assist.
To underline the enduring support of the Security Council for greater peace
and stability in Somalia, and to all actors working on the ground to this end.
Kenya
To engage on matters of mutual interest with the Government of Kenya.

14-58995

5/5
