S/2018/293

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 April 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 32 of Security Council
resolution 2386 (2017), in which the Council requested to be informed of progress in
implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) and to have any serious violations of all applicable agreements brought to
its immediate attention. It also provides an update on the status of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. It covers the period since the issuance of my
previous report (S/2017/870), from 17 October 2017 to 29 March 2018.

II. Abyei
Security situation
2.
Over the reporting period, the security situation in the Abyei Area was generally
stable but remained unpredictable. The onset of the dry season and migration into the
Abyei Area of the Misseriya began in mid-October, two weeks earlier than usual due
to a lack of rain during the wet season, forcing the seasonal moveme nt of livestock to
start earlier. To facilitate the southward migration, UNISFA started its switch from
wet to dry season deployment in mid-October 2017 by erecting temporary operating
bases at Um Khariet in Sector North, Alal, Donguop and Madington in Sec tor Centre
and Agany Toak in Sector South, to cover potential migration flash points. UNISFA
controlled the migration corridors and dominated the areas through tactical
deployments in flash points and through short, medium and long-range patrols. In
addition, to enhance the mission’s visibility and reach across the Abyei Area, ground
patrols were supplemented by weekly aerial patrols in areas of suspected armed group
activity. UNISFA also supported existing early warning grass-roots structures, namely
the joint security committees and the joint peace committee, to minimize the
possibility of migration-related inter-community violence. Some 34 meetings of the
joint security committees were held in all three sectors to provide early warning.
3.
Reports by the local population indicating the presence of unidentified armed
groups in the vicinity of Athony, Maluak Agak, Agany Toak, Noong, Rumajak and
Shamam were followed up by UNISFA troops, as both a preventive and a deterrent
measure. On 1 December, UNISFA arrested two armed Misseriya men attempting to
rob a shop in Shamam, Sector North. On 4 December, in an armed attack by
unidentified individuals at Rumajak, Sector Centre, two civilians were injured. On
9 January, nine bandits, believed to be members of an arme d group attempting to rob

18-04697 (E)

060418

*1804697*

S/2018/293

civilians and United Nations personnel, surrendered to the Diffra oil police in Sector
North. On 13 January, unknown armed men attacked a civilian vehicle at Rumamier,
Sector South, injuring the Ngok Dinka driver.
4.
Acts of violence also occurred near the Amiet common market, which continues
to attract displaced persons from South Sudan seeking economic opportunities. On
26 November, a Dinka man attempting to rob the shop of a Misseriya trader was
stabbed and killed by the shop owner. On 22 January, another Dinka man was injured
under similar circumstances. On 24 January, a Misseriya man was apprehended with
a hand grenade in the common market. On 19 January, in a brawl following a
disagreement over a cattle transaction between me mbers of both communities, four
individuals were injured, and the market was closed. A separate cattle rustling
incident in eastern Abyei Area, in which Ngok Dinka men rustled 107 cattle belonging
to the Misseriya, aggravated tensions. The common market only resumed operation
on 1 February, once 39 of the stolen cows were recovered by the Ngok Dinka
community, assisted by UNISFA, and returned to their owner. Three cattle rustlers
were apprehended and handed over to the community protection committee for
prosecution.
5.
In pursuit of its mandate to provide security across the Abyei Area, the Mission
patrolled the entire expanse of the area. UNISFA was denied freedom of movement
on a handful of occasions. On 23 January, a Mine Action Service (UNMAS) team
conducting a route assessment patrol along the Athony-Awang Thou-Lort route was
stopped at a checkpoint in Awang Thou by Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
soldiers. On 25 January, UNISFA returned to the SPLA checkpoint, accompanied by
SPLA national monitors who form part of the Joint Military Observation Committee,
to ascertain that the SPLA presence was indeed within the southern limits of Abyei
Area. A global positioning system confirmed this. On 2 February, another UNISFA
patrol was stopped by unarmed locals who claimed that the area was in Twic State
and not part of Abyei Area. In a separate development, on 25 January, UNMAS, on a
route assessment patrol, was informed by locals of a Sudanese Armed Forces
checkpoint along the Diffra-Shamam-Um Khaer route close to the northern limit of
the Abyei Area. A follow-up UNISFA patrol dispatched on 29 January to investigate
the allegation did not find any evidence of such presence.
6.
The Ngok Dinka community in Abyei town protested outside UNISFA
headquarters on 18 December and 23 January. Some 400 persons attended the
18 December demonstration. Numbers swelled to 2,000 for the 23 January
demonstration, which was led by the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief, Bulabek Deng
Kuol. On both occasions, a petition was handed over to UNISFA, which, inter alia,
complained about the perceived negative impact on local employment of the
implementation of a new camp management services contract. UNISFA movement
through the main gate was obstructed for a few hours on both occasions. UNIS FA met
several times with the local chiefs and representatives of individual contractors to
address their concerns and explain the situation.
7.
Despite those efforts, on 11 February, all exit gates at UNISFA headquarters
were blocked by members of the local community, which immobilized all but the
critical activities of the mission and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.
Once again, UNISFA engaged extensively with the traditional chiefs, and the
blockade was lifted some 60 hours later, on 13 February. However, individual
contractors and national staff continued to stay away from work until 18 February for
fear of retribution by the local community. One international staff member was
temporarily relocated to Kadugli on 15 February.

2/14

18-04697

S/2018/293

Local level peace process
8.
UNISFA has enhanced its role in fostering intercommunal dialogue through
logistical support to joint peace committee meetings in Abyei town, Dokura, Amiet,
Todach, Leu and Marial Achak. The logistics of joint peace committee meetings were
sustained by an international non-governmental organization. As funding from its
main donor was discontinued, so were its activities. UNISFA has since taken on the
role of supporting the committee and its weekly meetings. During these meetings,
community representatives have agreed on ways to address issues affecting peace and
harmony, including criminal activities, and agreed on modalities of payment of
compensation to victims or their families. On 14 December 2017, Ngok Dinka
representatives compensated a Misseriya pastoralist for the theft of 10 of his cows in
January 2017. To date, the Misseriya have paid compensation for 10 of 21 Ngok Dinka
victims. Conversely, the Ngok Dinka have paid compensation for 3 of 14 Misseriya
victims killed over the past year.
9.
UNISFA support to such grass-roots committees has created an environment
conducive to the continued growth of the Amiet common market. The market attracts
commerce not only from within Abyei Area but also from neighbouring areas in the
Sudan and South Sudan. UNISFA continues to provide security to the market and its
environs, while United Nations police assists the market committee with law and
order. The number of vendors and market goers continues to rise, as does the number
of displaced persons from South Sudan seeking employment opportunities there.
10. Ngok Dinka traditional leaders have advised UNISFA of growing tensions
between them and their neighbours to the south, the Twic Dinka, owing to a
longstanding land issue within the Abyei Area. Tensions have also arisen due to
reports that some Twic Dinka and Misseriya were developing an economic corridor
that would pass through the western fringes of the Abyei Area, with a view to
circumventing the Ngok Dinka, and developing a market that would compete with the
Amiet common market.
11. Hostilities have been on the rise between the Misseriya and the Nuer. From 16
to 17 February, 32 Misseriya were reportedly killed at Kadama to the east of and
outside of Abyei Area by Nuer from Mayom county, South Sudan. The killings were
linked to an incident of aggravated cattle rustling. As the victims are related to those
migrating through Abyei Area, reconciliation efforts are being undertaken by the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
12. UNISFA has supported peacebuilding activities, and a peacebuilding working
group comprising relevant UNISFA and United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes staff was re-established on 20 February, after a two-year hiatus. Chaired
by UNISFA and the Resident Coordinator Office, the working group focused on
strengthening synergies in such areas of mutual interest as gender, reconciliation,
migration and traditional justice.
13. With regard to traditional justice, UNISFA visited community protection
committee detention facilities to assess the holding conditions of detainees, the
management of existing facilities and the offences for which detainees were charged
and convicted. The assessment revealed that facilities were understaffed and that the
personnel were unqualified, rendering procedures inapplicable, and prolonging
pretrial detention, owing to an inability to conduct investigations and bring offenders
to trial in a timely manner. Engagement with the Juba-appointed Abyei chief
prosecutor in charge of carrying out investigations for both civil and criminal offences
was limited, as UNISFA cannot interact with unilaterally appointed public
administration bodies. From 1 to 3 March, a workshop on traditional justice specific
to the Ngok Dinka community, led by United Nations agencies, funds and programme,

18-04697

3/14

S/2018/293

took place in Abyei town. UNISFA intends to facilitate a similar workshop in the
coming weeks in the northern part of Abyei, as well as a joint workshop between both
communities.
14. An intercommunity pre-migration conference jointly organized by the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the World Food Programme, with
UNISFA support, scheduled to take place at the UNISFA company operation base in
Todach from 6 to 8 February, was postponed twice owing to the reluctance of the
Ngok Dinka and Misseriya representatives to participate. The conference was
eventually held from 3 to 5 March, with the participation of more than 100 Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya, including women and children. Participants agreed on a number
of conclusions that were reached with regard to regulating the relations between the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinkain the areas of security, the settlement of disputes and
social justice. UNISFA provided logistical and security support for the conference.
15. With a view to enhancing community engagement and building local support,
UNISFA completed 8 of 25 quick impact projects in support of livelihoods and basic
humanitarian, social and development needs. All such projects, which are selected
based on geographic and thematic priorities, were expected to be finalized by late
May.
Political developments
16. UNISFA continued to engage with the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan, as did the African Union High-level Implementation Panel and the Office of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan, on the
need for both parties to fully implement agreements related to Abyei Area and their
common border. The UNISFA Acting Head of Mission and Force Commander held
meetings in Khartoum with senior officials of the Sudanese Ministry for Foreign
Affairs on 30 November 2017 and with military intelligence officials on 25 February.
In Juba, on 30 January, he met with Minister for Foreign Affairs Deng Alor Kwol and
high-ranking officials, including the head of the Abyei file negotiations committee
and the co-chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee, South Sudan. During these
meetings, UNISFA reiterated the need to establish joint institutions in Abyei Area,
without which Abyei Area would continue to operate in a vacuum in terms of
administration and the rule of law, a circumstance prejudicial to its development and
the livelihood of its people. UNISFA emphasized that such institutions could also
prevent or address unilateral action by either side, such as the start of commercial
flights at the Agok airstrip on 19 November 2017, which would better be addressed
jointly.
17. Discussions also focused on the need for sustained cooperation and on the need
to dispel perceptions of UNISFA bias towards either of the two parties. In this regard,
taking into consideration the need for impartiality, existing rules and regulations and
security considerations, UNISFA was obliged to decline a request to transport
Minister Deng Alor Kwol and a delegation of 34 members on a UNISFA flight on
3 January to accompany the remains of Ambassador Kuol Alor Kuol, the late South
Sudanese representative to the United Nations Office in Geneva, from Wau, South
Sudan, to Abyei.
18. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee held its tenth ordinary session under
African Union auspices in Addis Ababa on 13 November 2017. During the meeting,
agreement could not be reached on the inclusion in the agenda of the issue of the
Abyei Area Administration. The new Co-Chair of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee for South Sudan, Mr. Deng Arop, argued that the Committee was a
supervisory institution to oversee joint institutions but that the latter could only be
established by the two presidents, not by the Committee. Since the issue of Abyei did
4/14

18-04697

S/2018/293

not feature in the 1 November presidential summit, there is a continued deadlock over
the question of joint institutions. In a press release issued on 24 November, the
African Union Commission called for resolution of the matter prior to the next
Committee meeting. The next Committee meeting, which was to be held by
mid-February, had yet to be convened as at the time of publication of the present
report.
19. In a positive development, on 14 November 2017, the traditional chiefs of the
Misseriya and Ngok Dinka communities met in Addis Ababa. The meeting had been
called for during an Abyei Joint Oversight Committee meeting held in March 2015.
UNISFA facilitated the travel of the Ngok Dinka traditional chiefs from Abyei to J uba
to attend the meeting. Both sides called for the release of the report of the Abyei Area
Joint Investigation and Inquiry Committee on the killing of the Ngok Dinka
Paramount Chief on 4 May 2013, and urged that, upon the release of the report, the
African Union engage with the affected communities and families to promote peace
and reconciliation. The traditional leaders also agreed on the establishment of a fund
to compensate victims of attacks and rustling. They further underscored the need for
economic regeneration, including joint access to the proceeds of oil revenues from
Abyei Area, in line with the Abyei Protocol to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
of 2005. They also expressed their full support for maintaining the common market
in Amiet.
20. The Abyei Joint Oversight Committee co-chair of the Sudan, Hassan Ali Nimir,
also paid a visit to northern Abyei from 3 to 10 March, where he addressed some 150
locals from surrounding areas at a meeting in Diffra and oversaw the renewal of some
population councils in northern Abyei, whose main task was to mediate disputes at
the local level and fill the administrative vacuum in the area.
Police and Mine Action Service activities
21. In the absence of an Abyei police service, United Nations police continue d to
provide advice and mentoring on law and order and effective policing to community
protection committees and the joint peace committee at the Amiet common market,
ensuring that the committees adhere to international standards and human rights when
executing law and order duties in accordance with Security Council resolution 2205
(2015). In addition to the five team sites at Abyei, Banton, Agok, Todach and Diffra,
on request of the communities, United Nations police plan to establish three team
sites, in Tajalei, Goli and Marial Achack, to address issues related to law and order,
in conjunction with the local community. The United Nations police have conducted
a total of 1,540 community interactive patrols during the reporting period and, on
27 November, trained 51 Agok community protection committee members, including
seven females, on law and order duties. Two crime awareness campaigns were
conducted in Noong and Tajalei, and three traffic awareness campaigns were held in
Ajok, Diffra and the Amiet common market.
22. In preparation for the eventual establishment of an Abyei police service, the
United Nations police, in conjunction with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and the traditional leaders of both communities, conducted a mapping
exercise in the Abyei Area from 30 November 2017 to 2 February 2018 to identify
potential areas in which to establish Abyei police stations and prisons. The
Government of the Sudan raised objections to that endeavour. In the meeting with the
military intelligence of the Sudan on 25 February, the UNISFA Acting Head of
Mission and Force Commander clarified that the exercise was merely preparatory
work for the Abyei police service being formed as per the signed agreements.
23. The United Nations police continued to implement its gender-related activities
with the communities, conducting 13 sexual and gender-based violence awareness
18-04697

5/14

S/2018/293

campaigns, covering sexual exploitation and abuse, domestic violence, child
marriage, forced marriage and child abuse. The United Nations police will continue
to promote gender awareness in coordination with the gender affairs officer.
24. In line with the UNISFA mandate to ensure freedom of movement and the
identification and clearance of mines in the Abyei Area and the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone, UNMAS verified that 358 kilometres (km) of priority routes and
389,068 square metres of land were safe from explosive hazards. These routes allow
UNISFA to deploy to additional temporary operating bases in the dry season as part
of the strengthening of its military presence of the area. Non-technical survey and
mine risk education activities in various communities led to the identification and
destruction of 23 explosive remnants of war, one anti-tank mine, one anti-personnel
fragmentation mine and two units of small arms ammunition. UNMAS has also
destroyed 8 rifles and 209 small arms at the UNISFA weapons storage site. Mine risk
education messages were delivered to 12,008 men, women, boys a nd girls living in
the Abyei Area, including nomadic herdsmen and returnees, and to 468 UNISFA
troops, military observers and United Nations police officers.
Humanitarian situation
25. Humanitarian and recovery needs remained significant in the Abyei Area
because of population movements, intercommunal tensions and lack of basic public
services. The challenging economic situation in the Sudan and South Sudan has
further affected the area. The United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
non-governmental organizations assisted approximately 170,000 vulnerable people
across all sectors in the Abyei Area, including 80,000 people from the Ngok Dinka
community, 15,000 Ngok Dinka displaced within the Abyei Area, 11,000 people
displaced from neighbouring Unity State and Warrap State in South Sudan, 29,000
Misseriya who remained back in Abyei Area during the rainy season and 35,000
seasonal Misseriya migrants who entered the area in October 2017 and are expected
to return in mid-2018. An estimated 10,000 persons displaced by conflict in South
Sudan transited through Abyei Area, at an average of 2,500 people per month, to reach
destinations in the Sudan. Their transit was monitored by IOM at the Amiet common
market and Diffra, with some receiving limited basic assistance.
26. Over 80,000 vulnerable people benefited from various food -assistance-related
activities, mainly through food for assets programmes, in central and southern parts
of Abyei. In addition, a total of 6,192 vulnerable displaced people from Unit y State
in South Sudan have benefited from general food distribution. Meanwhile, 22,000
students, enrolled in 27 schools, received daily school meals. Efforts to support
community livelihoods and recovery activities benefited both Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities as well as displaced persons. Activities included refresher
training of community animal health workers; the vaccination and treatment of
approximately 200,000 livestock belonging to both the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya
communities; support to agricultural production through the distribution of seeds and
tools, coupled with specific training sessions; the construction of a market in Abathok,
in Sector South, and of three grinding mills, two community halls and a vegetable
garden; and the implementation of a pilot community-based shelter project for some
120 households in the Kolom returnee village in southern Abyei Area.
27. Integrated primary health-care and nutrition services, including routine
immunization and the provision of essential drugs, continued in the 14 health
facilities, including the two hospitals in Abyei and Agok towns. A clinic in Goli,
Sector North, was constructed and will be operational soon, as the fifth clinic in the
northern Abyei Area. Meanwhile, the nutrition screening and programming support
for patients with moderate and acute malnutrition continued under the targeted
supplementary feeding programme throughout Abyei Area. The targeted
6/14

18-04697

S/2018/293

supplementary feeding programme covered a monthly average of 7,000 children
under five years of age and pregnant and lactating women across the Abyei Area. In
addition, awareness-raising and capacity-building activities were conducted,
including on-the-job training for clinical staff and health awareness sessions.
28. In northern Abyei Area, the supply of safe water to the communities and
seasonal migrants remains a challenge. Existing hand pumps were upgraded to mini
solar-powered water yards at eight locations; seven new hand pumps/boreholes were
drilled; and three water yards and 38 hand pumps were repaired, benefiting some
30,000 people. Other major activities included the construction of school ablution
facilities; training of water user committees and counterparts in water management;
the maintenance of solar-powered water yards; the distribution of hygiene kits to
school children; the construction of 220 household latrines in sites for displaced
persons and communities in Agok, Sector South. However, with a limited law
enforcement system, vandalism and theft of solar systems and water faci lities
equipment were rampant.
29. The absence of formal authority structures in the Abyei Area poses additional
challenges in carrying out and coordinating humanitarian and recovery activities. It
raises questions regarding the sustainability of basic se rvices, including the running
of schools and health facilities. Similarly, in the absence of rule of law structures,
women and children are exposed to risks of violence, exploitation and abuse. While
humanitarian organizations working in the area have limited capacity, community
expectations are high. Considering these challenges, UNISFA and United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes are endeavouring to attract donor attention to Abyei
Area to overcome the deficit of governmental investment.
Administrative aspects and mission support
30. As at 25 March, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,492 personnel
(4,287 troops, 79 military observers and 109 staff officers), against an authorized
ceiling of 4,791. The UNISFA police component stood at 39 offi cers (27 men and
12 women), of an authorized total of 50, which is the highest number deployed since
the mission was established in 2011. The number of civilian staff stood at 140
international, 32 United Nations Volunteers and 75 national staff, against a n
authorized total of 161 international, 33 United Nations Volunteers and 89 national
staff posts. The Government of the Sudan issued 175 visas for UNISFA personnel
during the reporting period, while 50 visas remained pending for five international
staff members, 9 military personnel, two United Nations police and 32 contractors. In
an unfortunate incident, on 3 February, three national staff and two individual
contractors employed at the UNISFA logistics base in Kadugli lost their lives in a
road traffic accident near El Obeid, Sudan.
31. The mission continued to upgrade the infrastructure and environmental
installations at all camps. Prefabricated buildings that were no longer fit for purpose
owing to age and degradation were replaced at seven company oper ating bases. The
conversion of the Noong temporary operating base into a permanent operating base
was completed. Site preparation works at the expansion site at the mission
headquarters and the improvement of living conditions in the Abyei Camp are 90 per
cent complete.
32. With regard to environmental and hygiene issues, of the 36 planned wastewater
treatment plants for all UNISFA bases, 18 have been installed. It is anticipated that
all will be installed by 30 June 2018. The mission currently relies on in dividual
contractors for the operation and maintenance of these plants, which has left the
mission exposed owing to lack of adequate skills or accountability framework. A more
effective operation of this critical plant equipment depends on the implementati on of
18-04697

7/14

S/2018/293

a camp services contract, which has been delayed owing to resistance from the local
community in Abyei, as reported in paragraphs 6 and 7 above. The mission is actively
engaged with the local community and other stakeholders in order to resolve the i ssue.
33. UNISFA continued to operate four helicopters and three fixed -wing aircraft. Of
the 101 missions undertaken during the reporting period, 27 were aerial patrols of the
Abyei Area, 41 were patrols by the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, 14 were rotation flights in support of the Mechanism and 5 were air
support to the African Union border team for the marking of crossing points between
the Sudan and South Sudan. Until 31 December, the Mission shared the costs of one
of its aircraft with the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Furthermore, UNISFA is following
up on the Secretary-General’s initiative for effective and efficient aviation operations,
and will share one regional jet aircraft with UNMISS in the 2018/19 financial year.
The mission continued to receive ground-handling support from the contracted
services providers of MONUSCO in Entebbe, Uganda, and the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in Khartoum. During the reporting period, the
mission completed the rotation of 1,110 force protection unit troops of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (557 inbound and 553 outbound) and
the transportation of 65 tons of inbound and outbo und troops’ luggage through
Kadugli airport. All of the luggage was transported by road between Kadugli and
Abyei, as the Government of the Sudan continues to withhold permission for use of
the 90 per cent completed airstrip at Athony, Sector South. This i ncreases the strain
on air assets. Overall, the mission transported a total of 4,296 passengers, 58.5 tons
of luggage and 146.7 tons of cargo by air, and 2,158 tons of cargo by road.

III. Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
34. Since my last report on 17 October 2017, the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism has made significant progress. Its activities have been
reinvigorated by the commitment made by the two sides in their joint letter to the
President of the Security Council of 24 September, in which the two ministers for
foreign affairs assured the Council of mutual cooperation in implementing resolutions
1990 (2011) of 27 June 2011 and 2352 (2017) of 15 May 2017. In a letter dated
23 October, the African Union Commission Chairperson, Moussa Faki Mahamat,
wrote to the Secretary-General reiterating the African Union’s appreciation for the
support extended by the United Nations to UNISFA and the Mechanism. He
emphasized that any steps that altered the current arrangements related to UNISFA
and the Mechanism could have serious implications on the ground and for wider
regional stability. He also stated that efforts were under way to urgently convene an
extraordinary session of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism later that month.
35. On 31 October, an ordinary session of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism was held in Khartoum in preparation for a high -level meeting of
Presidents Al-Bashir and Kiir. Both sides agreed to immediately reactivate the
Mechanism and the joint security committee and to redeploy their forces out of the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. The following day, on 1 November, in a summit
meeting between the two presidents, held in Khartoum, they agreed to strengthen
relations and renewed their commitment to the implementation of all the cooperation
agreements signed in September 2012.
36. As regards the ordinary Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting, the
next meeting slated for 8 January 2018 was postponed. An extraordinary session was
convened by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel in Addis Ababa on
4 February. The delegation of South Sudan was led by the Minister of Defence and

8/14

18-04697

S/2018/293

Veterans’ Affairs, while the Sudan was represented by the Chief of Joint Staff of the
Sudanese Armed Forces. During this meeting, UNISFA shared details of the progress
made by the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and of are as in
which further efforts by both parties were urgently needed. The Mechanism recalled
that, shortly after the Joint Political and Security Mechanism meeting in late October,
UNISFA received the notification from both sides that the Safe Demilitarized Bo rder
Zone had been vacated. UNISFA also stated that there were two ongoing ground
missions within the Zone, at Safahah/Kiir Adem and Tishwin respectively,
representing encouraging steps by both sides to support UNISFA and the Mechanism.
However, the redeployment of military presences out of the Zone had not taken place
in the Tishwin area, where the presence of troops of the two sides were barely
600 metres apart.
37. The meeting also focused on the redeployment of forces outside the SDBZ, the
operationalization of the team sites, border crossing points, the marking of the
centreline of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, the activation of the ad hoc
committee for the 14 Mile Area and reports of the presence of unknown forces in nine
locations north of the Zone. The outcome document from this meeting included
specific actions to be taken and reported on at the next meeting, scheduled for
5 March, to be preceded by a meeting of the joint security committee held in Juba.
38. On 27 February, the seventh meeting of the joint security committee was held
in Juba. The meeting recognized that generally progress had been made in relation to
the withdrawal of forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. It called for the
establishment of a joint committee, with the participation of the African Union Border
Programme Technical Team, to work with UNISFA in verifying the redeployment of
SPLA and Sudanese Armed Forces from the Zone within 15 days and recommended
that the Joint Political and Security Mechanism expedite th e process of determining
the exact coordinates of the border crossing points with the Technical Team no later
than 15 March.
39. The first meeting of the ad hoc committee of the 14 Mile Area, facilitated by
UNISFA, was held on 27 February at Gok Machar. Two representatives of the
Sudanese Armed Forces and three from SPLA took part, along with two UNISFA
members. They discussed operational matters and formulated the draft terms of
reference of the committee, which were approved by the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism on 5 March.
40. On 5 March, UNISFA attended the extraordinary session of the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism in Addis Ababa. The session was convened by the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and attended by the South Sudanese Minister
of Defence and the Sudanese State Minister of Defence. UNISFA briefed on the
progress achieved, inter alia, the status of redeployment of military troops out of the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone by the end of February, and shared satellite imagery
of eight locations of suspected military presence. It noted that they had received
assurances from South Sudan that these were not SPLA elements. UNISFA also
briefed on the challenges faced at the team sites. Both parties decided, inter alia, to
designate sites to mark crossing points by 20 March and to grant standing clearance
for all ground monitoring and verification patrols as well as helicopter landings within
the Zone. The next extraordinary meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism was to be held in April 2018.
41. The Security Council requirement that the two sides resume holding border
demarcation discussions has been met. The Joint Border Commission met in
November 2017 for the first time since September 2016, and the Joint Demarcation
Committee met in December 2017.

18-04697

9/14

S/2018/293

42. Also, on 19 February, in line with a decision of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, the African Union Border Programme invited UNISFA and UNMAS
officials to Khartoum to consult on preparations for the upcoming identification and
marking on the ground of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone centreline, its outer
limits and checkpoints at four border crossing corridors.
43. The border crossings to be opened in phase 1 were identified at a meeting held
on 20 February in Khartoum, convened by the African Union Border Programme
Technical Team and attended by the Joint Technical Border Co rridors Committee,
comprising technical experts from both sides. The border crossing corridors identified
were Kosti-Renk (both river and land), Panthou (Heglig)-Bentiu, Muglad-MeiramAweil and El Rodam Buram-Tumsaha-Raja. On 19 March, the African Union Border
Programme Technical Team, accompanied by the Joint Border Technical Crossings
Committee and the joint security committee, supported by UNISFA and UNMAS,
completed the marking of five points on the Bentiu-Heglig corridor of the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone. They established the outer limits to the north and south,
the centreline and two checkpoints for customs and immigratio n. The team marked
the corridor at Meiram-Aweil on 21 March and on 23 March, the team proceeded to
mark the Kosti-Renk corridor. While it successfully marked this northern limit, it was
prevented from marking the centre and southern limit by the Governor of Upper Nile
State.
Operations
44. On 15 November, the Security Council, in paragraph 2 of its resolution 2386
(2017), stipulated that the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism shall
be on its final extension unless the parties take the specific measures described in
paragraph 9 of the resolution. The paragraph calls for the two sides to deliver on the
outcomes of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism agreements reached in May
and October 2017 for the Security Council to renew the UNISFA mandate to support
the Mechanism. In paragraph 9, the Security Council called for full freedom of
movement for UNISFA air and ground patrols, the opening of the phase 1 border
crossing corridors, the holding of at least one meeting to resume border demarcation
discussions, the reactivation of the ad hoc committee of the 14 Mi le Area, the
operationalization of the four Mechanism team sites and the convening of at least two
meetings of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. Progress has been made on
each of these.
45. On 25 January, UNISFA and national monitors from the Sudanese Armed Forces
and SPLA departed from the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
headquarters, in Kadugli, on a ground patrol to establish and occupy a temporary team
site at Tishwin. On the same day, UNISFA and national monitors from the S udanese
Armed Forces and SPLA departed from Gok Machar to establish a temporary
Mechanism team site at Safahah. An initial attempt from both sector headquarters
locations on 31 December had been unsuccessful, owing to the presence of SPLA
elements in Safe Demilitarized Border Zone, who demanded that the ground
monitoring missions to return to respective bases. A Sudanese Armed Forces presence
was also sighted within the Zone at Tishwin, along with Sudanese oil police. In
January, UNISFA took up this denial of freedom of movement with the South
Sudanese authorities and was reassured that the local military commanders had been
informed of UNISFA operations.
46. On 26 January, the team site at Safahah was temporarily established further
north. On 6 February, UNMAS was compelled to suspend operations, as landing
permission was not received from either side. On 12 February, an effort was made to
relocate the team site southwards, but this was not possible, as the South Sudan
national monitor did not participate and as UNMAS had suspended operations
10/14

18-04697

S/2018/293

temporarily. To address the issue, during a visit to the team site, the Chief of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism ascertained that the Sudanese
national monitors wanted the team site to be relocated southwards into the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone, while the South Sudan side was adamant that since the
Zone was not demarcated, the location was deemed appropriate. The Sudanese senior
national monitor pointed out that a guarantee of security could no t be given at the
location since it was outside of the Zone on the Sudanese side. There were two
occasions in January when unidentified armed groups were sighted near the team site.
The disagreement over relocation of the team site, withdrawal of the natio nal
monitors and a potentially adverse security situation led to the team site being
withdrawn to Gok Machar on 23 February. On 23 March, the Joint Border Verification
Monitoring Mechanism conducted a ground patrol with the intent to establish the team
site south of the Kiir river, within the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. The local
population, backed by the administrator of Kiir Adem, blocked this attempt.
47. On 26 January, an attempt to establish the team site at the intended location in
Tishwin that had been surveyed by helicopter during a preliminary survey for an
appropriate location on 20 September, was unsuccessful, as the ground monitoring
mission was turned back by SPLA elements in the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone to
the immediate north of the centre-line on the Sudan side. The Sudanese Armed Forces
were found to be located 200 meters from the SPLA at Tishwin. The team site was
therefore set up away from the centreline. On 23 March, reconnaissance of the centre line did not establish the presence of Sudanese Armed Forces or SPLA troops in the
vicinity.
48. South Sudan agreed to withdraw the SPLA from Tishwin by 12 February.
However, UNISFA verification patrols from the Tishwin team site were unable to
verify withdrawal, as the SPLA national monitor at the team site refused to join the
patrol. The Chief of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, during
a visit to Tishwin on 19 February, ascertained from the South Sudanese national
monitors that they had not received clearance from Juba for joint patrols. Following
further engagement, on 18 March, the Tishwin team site conducted ground patrols to
the centreline of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. No military presence was
sighted.
49. On 21 March, the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
commenced the establishment of a temporary base at As Sumayah.
50. On 7 March, a Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism special
verification patrol in El Mgeins, Gerger and Goda reported the presence of military
camps and suspected military hardware and vehicles at El Mgeins and armed
personnel, a suspected mortar position and heavy artillery guns at Gerger. Another
military camp was also observed in the same area, with the presence of soldiers and
armoured vehicles. A special verification patrol by the Mechanism in the general area
of As Sumayah/War Guit was also conducted on 7 March. The area was found to be
stable, with no visible presence of armed elements. On 14 March, during an aerial
patrol by the Mechanism west of Safahah/Kiir Adem, a suspected military camp was
observed. During a verification patrol on 23 March, UNISFA could not confirm the
existence of the suspected military camp, as it was denied access to the area by the
local population and town administrator.
Financial aspects
51. The General Assembly, by its resolution 71/298 of 30 June 2017, appropriated
the amount of $266.7 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018. As at 16 March 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to
the Special Account for UNISFA amounted to $83.3 million. Total outstanding
18-04697

11/14

S/2018/293

assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
$2,672.8 million. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to
31 December 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment
has been made for the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule.
Observations and recommendations
52. The Abyei Area has continued to remain relatively stable and secure during the
reporting period, in large part thanks to the presence and activities of UNISFA.
UNISFA also facilitated access to and the delivery of humanitaria n aid. It has not
however been able to address certain issues beyond its remit, such as the withdrawal
of the Diffra oil police, which remain in place despite successive Security Council
resolutions calling for their withdrawal. Similarly, UNISFA has not b een able to
support the interim institutions, which have yet to be set up by the two sides. In this
regard, the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee and the Joint Military Observation
Committee are not functioning jointly as had been intended. Even though the A byei
Joint Oversight Committee is vested with oversight functions for joint institutions
that are not in place, its role must be expanded to help contend with issues related to
governance and law and order. Regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee would also be useful to address issues that, in the absence of a joint
administration, must be handled by UNISFA even though such a role is not in keeping
with its mandate.
53. The relatively stable situation on the ground has not generated forward
movement at the political level. Although there are grave political and economic
challenges that the two Governments continue to grapple with, the political status quo
between the parties on the issue of Abyei cannot be sustained or countenanced
indefinitely. I therefore call on the two Governments to undertake discussions at the
ministerial level to review the implementation of their cooperation agreements signed
in September 2012. A similar meeting on the agreement of 20 June 2011 would also
help advance the joint institutions or other mutually agreed interim arrangements. As
an interim step, taking advantage of the presence of UNISFA, I urge the two sides to
set up interim joint institutions and normalize border arrangements by opening border
crossing corridors and undertaking border demarcations.
54. I urge the Security Council to encourage the two parties to act expeditiously in
resolving their disputes and to use the opportunity of prevailing stability to make
progress on the final status of the Abyei Area. Addressing outstanding issues from the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement is necessary to unlock the status quo and make
further progress.
55. With regard to the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism,
UNISFA effectively supports the Mechanism through its monitoring, verification and
investigation activities. As I have noted in my report, the Mechanism has made
notable progress, as both Governments have put considerable effort into
implementing their agreements on the border. In fact, more prog ress has been made
during the previous five months on the operationalization of the Mechanism than in
the previous five years. This renewed momentum must be built upon and represents
a compelling argument for the extension of the mandate in support of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism beyond 15 April. Over the past few months,
both parties have been shown that they can and must work together. I therefore call
on the Security Council to recognize the efforts and the important steps taken by the
Sudan and South Sudan on their border and thus continue the support to this joint
mechanism. I recommend an extension of UNISFA support to the Mechanism at initial
operating capability for a further six months, making any future move to full operat ing

12/14

18-04697

S/2018/293

capability contingent upon the two countries’ ability and willingness to implement
progressively the outcomes of their border management discussions.
56. In addition, I have included UNISFA among the eight missions that are to be
subject to a comprehensive external review in order to inform the upcoming strategic
discussions in the Security Council. The review team visited Abyei and the wider
region from 5 to 19 March and assessed the underpinning assumptions and the scope
of the mandate, the conditions for its successful implementation and opportunities for
improved performance and innovative solutions, including whether there is an
achievable political solution and a viable exit strategy. Its findings will be presented
to the Council ahead of its discussions on the renewal of the mandate of UNISFA.
57. In conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude to the outgoing Acting Head of
Mission and Force Commander Major General Tesfay Gidey Hailemichael, under
whose tenure the Mission has implemented its mandate effectively, particularly with
regard to the operationalizing of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism. I am particularly grateful to all UNISFA staff for their forbearance in
face of the numerous challenges in Abyei Area and the Safe De militarized Border
Zone. Finally, I thank the partners of UNISFA from the agencies, funds and
programmes and from the African Union — in particular former Presidents Mbeki
and Abubakar of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel; my Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom; and the Government of
Ethiopia — for their tireless efforts to advance at the political level the peace process
in relation to both the Abyei and border issues.

18-04697

13/14

S/2018/293

14/14

18-04697
