United Nations

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6114

th meeting
Wednesday, 29 April 2009, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller/Mr. Puente . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Ms. Fofana
Ms. Li Xinyan
Mr. González
Ms. Kožar
Mr. Fieschi
Mr. Ashiki
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Lukiyantsev
Mr. Ünal
Mr. Muhumuza
Ms. Steele
Ms. Lavin
Ms. Nguyen Thi Thanh Ha

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-31740 (E)

*0931740*

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.20 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Armenia, Benin and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
request that this afternoon’s speakers kindly limit their
statements to a maximum of five minutes, taking into
account that we still have an extensive list of speakers
who would like to take the floor this afternoon.
On behalf of the members of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Her Excellency Ms. MarieAnge Lukinana Mufwankol, Minister of Gender,
Family and Children Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and give her the floor.
Ms. Mufwankol (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, first of all, let
me convey the warm congratulations of the Congolese
delegation for the effective way in which you are
directing the Council’s deliberations in this month of
April. I would like to thank you in particular for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on
children and armed conflict, the difficult subject that
we are debating today. In this regard, I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his very objective
and informative report (S/2009/158). My thanks go as
well to Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whom we had
the honour to receive in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for the presentation of her edifying report
on this subject, highlighting the obligation to put an
end to recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. Her visit and others, which have helped
advance the cause of women and children, have had
positive repercussions.

2

The theme of today’s meeting on violence against
children is of vital importance for our country, because
in this area the Democratic Republic of the Congo is in
the centre of the storm. The Democratic Republic is
coming out of a long political, social and economic
crisis that has been worsened by disastrous
consequences of the war of aggression and armed
conflict, with their stream of acute violence, in which
women and children, who have been massively
exposed, exploited and impoverished, have been the
primary victims.
Here, we would say specifically that increasingly,
the recruitment and abusive use of children is the effect
of both foreign and national armed groups belonging to
various rebel factions. We would also note that, for the
purposes of peace and national reconciliation, the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) itself, the regular Congolese army,
has been engaged in a long process of folding in large
waves of former rebels of all grades, even
commanders, since 2003.
Given the scope of the challenge, my delegation
would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the plea
regarding the need for effective support by the
international community in seeking a stable peace and
in promoting democracy, both in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in other countries in the
Great Lakes region and throughout the world.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158)
has edified us on progress made and on measures taken
by the parties with a view to eliminating grave
violations, which are nevertheless still continuing.
Concerned by this situation, the elected institutions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, led by
President Joseph Kabila, are doing everything they can
to put an end to these grave violations of the
fundamental rights of children.
Among the efforts made, one can cite the
promulgation in January 2009 of the statute to protect
children, which brings in international standards for the
protection of children and is a complement to the law
against sexual violence of 2006. We can also cite the
establishment of the Fund to Protect Children and
Promote Women, as well as the Agency for Combating
Violence against Women and Children. Also significant
are the reinforcement of the programme to fight
impunity and to help programmes for disarmament,

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration,
especially with respect to child soldiers.
Moreover, in a determined political will, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
through the Ministry of Gender, Family and Children
Affairs, has launched an appeal for a general
mobilization to combat violence and other violations of
human rights perpetrated against women and children.
In November 2008 this general mobilization was
expressed by the Campaign of Congolese Women at a
level of national outrage in the form of the petition
“Je dénonce” and in a gigantic protest march on
16 December. This message translated the essential
concern of Congolese women and children regarding
their right to life, peace, security, human dignity and
well-being.
All these efforts have been made possible thanks
primarily to the cooperation between my Government,
the United Nations system and other partners that
support
development.
We
therefore
support
implementation of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General as contained in the different reports
on children in armed conflict as well as
recommendations of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General. The programmes for disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation and reintegration and for
disarmament,
demobilization,
reintegration
and
resettlement or repatriation, both for national armed
groups and foreign groups, must continue and must be
brought to completion.
In order to put a real end to the agony of
Congolese children, my delegation can only reiterate
the position of Congolese women and children, which
calls for greater and more resolute involvement by the
Security Council to strengthen international solidarity
to build peace, territorial integrity and sovereignty in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It calls for the
complete eradication of foreign and national armed
groups, created by the poor management by all of the
international humanitarian corridor of 1994, whose
goals to save 1 million people’s lives following the
genocide were nevertheless noble. However, for the
peaceful innocent Congolese hosts, that corridor
became a conduit for exporting death, for the
widespread rape of children and women, for pillaging
national resources and for the prevalence of AIDS,
with a heavy toll of 5 million dead and 2 million
displaced, primarily women and children.

09-31740

We need the Security Council’s support for the
promotion
of
an
international
emergency
reconstruction plan for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo following the example of Marshall Plan, with
Congolese children and women as the main target.
Lastly, democracy needs to be promoted in the other
countries of the Great Lakes Region, and national and
intercommunity dialogues should be held, with a view
to eliminating latent conflicts in neighbouring
countries that are feeding destabilization of peace in
the subregion, resulting in the huge and cyclical
suffering of our respective populations.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to
thank you once again and the many other speakers for
their positive contributions towards lasting solutions
not only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo but
also for all countries concerned. For us, it is a question
of putting an end to war, impunity and the unspeakable
suffering of our populations and, in particular, of
children in areas of conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Minister for her important statement, which I am
certain all members of the Council have noted.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Chile.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening a debate on the
important topic of children in armed conflict. I would
like to express my support for your country on account
of the difficult time that it is currently experiencing.
Chile endorses the statement by the representative of
Ireland, the country that is chairing the Human
Security Network to which Chile belongs.
Although the international community recognizes
children as subjects in law, in reality their rights are
disregarded daily in situations of armed conflict. For
that reason, we support the work done by the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict, established by resolution 1612 (2005), as well
as
by
UNICEF,
various
non-governmental
organizations and civil society, actors that are jointly
contributing to the implementation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism under that resolution. We
also acknowledge the significant work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and are following with interest her
activities in the field. We also thank her for her
presence this past Saturday at a football match between

3

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

ambassadors and the Secretary-General in aid of the
children of Sierra Leone.
As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and International Labour
Organization Convention 182 concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination
of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, Chile reiterates its
commitment to the initiatives aimed at eliminating all
forms of violence against children, in particular, those
that we are discussing today.
True to that commitment, on 25 September 2008,
Chile endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, known as the Paris Principles, which reflect
significant progress in prevention and reintegration and
in the special needs of girls in armed conflicts. In
accordance with the Principles, we support multilateral
actions aimed at lessening and eradicating this scourge
by means of more consistent planning, sustainable
reintegration and the promotion of prevention activities
aimed at protecting the environment of children.
The Council should use its authority to identify
and punish those responsible for the atrocities
documented in the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2009/158)
and to implement its important recommendations.
Chile believes that the Council should enhance the
protection of children, enabling the strengthening of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism, envisaged in
resolution 1612 (2005), such that it can be triggered in
cases of intentional actions that do not constitute
collateral damage. We support the recommendation
that giving equal attention to children affected by
armed conflict in all situations of concern be
considered.
We
particularly
welcome
the
recommendation that the Council consider, at a
minimum, expanding the criteria for the annexes of the
report of the Secretary-General to include parties that
commit rape and other grave sexual violence against
children in situations of armed conflict. Likewise, we
note with interest the possibility of addressing other
types of abuse, including, if possible, the intentional
killing and maiming of children, which, like the
recruitment and use of children and sexual violence,
constitute deliberate and selective acts reflecting
criminal intent.

4

Similarly, we call for guarantees that the
mandates of the relevant United Nations peacekeeping
operations and political missions continue to include
specific provisions for the protection of children, the
permanent deployment of child protection advisers and
the training of troops on this issue. In that regard, since
its creation in 2002, the Chilean Joint Centre for
Peacekeeping Operations has been training Chilean and
foreign civilians, military and police, using a
comprehensive approach.
We also urge that the monitoring and reporting of
violations against children should be accompanied by
effective measures to prevent such violations and to
generate timely reactions. Lastly, we stress the
importance of the Working Group having the necessary
resources to carry out its work effectively and to use
the tools at its disposal, in particular field visits and
emergency meetings.
Almost four years after the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005), Chile reiterates its commitment to
actively contribute to the elimination of all forms of
violence affecting children throughout the world from
armed conflict to urban violence. We will continue to
support all initiatives that seek compliance with
international commitments in that area.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Windsor (Australia): Australia is very
grateful for this opportunity to restate its commitment
to strong and effective measures to protect and
rehabilitate children from harm and exploitation in
situations of armed conflict. Australia worked to ensure
the renewal of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict during the sixty-third session of
the
General
Assembly
and
we
commend
Ms. Coomaraswamy’s progress in mainstreaming this
issue.
Australia recognizes the importance of effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes and, to that end, in September 2008
endorsed the Paris Principles and Guidelines on
Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups and committed funding to UNICEF for its work
on child soldiers, particularly in Sri Lanka.
Australia
welcomes
recent
progress
implementing resolution 1612 (2005) and

in
in

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

operationalizing the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. We are pleased that the mechanism has
now been adopted in all situations listed in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2009/158). That
achievement will be further advanced by ensuring that
all parties develop concrete, time-bound action plans
that meet international standards. We commend the
recent real progress in halting the recruitment and use
of child soldiers.
However, more remains to be done. Australia is
particularly concerned about ongoing reports of the
forced recruitment and use of child soldiers by the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam in Sri Lanka and of
the continued recruitment and use of child soldiers by
the national forces and other parties in Myanmar. The
current situation in Sri Lanka only serves to underscore
the serious impact that that conflict has on children. We
owe it to all children in situations of armed conflict to
strengthen the current monitoring and reporting
process.
Australia reiterates that there should be no
hierarchy of treatment amongst the six grave
violations. Australia is very concerned at the large
number of reported sexual violations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report. We are particularly
concerned at the significant number of reported cases
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Clearly, rape
and other forms of sexual violence are endemic in
many conflict situations worldwide. The threat that this
poses to peace and security was recognized by the
Council when it adopted resolution 1820 (2008). The
Council should consider the feasibility of a new
resolution to expand the scope of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism to include, at a minimum, rape
and other forms of sexual violence as a trigger for
listing.
We recognize that the mechanism should be
expanded only if it enhances the protection of children
in armed conflict and the effectiveness of resolution
1612 (2005). A well-supported and adequately
resourced Working Group is crucial to the mechanism’s
effectiveness. That would not only ensure that the
Working Group is well placed to respond to any new
situations that may be included in its agenda, but also
assist its ability to respond promptly to rapidly
evolving situations of urgent concern.
International efforts to address the problem of
children in armed conflict must be accompanied by

09-31740

effective action at the national level. Concerned States,
including Myanmar, should allow United Nations
access to listed non-State parties for the purpose of
discussing possible child protection measures.
Effective domestic legislation, including legislation
criminalizing rape and other sexual crimes, is of
paramount importance. We encourage the adoption by
concerned parties of national action plans on sexual
violence and commend the efforts of parties in Côte
d’Ivoire in that regard.
With regard to the broader issue of violence
against children, I am pleased to announce that today,
the Australian Government released “Time for Action”,
a major report prepared by the Australian National
Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their
Children. The Australian Government simultaneously
announced its intention to move immediately to
advance 18 of the 20 priority recommendations of the
report. The Government will further consider the
remaining two recommendations within the context of
developing a national plan to reduce violence against
women and children.
Australia encourages the Working Group to
utilize the full range of tools available to it in
responding to situations of concern. Given the valuable
and constructive results of the Special Representative’s
field visits, including her recent visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, there may be real merit in the
Group’s visiting situations in which persistent
violations occur or in which there has been no reaction
to the Group’s recommendations. Persistent violators
should not go unpunished. National and international
accountability is at the heart of resolution 1612 (2005)
and will have a significant deterrent effect.
In conclusion, the commitment of all Member
States is required to realize the full potential of
resolution 1612 (2005) and to further the fight against
impunity. We must work together to fight the scourge
of violence against children in all its forms. Australia
remains firmly dedicated to that goal.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully aligns itself with the statement made this morning
by the Permanent Representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to make a few additional remarks — first, on the

5

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

expansion of the trigger mechanism for monitoring and
reporting; and secondly, on impunity.
I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict and for the work that
Mexico is doing in this area.
It is a sad reality that, as we speak, many children
around the world are being harmed for life by armed
conflicts. Sometimes, they happen to be in the wrong
place at the wrong time. More often than not, they are a
tool or a target of shameless violence. Whatever the
case, we all have an urgent obligation to do whatever
we can to protect children from armed conflict. That is
a political and moral imperative for all of us. Along
with the integrity of our children, the integrity of the
Organization and everything it stands for is at stake. In
children we see our future, and in their suffering during
armed conflict we see the dark side of humankind. We
heard impressive testimony to that effect earlier in the
debate.
The Netherlands strongly supports the valuable
work of Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and that of the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on that subject (S/2009/158).
We commend the Security Council for the
important progress made on its agenda related to
children and armed conflict, in particular with regard
to the use and recruitment of child soldiers. However,
the Council should take further action to ensure that
children caught in armed conflicts are protected from
violence and related threats to their security and wellbeing. To that end, the Council should expand its focus
to include the other grave violations against children in
armed conflict, as they affect much larger numbers of
children and result in terrible and long-lasting
consequences.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism has
shown its value. Effective monitoring and reporting
help to reveal the extent and severity of violations,
increase the accountability of those who target, abuse
or exploit children and, last but not least, strengthen
programmes to assist and protect children in situations
of armed conflict. One step that the Security Council
should take is to extend the applicability of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism to other situations

6

in which grave violations against children in armed
conflict occur — first and foremost, rape and other
grave sexual violence.
Why should the Council do so? Over the past
20 years, rape and other forms of sexual violence have
been documented in at least 50 conflicts, affecting
millions of individuals, predominantly girls and
women. Like the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
rape and other forms of sexual violence are intentional
acts committed by individual perpetrators. Parties to
armed conflict can take action to hold those
perpetrators accountable for their actions. Progress in
ending such violations can be measured, allowing for
de-listing, an incentive for change.
In dozens of ongoing armed conflicts, sexual
violence continues to threaten the safety of women and
girls on a daily basis. In some armed conflicts, boys
also become victims of sexual violence, although in
smaller numbers than girls. Rape and sexual violence
against children may have long-term and long-lasting
consequences, and their impact may affect future
generations as well. Think, for instance, about the
situation of children born as a result of rape and about
their traumas, which may damage them — and, again,
others — for life.
In its resolution 1820 (2008), the Council has
already stressed that sexual violence can significantly
exacerbate situations of armed conflict and may
impede the restoration of international peace and
security, and has expressed its readiness to adopt
appropriate steps to address widespread or systematic
sexual violence. The expansion of the trigger
mechanism to cover the crime of rape and other forms
of grave sexual violence against children should be
seen as an appropriate step.
My second point: In most cases, the Security
Council has not taken strong steps to address
accountability and end impunity for perpetrators of
violations against children, especially with regard to
persistent violators. As stated before in this Council,
abuse really stops only when perpetrators have been
brought to justice. Anything short of that means a
continuation of the violation of victims’ integrity. That
is why ending impunity is a critical element in ending
violations and abuses against children. The Member
States concerned should take effective action to bring
to justice individuals responsible for violations of
children’s rights. Those who recruit or use child

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

soldiers, those who rape or commit other grave sexual
violence against children — all should be held to
account. We therefore stress the role of the
International Criminal Court in the investigation and
prosecution of such crimes falling within its
jurisdiction. Where national systems of justice fail,
either because of the unwillingness or because of the
inability to genuinely prosecute such violations against
children in armed conflict, the situation should be
referred to the Court.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-kook (Republic of Korea): First,
allow me to commend the work of the Security Council
and its Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to protect children affected by armed conflict
with a view to ending the grave violations against
them. My delegation would also like to commend
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for their dedication and
continued efforts in addressing the plight of children in
armed conflict. We also welcome the renewed mandate
of the Special Representative.
The Republic of Korea appreciates the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2009/158), which covers 15
situations on the agenda of the Security Council and
five other areas of concern in a comprehensive way,
including a section on rape and other grave forms of
sexual violence against children during times of
conflict.
The information on compliance and progress in
ending the recruitment and use of children contained in
the report shows that there has been progress in some
countries, such as Côte d’Ivoire. However, in some
situations, child recruitment remains an issue of serious
concern.
Only nine out of 63 armed groups listed in the
annexes of the report have signed action plans to stop
the recruitment of child soldiers. As emphasized in the
Secretary-General’s report, concerned Member States
should allow contact between the United Nations and
non-State parties to prepare action plans without
prejudice to the political and legal status of those
armed groups. Dealing with persistent violators also
remains a critical issue that must be addressed with a
sense of urgency.

09-31740

Within the Secretary-General’s report, 19
persistent perpetrators have been identified, increasing
the number from the 16 listed in last year’s report.
Many of these residual perpetrators have also been
responsible for committing other grave violations, such
as rape and sexual violence against children. The
Security Council needs to stand resolute and apply
targeted measures to these persistent perpetrators. One
way to facilitate the real use of targeted measures is to
establish systematic communications between the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the relevant sanctions committees.
The delegation of the Republic of Korea, like
those of many other Member States, is disturbed by the
continuing deplorable situation of sexual violence
against children in armed conflict. The SecretaryGeneral’s report gives us a worrisome picture,
especially of the situations in Burundi, Chad, the
Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Somalia and
the Sudan. There is universal consensus that
widespread and systematic sexual violence against
children in armed conflicts are grave crimes, as stated
in the Secretary-General’s report. Unless the Security
Council and the international community respond
strongly to these violations, such troubling cases will
continue.
This morning, we had a truly invaluable
opportunity to confirm the atrocity of sexual violence
against children through the firsthand account of an
eyewitness. In this context, my delegation strongly
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Security Council adopt an incremental
approach by first including rape and other grave sexual
violence as an additional criterion for inclusion in the
annexes, along with the recruitment and use of
children. We emphasize that a priority step to
strengthen child protection on the ground is to expand
the trigger of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
to include grave sexual violence.
Addressing sexual violence is an important
system-wide priority of the United Nations. As such,
resolutions 1612 (2005), 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
should be implemented in a mutually reinforcing
manner, with a view to maximizing the synergy effect.
My delegation welcomes the progress made in the
mainstreaming of the issue of children in United
Nations peacekeeping and political missions. The work

7

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs in developing policy
directives and guidance is significant. We encourage
the further integration of children’s concerns into all
mission planning instruments and processes, including
the deployment of child protection advisers to all
relevant missions.
Finally, my delegation hopes that our open debate
today testifies to our strong commitment to this critical
issue, not through our numerous verbal statements, but
by taking concrete and resolute action to ensure the
protection of children exposed to and suffering from
armed conflict. There is a wide range of actions that
the Security Council can and should take. Some of the
urgent actions, such as expanding the trigger of the
monitoring and response mechanism to include rape
and other grave sexual violence, will require a new
resolution. In this vein, we strongly support the
immediate commencement of serious work by the
Council members with a view to adopting such a
resolution as soon as possible. Safeguarding the rights
of the next generation of vulnerable children in global
conflict zones is in our hands. Now is the time to act.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Mr.
Viinanen
(Finland):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
children and armed conflict. This debate is about our
children and grandchildren. There cannot be a more
important matter than this.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden.
Children bear the heaviest burden of armed
conflict, although they are the least responsible for it.
The Nordic countries would like to reiterate their deep
gratitude for the tireless efforts made by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to
record violations against children, to bring them to the
attention of the international community, to call the
perpetrators to account and to make proposals for
concrete action to monitor the violence and to bring
relief to the children who are suffering. We fully
endorse the report of the Secretary-General on children
and
armed
conflict
(S/2009/158)
and
the
recommendations made therein.

8

All forms of violence against children must be
condemned. Each of the six categories of grave
violations set out in resolution 1612 (2005) must be
addressed with equal vigour. Rape and other forms of
sexual violence are heinous crimes. In addition to the
immediate physical, mental and emotional damage,
they often cause lasting harm to sexual and
reproductive health. They spread HIV and other serious
diseases. They cause disabilities that diminish the
capacity for learning, safe parenthood and social
interaction. All too often, it is the victim who is
stigmatized while the perpetrator escapes punishment.
Girls and women constitute the largest group of
victims in armed conflict. As the Secretary-General’s
report shows, they are particularly vulnerable to
gender-based and sexual violence perpetrated by all
sides in conflicts, sometimes even by the peacekeepers
who are supposed to safeguard them. The united
condemnation of such crimes by the international
community has been heartening. However, urgent and
forceful action is still required. The Nordic countries
fully endorse the recommendation that the Security
Council expand, at a minimum, the criteria that trigger
listing in the annexes to this report to include rape and
other grave sexual violence.
The efforts to monitor and address gender-based
and sexual violence and other grave violations set out
in resolution 1612 (2005) could benefit from increasing
interaction and collaboration among the United Nations
and regional actors. For example, synergies should be
established between the monitoring mechanisms
established to support the implementation of resolution
1612 (2005) and resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) on women, peace and security and the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
We would like to express our satisfaction with the
work undertaken by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in designing a global policy on child
protection advisers and in mainstreaming child
protection issues in the work of the peacekeeping and
political missions of the United Nations. We look
forward to the implementation of that policy by rolling
it out to the field.
The Nordic countries strongly commend the
efforts of civil society. In spite of their often limited
resources and the most dangerous working conditions,
local
non-governmental
organizations
provide
invaluable information and concrete action that no

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

other actor could provide with such intensity, reach and
effectiveness. We note with deep appreciation the
support provided by civil society organizations in
developing more effective policies and other tools to
protect children in armed conflict. We welcome the
emphasis of the Secretary-General on cooperation with
non-State actors.
Recruitment and use of children by armed groups
is a persistent problem and a reason for deep concern.
The recruitment of boys and girls to take part in
hostilities is a violation of international law and a war
crime in both international and non-international armed
conflicts. The prohibition on recruiting or using child
soldiers must be matched by effective implementation
at the domestic level. The Nordic countries again wish
to emphasize the need for all parties to armed conflicts
to present concrete, time-bound action plans ending
and preventing the recruitment of child soldiers.
Among the greatest challenges we face is that of
impunity.
The first case before the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to have proceeded to trial phase, the one
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, is a milestone in the
efforts to end impunity for the use of child soldiers.
The Nordic countries call on all States to become
parties to the Rome Statute and to effectively
implement its provisions in their national legislations.
Moreover, we urge the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict to use the full range of measures at its
disposal, especially when it comes to persistent
perpetrators. We call upon the Council to ensure that
interaction and cooperation among the Working Group
and the sanctions committees is made more speedy and
effective, and to use the most effective measures at its
disposal, including targeted sanctions. The Council
should refer violations against children in armed
conflict to the ICC for investigation and prosecution
when national Governments fail to carry out their
responsibility to protect those children. At the same
time, we wish to recall that the rule of law, including a
functioning judicial system at the national level, is a
necessary condition for peace and stability.
The growing incidence of attacks on schools
recounted in the Secretary-General’s report is of deep
concern to the Nordic countries. We call upon United
Nations country teams, peacekeepers and Governments
to actively negotiate among community stakeholders
and parties to armed conflict to designate schools as
safe sanctuaries.

09-31740

In concluding, the Nordic countries wish to
express their deep concern with the unacceptable
suffering of children in the military end game in
northern Sri Lanka. The ongoing recruitment of
children into the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE), as well as the fact that civilians continue to be
prevented from leaving the war zone, fill us with dread.
We urge the Government of Sri Lanka to protect all the
civilians in the area, especially children, in accordance
with its obligations under humanitarian law.
This year we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. We call for universal adherence and
implementation of the Convention and its two Optional
Protocols. The Nordic countries would like to reiterate
their encouragement to the Security Council and to the
entire United Nations system to give children in armed
conflict the attention they deserve and to constantly
seek the most effective means to improve their
situation. Institutional prerogatives or procedural
traditions should never stand in the way of concrete
action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Kavanagh (Ireland): I would like to thank
you, Sir, and the members of the Council for this
opportunity to address the Council on the important
issue of children and armed conflict. Ireland also aligns
itself with the statement made earlier by the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union.
Ireland welcomes Mexico’s initiative in
organizing today’s open debate of the Council. We
strongly support all endeavours made at the United
Nations and at the regional and national levels which
seek to address in an effective manner the situation of
children in armed conflict.
Ireland commends ongoing efforts to ensure that
this important issue remains firmly on the agenda of
the Security Council. We support the implementation
of the monitoring and reporting mechanisms on
children and armed conflict established under Security
Council resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005) — as
well as the significant work being carried out by the
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

9

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Ireland warmly welcomes the current report of
the
Secretary-General
(S/2009/158)
and
the
recommendations therein. In particular, we commend
the significant progress made in mainstreaming the
issue of children in armed conflict in United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions. The deployment
of child protection advisers in a number of
peacekeeping operations is a positive step and helps to
enhance the monitoring of the situation, improve
dialogue with parties to conflict and ensure systematic
training on child rights and protection.

war crime or a crime against humanity if committed as
part of a widespread or systematic attack against a
civilian population. In particular, Ireland supports the
Secretary-General’s recommendation, set out in the
report, that the Council expand the criteria for
violations that would trigger the listing of a party in the
annexes attached to such reports. By the same token,
we support the recommendation to include, henceforth,
express reference to those parties that commit rape and
other grave sexual violence against children, as well as
intentional killing and maiming of children.

Ireland is the current Chair of the Human
Security Network and notes that the harmful and
widespread impact of armed conflict on children has
been one of the priority issues for the Network since its
establishment. As part of our chairmanship, Ireland has
chosen to focus on the theme of gender-based violence.
The prevalence of gender-based violence during times
of conflict, in areas where the rule of law is frequently
absent and impunity is widespread, remains a grave
concern. Successive resolutions of the Security Council
have also recognized those egregious abuses. Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) highlights the human
rights of girls and their right to protection from genderbased violence, particularly rape and other forms of
sexual abuse. Resolution 1820 (2008) attacks the
targeting of girls through the use of sexual violence
and demands that all parties to armed conflict take
appropriate measures to protect women and girls from
sexual violence.

Ireland continues to support the valuable efforts
of
Ms.
Radhika
Coomaraswamy,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and her Office. She has done great
work by raising awareness, engaging with parties to
conflict through field visits and ensuring that this issue
is kept high on the international agenda.

The
Secretary-General’s
report
expressly
acknowledges that Security Council resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1820 (2008) are “mutually reinforcing” and
that steps should be taken to streamline documentation
and sharing of information on rape and sexual
violence.
In that regard, the initiation of consultations
between the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict and
relevant United Nations agencies and departments, in
order to devise a strategy to strengthen data collection
and reporting, is, we believe, a positive development.
Ireland welcomes the attention given in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to rape and other grave sexual
violence against children in armed conflict.
The report reaffirms that rape and other forms of
sexual violence are grave crimes and, under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court, constitute a

10

Ireland further commends ongoing efforts on this
crucial topic made by UNICEF, other United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes, along with
non-governmental organizations, regional organizations
and national authorities.
In conclusion, my country is committed to
working closely with the United Nations system, as
well as with all other relevant organizations, to ensure
that steps are taken and progress is achieved towards
improving the deplorable situation faced by children in
armed conflicts around the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important debate and for your
leadership of the Security Council during this month.
As some may know, we are celebrating today the
sixty-first anniversary of the independence of the
modern State of Israel, the homeland of the Jewish
people. Nevertheless, in the light of the importance of
this debate and the issue at hand, I have decided to
participate.
Let me thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her great
help and for her introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/158). Also, I would like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Ann Veneman, for their

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

briefings. I am also very grateful for the moving
testimony given this morning by Ms. Grace Akallo, as
well as for her courage in surviving the horrors she
faced and her willingness to share her experience with
us. We wish to commend the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for its vital work in
raising the profile of this issue and for working to
protect children living in difficult circumstances
caused by armed conflict.
There can be no doubt that, since the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1612 (2005),
establishing the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, the increased international focus on this
issue has resulted in improved protection for many of
the estimated 300,000 child soldiers around the world.
Among the notable achievements is the pressure
exerted on armed groups to desist from child
recruitment and to release youths who have already
been conscripted into armed groups. Indeed, several
armed groups have been de-listed from the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s reports, and the first trial
initiated by the International Criminal Court earlier this
year in The Hague is a milestone in the issue of child
soldiers. In addition to encouraging the release of child
soldiers, placing the spotlight on these violations and
on those who commit them has the significant effect of
discouraging future abuse by others.

including children. They initiated the conflict by their
years-long barrage of rockets and mortars launched
from Gaza into Israel, killing, wounding and
terrorizing civilians across the southern part of my
country. These rockets and mortars were often
launched from heavily populated civilian areas, very
often in close proximity to schools and hospitals.
During the recent conflict, Hamas terrorists hid among
Gaza’s civilian population, using and abusing them as
human shields. While civilians have been too
intimidated to denounce the terrorists for this abhorrent
practice, the evidence for its widespread use is
overwhelming and incontrovertible. And while children
were trained, indoctrinated and used by Hamas in the
hostilities, the Secretary-General’s report states only
that “community members are reluctant to provide
information on cases of children used by armed forces
or armed groups for fear of reprisals” (S/2009/158,
para. 86).
We should also remember that childhood
indoctrination into prejudice, hatred and the ways of
terrorism has devastating effects. Indoctrination and
incitement to violence is, regrettably, all too common
in some areas in my region. More attention should be
paid to this practice in the Special Representative’s
reports, and they should clearly and unequivocally
condemn all such exploitation.

Another area that warrants greater attention is
rape and other grave forms of sexual violence in
situations of armed conflict — in this case, violence of
the most despicable kind: violence perpetrated against
children. There is a growing consensus in favour of
adding this violation as a trigger for the listing of
specific groups that warrant the attention and
monitoring of the Working Group. These acts are
deliberate and are often carried out as tools of war and
terror. Israel adds its voice to those of States calling for
the addition of grave sexual violence to the list of
violations that trigger the listing of a party in the
Secretary-General’s annexes.

Israel follows with interest the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
is a tireless advocate for children. Certain aspects of
her work, however, deserve to be examined more
carefully, especially those aspects in the reports which
rely heavily on unsubstantiated allegations and which
lack supporting detail. The practice is so extensive as
to cast a shadow over these reports, and it does a
general disservice to the cause of children and armed
conflict. We urge the Office of the Special
Representative to give greater attention to the
invaluable process of carefully documenting and
vetting the various sources of the information it
receives.

Terrorism
deliberately
targeting
civilians,
including children, continues to plague many regions
in the world. Only a few weeks ago, an Israeli child
was murdered and another seriously wounded by an
axe-wielding terrorist. In the recent armed conflict
between Israel and the Hamas terrorist entity in Gaza,
Hamas terrorists displayed the same callous disregard
for the lives of both Israeli and Palestinian civilians,

Israel believes that more intensive work should
be done to ensure the long-term effectiveness of
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes. After intensive investment of resources to
help stabilize a post-conflict situation, viable
alternatives to violence need to be put in place as
quickly as possible. These efforts must also be
sustained until reintegration has been achieved. The

09-31740

11

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

longer children languish in camps or, worse, continue
to be compelled to take part in violence, the dimmer
the prospects are for their effective reintegration, and
formal education may never resume. Time is of the
essence for preventing armed conflicts, but also for
protecting individual children. To this end, a candid
assessment of the Working Group’s impact on various
situations should be carried out in order to arrive at
best practices.

suffering of children exposed to armed conflict. That
intolerable reality — including the threats to children
posed by murder, being orphaned, mutilation,
abduction, lack of education and health care, and deep
physical and psychological trauma, as well as the grave
situation of refugee and displaced children exposed to
violence, recruitment, sexual exploitation, disease,
malnutrition and death — is reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports.

Israel recognizes the work of all individuals and
organizations dedicated to protecting children. Often,
their work is carried out under very difficult
circumstances, and their efforts deserve our
unwavering support. We should seize this opportunity
to reach international consensus on the issues of
concern and together improve the situation for children
in armed conflict around the globe.

The issue of refugees is of particular concern to
my country. Since 2000, the number of displaced
persons seeking refuge in Ecuador has grown at an
unprecedented rate. Ecuador is host to the greatest
number of persons in need of international protection
in the entire western hemisphere. Protecting those
thousands of people, including children who have been
direct participants in armed conflict, is a priority of my
Government’s international policy.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his clear
and detailed report on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/158), which takes stock of the activities
undertaken and progress achieved on this important
issue. Very significant results have been attained,
especially since 1999, when the issue of children
affected by war became an official part of the Security
Council’s agenda. Since then, a number of resolutions
have been adopted, setting out specific measures to
improve the situation of children suffering under this
scourge. As the report notes, there is no doubt that the
provisions of the various relevant international
instruments constitute a large, solid body of
international law that will enable the international
community to continue its work to defend children
affected by armed conflict.
It is essential that international instruments be
strengthened, extended and effectively applied in order
to guarantee the necessary protection for children,
especially given the persistence of conflicts of all kinds
throughout the world. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s valuable initiatives in that regard, as well as
the commitments undertaken by several countries to
ensure the well-being and protection of children in
armed conflict and to fully sensitize the authorities and
civil society to their situation.
One of the saddest and tragic realities we have
seen in various regions of the world is the deep

12

Faced with this difficult humanitarian situation,
the State of Ecuador has assumed, in the context of full
respect for human rights and with a thorough sense of
responsibility and solidarity, the commitment to protect
refugees under several international instruments to
which it is party. Since 2000, my Government has
undertaken legal and institutional reforms to develop a
system aimed ultimately at providing a flexible and
effective response to the needs of those people,
especially children and adolescents. The new State
policy, implemented in particular in the border regions,
seeks to encourage comprehensive economic and social
development and to promote zones of peace.
My delegation also wishes particularly to stress
the impact on children of the illegal traffic in small
arms and light weapons, landmines, cluster munitions
and unexploded ordinance. That is why my country
co-sponsored General Assembly resolution 63/240,
adopted in December 2008, establishing an open-ended
working group to consider elements of a possible arms
trade treaty.
With regard to the problem of the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict, Ecuador believes that
allowing children to take up arms and enter the vortex
of violence, confrontation and destruction is inhuman
and contradicts the highest values of all societies. The
progress that has been made in eliminating the
recruitment of child soldiers is considerable, but there
is still a long way to go and there are many challenges
to face.

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

In such circumstances, the international
community must give priority attention to the situation
by applying more specific measures to guarantee the
most fundamental rights of children and to mitigate
and prevent the gravest effects of conflict and violence
on children. Ecuador wishes to express its full support
for all initiatives to take concrete measures against that
scourge.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the delegation of Mexico for convening this
timely debate on civilians in armed conflict. Uruguay
is pleased that the issue of children affected by armed
conflict has been enjoying increasing priority on the
international agenda, and will continue to support all
efforts in that regard.
We welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. Uruguay fully supports her work
and mandate. Her substantive briefings, developed in a
framework of broad consultations, allow us to assess
progress to date and reaffirm our conviction that much
work remains to be done.
Despite the achievements of recent years, the
figures contained in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2009/158) on the impact of armed conflict on
children are of particular concern. The issue is
inscribed on the agenda of the General Assembly,
where my country has played an extremely active role
year after year in strengthening and expanding the
involvement and responsibility of that organ of
universal membership with respect to an issue that falls
within its mandate and is of concern to all.
Nevertheless, Uruguay recognizes the role that
the Security Council has played, particularly through
the adoption of numerous resolutions, the most recent
of which — resolution 1612 (2005) — established a
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to
receive reliable information and take specific action to
put a halt to the illegal recruitment and use of children
in conflict zones. With respect to resolution 1612
(2005), we believe that it is necessary to assess not
only the implementation, but also the format of the
mechanism. We remain concerned by the fact that,
even when reports continue to highlight six types of
grave violations against children, the mechanism is

09-31740

triggered only by the illegal recruitment and use of
child soldiers.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
recommendation that the mechanism’s scope be
extended, as we do not believe that certain violations
are more serious than others. All must be accorded the
same priority. We understand that extending the trigger
would call for the careful discussion of each category
within existing legal frameworks. We feel that a focus
on step-by-step, progressive inclusion would be more
practical and operative.
In that respect, we recognize the contribution of
the International Criminal Court, which designates as
war crimes sexual violence and the recruitment or
enlisting of children under the age of 15 or their active
use in armed conflict. We also appreciate the
contributions of other international courts that have
included the protection of children in their respective
jurisdictions. We understand that it is critical to fight
tirelessly against the impunity of those responsible for
grave violations of children’s rights, in clear
contravention of relevant international norms. In that
regard, we encourage the Security Council to refer
such cases to the International Criminal Court.
My delegation believes that greater attention
should be given to the reintegration into society of
children who are linked to armed groups or victims of
other grave violations of their rights, in particular
sexual abuse or exploitation. We agree with the Special
Representative on the critical importance of effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes to the well-being of all children affected
by armed conflict. Such efforts should enjoy adequate
human and financial resources and be communitybased in order to facilitate the sustainable and
successful reintegration of these children.
The social reintegration of children also requires
the careful consideration of cases of minors accused of
crimes committed during their association with armed
forces or groups. We agree that, in such cases, children
must be seen, first and foremost, as victims and dealt
with in accordance with international legislation within
the framework of a legal system for children that leads
to their social rehabilitation.
We appreciate the work of civil society in
conjunction with the entire United Nations system,
including the Office of the Special Representative,
UNICEF child-protection advisers and the peace

13

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

mission personnel, in building sustainable mechanisms
for child protection.
Uruguay, one of the 10 largest troop contributors,
has demonstrated on the ground its unwavering
commitment to the protection of the civilian population
in general and of children in particular. In this sense,
we support the recommendation to include specific
provisions for the protection of children in all
peacekeeping operations.
Our country has witnessed the successes and the
difficulties of this project. Our troops have participated
in successful programmes in coordination with the
child protection advisers, but have also endured the
difficulties in implementing mandates that, while
sound on paper, do not have enough human and
material resources in practice.
It is thus indispensable that Security Council
mandates, when incorporating specific provisions to
protect children, include the strategic and logistical
measures needed to best fulfil these tasks. Uruguay
once again stands ready to contribute to responding to
this challenge through its experience on the ground.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Terzi (Italy): Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you personally and thank the Honourable
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Ms. Patricia
Espinosa Cantallano, for her initiative and for that of
the Mexican presidency of the Security Council to
convene this open debate on children and armed
conflicts and for chairing the Security Council’s
meeting today. I would also like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General, UnderSecretary-General Le Roy, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy
and Ms. Veneman for their important statements today.
In taking the floor, I would like to subscribe to
the statement delivered by the representative of the
Czech Republic in his capacity as the Presidency of the
European Union.
The protection of children’s rights during armed
conflicts is one of Italy’s top national priorities, as we
indicated when we were elected to the Human Rights
Council in 2007. During our 2007-2008 term on the
Security Council, this same commitment inspired us to
make an active contribution, proposing the insertion of
child-protection provisions into United Nations

14

mission mandates from Côte d’Ivoire to the Sudan and
Afghanistan. We are glad that this proposal has now
become standard practice, whenever a mandate is
established or renewed by the Security Council.
I wish to pay tribute to Ambassador Ripert, the
outgoing Chair of the Security Council Working
Group, for the leadership and contribution that France
has provided in pushing forward the United Nations
agenda for children in armed conflicts. Let me also
congratulate Ambassador Heller for taking over this
task.
We have been moved by the testimony of Grace
Akallo in the Council today. She is an example of
resilience, and the account she made of the heroism of
Sister Rachele witnesses to the fact that individual
actions and strongly felt values can make a difference.
Italy welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral
(S/2009/158)
and
endorses
its
recommendations. In particular, we support the
Secretary-General’s proposal to extend the trigger for
the Council’s action to include sexual violence. The
Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
which we co-sponsored, acknowledges that, today,
sexual violence is one of the primary threats to
children in situations of armed conflict.
Placing this violation among the criteria for
inclusion in the reports of the Secretary-General would
be another major step forward in the Council’s action
against this appalling crime and a signal that the
Council is listening to the voices of children who have
been its victims.
We also share the report’s emphasis on action
plans, whose significant results have been the release
and reintegration of child soldiers in countries where
parties to conflicts have agreed to detailed and timebound commitments.
The 83 child-protection advisers on United
Nations missions perform essential duties. As a main
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
my country is ready to actively support United Nations
action to strengthen the training of United Nations
mission personnel in this area, and welcomes the
efforts in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to draft common guidelines. In the development of
strategies for the protection of children, their
participation is another priority. We must listen to their
voices. To further encourage child participation and

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

protection, my Government has organized — together
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, UNICEF, and Save the Children —
a high-level event in Rome in late June this year. The
participants will include several former child soldiers
and youth advocates from the Network of Young
People Affected by War.
Impunity remains a major issue, and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has a key role to
play. We recall that the very first arrest warrant the
Court issued concerned the recruitment of child
soldiers. The Security Council and its Working Group
should look into ways to develop practical cooperation
with the ICC in fighting impunity. The first step is for
the Security Council to impose targeted measures on
offenders, as contemplated by resolution 1612 (2005).
Given the role of the United Nations in
addressing the plight of children in armed conflict, we
believe there is an urgent need for the Security Council
to start working on a new resolution that would allow
us to incorporate the lessons learned and the
developments ensuing from the approval of resolution
1612 (2005).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Mr. President,
first of all, I would like to thank you for organizing this
important debate.
My delegation takes due note of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report on children and armed conflict.
We believe the recommendations therein merit careful
consideration and subsequent implementation and
compliance by Member States and parties to conflicts.
We commend the Security Council and its
Working Group for their continued efforts to end
violations against children in armed conflict. These
initiatives have yielded significant and tangible
successes. Several listed parties to armed conflict have
adopted action plans to end their recruitment or use of
child soldiers. Some have ended the practice. Others
are engaged in active dialogue with United Nations,
with the aim of being de-listed.
It is encouraging that the Council’s monitoring and
reporting mechanism on grave violations of children’s
rights has been established in all the situations of armed
conflict listed in both the annexes to the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158). The

09-31740

United Nations system-wide response to this issue is
also laudable. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, deserves our
particular praise for her dedicated efforts in this regard.
The context of armed conflict has changed
dramatically over the years. Diverse forms of political
and armed violence have presented new threats to the
protection of children. These emerging concerns
necessitate prioritized and specific actions, as well as a
visionary and forward-looking approach.
As society breaks down during conflict, many
children perceive armed groups as their best chance for
survival. While some are coerced, some join armed
groups to escape poverty, while others do so out of
desperation to avenge the killing of family members.
Therefore, success in ending children’s involvement in
armed conflicts ultimately depends on addressing the
root causes of motivation and on building societies
where the rights and dignity of all children are upheld.
Despite all the successes, the pace of progress is
still slow and its impact is not yet felt by the tens of
thousands of children in the ranks of fighting forces.
While progress has been made through action plans to
release child soldiers in several situations of concern,
the overall situation of children in armed conflict
remains grave. Peace remains the main hope for
securing the release of child soldiers from armed forces
and groups. While we appreciate the gradual expansion
of child protection provisions in the peacekeeping
missions, we would therefore like to see such
provisions made an integral part of the mandate of all
ongoing and future peacekeeping and political
missions. The Peacebuilding Commission has to ensure
that children’s protection, demobilization and
reintegration needs are addressed in the initial planning
and implementation of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations.
We are of the view that the Security Council’s
current framework to protect children from armed
conflicts should give equal consideration to all six
mandated grave violations. The application of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism should also be
expanded to include all situations of concern identified
in both annexes of the Secretary-General’s report. A
thorough evaluation of the action plans and of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism would be helpful
to ensure their effectiveness.

15

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Some kind of enforcement criteria could be
contemplated to make parties listed in the annexes,
particularly the persistent violators, comply fully with
the action plans in a time-bound manner. The issues of
children under foreign occupation need to be
appropriately addressed. Dialogue with all parties to
conflict, including non-State actors, is crucial to
developing a workable action plan. We encourage the
Working Group to utilize the full range of actions
identified in its toolkit. The increasing time lag
between considering reports and issuing conclusions,
however, needs to be addressed.
Member States have to put in place durable
protection mechanisms to prevent child recruitment
and other abuses against children at the national and
local levels. At the same time, national and
international justice systems have to take stronger
action to end impunity for crimes against children
within their jurisdictions.
We have a rich body indeed of international
instruments for the protection of children in armed
conflict, but the task ahead is also uphill. Our
challenge is to ensure that this framework is used to
maximum effect. This will require well-coordinated
and multipronged actions by a wide range of actors,
and sustained funding to rehabilitate and reintegrate
returning child soldiers and other war-affected children
into society. We would urge the Security Council to
build on the gains achieved so far and address the
existing gaps in the current system. To secure a better
future for the world, we have to protect our posterity
from the scourges of war and armed conflict. We
simply cannot afford to be slacking in our endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Ghana.
Mr. Yankey (Ghana): I wish to commend the
delegation of Mexico for organizing this open debate
on children and armed conflict during your presidency,
Sir. I welcome the opportunity to participate in this
meeting.
Ghana will continue to support the Security
Council’s efforts to protect children in situations of
armed conflict, be they combatants or displaced,
orphans or victims of sexual violence. We believe that
the dehumanization and brutalization of such children
do not augur well for the long-term stability and
advancement of society in general. In this connection,
we are grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special

16

Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their
statements this morning. We applaud them for their
determined efforts to achieve the objectives outlined in
resolution 1612 (2005).
To Ms. Grace Akallo, we wish to express our
admiration for her courage. Her dramatic personal
testimony put a human face on a tragedy that often
seems remote, but is in fact closer to us in many ways
that might not be apparent. We also extend a hand of
solidarity to countless other unlucky child victims who
are caught up in the whirlwinds of violence and
destabilization all over the world, and particularly in
Africa.
Ghana welcomes the substantial progress that has
been made in developing strategies and mechanisms to
curb the abuse and exploitation of children in conflict
situations. The monitoring and reporting mechanisms
that are now in place have facilitated the exposure of
grave violations of the rights of children in those
unfortunate circumstances. We trust that the Security
Council will respond appropriately.
Despite the substantial gains that have been
reported, formidable problems persist. The recruitment,
abuse, torture and exploitation of children are still
commonplace among armed groups. We strongly
condemn the perpetration of widespread and systematic
rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children, which have become the ugly characteristics of
several ongoing conflicts. The rampant impunity with
which these crimes are committed has emboldened the
perpetrators to defy the authority of the Security
Council and the will of the international community.
Consequently, Ghana endorses the call by the
Secretary-General for the expansion of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism trigger to include rape and
other grave forms of sexual violence.
As we consider the next constructive steps
forward, we wish to highlight, among others, the
following points.
There is a need for increased focus on prevention
to ensure that children are protected against current and
future recruitment and exploitation as soldiers. We call
for legal safeguards to prohibit children under the age
of 18 from being deployed in armed conflict. The root
causes of recruitment invariably lie in poor governance
and its effects, including human rights abuses, which

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

create a fertile ground for child recruitment. Related to
this are the cultural and economic factors that
encourage child recruitment.
The demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers remains a significant challenge, especially
where gainful employment is not easily available. This
brings to the fore the issue of development, especially
in the health and education sectors. Comprehensive
donor support for the demobilization efforts of affected
Governments is thus imperative, if the incidence of the
recycling of child soldiers within conflict areas is to be
curbed. Existing international instruments, including
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, contain
much of what is required to offer adequate protection
to children. Those instruments need to be
supplemented with vigorous implementation of
existing mandates.
In conclusion, further efforts and better
coordinated actions are needed to advance this process,
which started a decade ago, to eliminate the
recruitment and exploitation of child soldiers. Such
efforts must take into account new and appalling
trends, including such atrocities as the killing and
maiming of children, rape and other forms of grave
sexual violence, abductions, attacks against schools or
hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access to
children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important and timely
debate. We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/158) and commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
her team for their dedicated work.
The increasingly dire humanitarian situation in
northern Sri Lanka is alarming. Civilians, including
many children, are trapped in the conflict zone.
Liechtenstein calls on both of the parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to facilitate unhindered access to those facing lifethreatening shortages of food, water and medical
supplies.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism on
serious violations of the rights of the child and the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and

09-31740

Armed Conflict have brought about tangible progress
in advancing the protection of children affected by
armed conflicts. The decision to de-list various
situations from the annexes of the report of the
Secretary-General demonstrates that the mechanism
established by resolution 1612 (2005) has already had
a positive effect on the ground. Taking into account the
recent progress made in the various areas of civilian
protection, in particular with regard to resolution 1820
(2008), we believe it is time to acknowledge the clear
linkage between resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1612
(2005) and to further develop both agendas in a holistic
manner.
In accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provides reliable
information on the situations listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General’s report, including the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, rape and other
forms of grave sexual violence against children, the
killing and maiming of children, the abduction of
children, the denial of humanitarian access and attacks
on schools and hospitals. However, only one out of
those six grave violations — the recruitment and use of
child soldiers — currently triggers the inclusion of
countries in the agenda of the Security Council, in
annex I of the Secretary-General’s report. We believe
that the protection of children could be significantly
enhanced if a new resolution were to expand the
criteria triggering the mechanism to include all six
grave violations against children.
While acknowledging the equal weight of all
grave violations, we believe that the expansion would
best be done step by step, beginning with sexual
violence, as the most pressing issue. With a view to
further strengthening the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, we welcome the information provided by
non-governmental organizations and call for the
inclusion of child-protection advisers in all
peacekeeping missions and, where appropriate,
political missions. In order to prepare and develop an
action plan that will lead to de-listing, the States
concerned should allow direct contacts between the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and relevant non-State actors.
The fight against impunity is an essential part of
our efforts to improve the safety and security of these
children. Holding perpetrators accountable for their
crimes has already proved to have a deterrent effect.
While it needs to be emphasized that such

17

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

accountability should take place in national judiciaries,
the Security Council must also be mindful of its
competence to refer to the International Criminal
Court, for investigation and prosecution, violations of
children’s rights falling within the Court’s jurisdiction.
Any measures taken by the Working Group in response
to grave violations of children’s rights must be
complemented by effective enforcement mechanisms
and measures, such as sanctions, arms embargoes and
bans on military assistance, as well as the imposition of
travel restrictions.

Likewise, it is essential that resolutions 1612
(2005) and 1820 (2008) be mutually reinforcing in
order to prevent and combat sexual violence in conflict
situations. Mechanisms permitting United Nations
agencies to exchange reliable information on acts of
sexual violence in order to reduce and combat that
scourge should also be explored. For its part, the
Security Council should continue using or expanding
its use of the instruments and means at its disposal to
stop violations of children’s rights in conflict
situations.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict, Liechtenstein will continue to be
active in this context. We hope that this open debate
will serve as a crucial step towards a new resolution
that will expand the monitoring and reporting
mechanism.

Resolution 1612 (2005), together with all
previous resolutions on this subject, has provided a
formal and detailed framework for promoting the
protection of children affected by armed conflict, as
well as key elements aimed at ensuring respect for
children’s rights on the ground. Peru calls on the
parties to armed conflicts to commit themselves to
respecting children’s rights.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Peru.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative to convene this
open debate on a topic to which my country attaches
great importance: the participation of children in armed
conflicts. We particularly thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Veneman for
their briefings and for the valuable information
provided. We also thank Ms. Grace Akallo for her
brave testimony, which strengthens our conviction that
armed conflict is a circumstance in which children
require redoubled and concerted attention.
In that respect, my country believes, as the
Secretary-General indicates in his recommendations,
that the Security Council should accord equal attention
to all children affected by armed conflict, wherever it
may occur. Under no circumstances is the abduction,
recruitment for criminal purposes, sexual violation,
mutilation or death of children acceptable; neither are
attacks against schools or camps for refugees or
displaced persons.
Peru reiterates its condemnation of all acts of
violence, in particular the intentional and repeated
sexual violation and rape of minors, especially girls, as
weapons of war for parties to armed conflict. The
Security Council should consider the SecretaryGeneral’s request that parties committing acts of sexual
violence against children in situations of armed
conflict be included in the annexes to his report.

18

At the same time, we must continue the
implementation of resolution 1612 (2005), particularly
when it comes to formulating specific action plans with
precise timetables to put an end to the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflicts. In that respect, we
should consider new modalities for cooperation among
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
sanctions committees and groups of experts in order to
take the measures necessary to ensure the safety of
children. In addition, the Security Council should
continue taking specific measures to protect children in
peacekeeping operations and political missions.
As rightly indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report, given the regional dimension of many conflicts,
field-deployed
operations
can
help
establish
coordination mechanisms for information exchange
and cooperation on cross-border child protection.
Member States, especially those affected by armed
conflict, must also, within the framework of their legal
systems, continue to implement or adopt measures to
identify those responsible for the illegal recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict and other grave
violations of children’s rights, and apply the necessary
sanctions. Neither amnesty nor impunity is acceptable.
The establishment of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is proof of the Security
Council’s increasing commitment to protecting
children. I must highlight the successful work done by
France as chairman of the Working Group, and I can

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

assure Mexico of our support in its work as the new
Chairman.
It is also appropriate to highlight the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Since
field visits are an essential part of the implementation
of resolution 1612 (2005), it is only right for her Office
to have the necessary logistic and budgetary support to
fully perform its functions. The same can be said of the
important work carried out by UNICEF, the Committee
on the Rights of the Child and other relevant bodies in
this area. We call on States and all parties to conflicts
to cooperate with these bodies. We also call on the
donor community to support the efforts to reintegrate
and demobilize child soldiers being made in some
countries.
The progressive development of international
humanitarian law has provided us with the legal
instruments needed to fight against the use of children
in armed conflict, protect them and ensure their
security in times of violence. States and the
international community therefore have the great
responsibility of ensuring that this is done. Not only do
current peace and stability depend on compliance, but
so does the building of peaceful, stable societies in the
future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Paudel (Nepal): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the important issue
of children and armed conflict. We are confident that
this debate will assess the magnitude of the problem
from wider perspectives and help consolidate
international cooperation for the implementation of our
shared commitments.
We appreciate the thoughtful statement by the
Secretary-General in the Council this morning. We also
appreciate the presentations by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, and her role in this issue. We
commend Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and
UNICEF Executive Director Ann Veneman for their
presentations. We were very much moved by the
descriptions of Ms. Grace Akallo on the plight of child
soldiers.
The international community has rightfully been
devoting its attention to the issue of children and
armed conflict for several years. In addition to the

09-31740

generic conventions, such as the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, there are other international
instruments, commitments and principles devised to
protect the rights of the child. In line with that, we
appreciate the initiatives of the Security Council in
adopting various resolutions, including resolution 1612
(2005), for the protection and promotion of the rights
of children affected by armed conflict.
Children are the most vulnerable sector of the
population in times of conflict. They are easily used
and abused, as they are incapable of judging what is
right and wrong for themselves. Governments, the
international community and civil society must come
up with rapid, effective and coordinated efforts to
prevent heinous crimes against children during
conflict. To that end, our great commitments must be
matched with adequate human and financial resources
on the ground to monitor the situation, rescue the
victims and bring the violators to justice.
There is a clear need for time-bound and tailormade action plans for rescuing the victims and for their
reintegration into their family and society in the
aftermath of conflict. We clearly see the need for a
comprehensive
approach
linked
with
overall
development policies for the sustained promotion and
protection of the rights of the child.
Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in November 2006, Nepal has travelled
quite a distance in its historic political transformation.
For the first time, people are writing their Constitution,
through their elected representatives in the Constituent
Assembly. Writing a new Constitution and guiding the
peace process to its logical conclusion are the two
fundamental tasks ahead of this Government. The
Government of Nepal is committed to fulfilling these
historic responsibilities with the consensus of political
parties and stakeholders.
Nepal, as a signatory to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, has devised the necessary legal
instruments and established a legal and administrative
framework for the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child. The Government of Nepal reiterates
its commitment to releasing combatants who are
minors, ending impunity for crimes against children
and protecting children from sexual violence and other
grave crimes against them, in the spirit of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as children are the

19

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

foundation of the peaceful and prosperous future of our
country.
The Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction has
taken the lead role in the release, reintegration and
rehabilitation of combatants who are minors on the
basis of the broad consensus of the Army Integration
Special Committee and its Technical Committee. To
this end, the Government of Nepal would welcome
cooperation from United Nations agencies, including
the United Nations Mission in Nepal, for the early
release and reintegration of combatants who are
minors.
Allow me to share with the Council the fact that
the Government of Nepal has taken note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158) in an overall
positive manner and expresses its readiness to work in
collaboration with the international community. The
Government of Nepal is determined to carry out its
responsibilities in the protection and promotion of
children affected by armed conflict, in line with
resolution 1612 (2005).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Ney (Germany): Germany fully aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
the Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Allow me to start by wishing you, Mr. President,
all the best in your new function as the Chairman of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. My
particular thanks also goes to France, as the outgoing
chair, for its important and crucial contribution during
the first formative years of the Working Group.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict for their dedicated
engagement in taking this important issue forward.
Finally, allow me to thank the staff of UNICEF and all
other United Nations agencies participating in the
monitoring and reporting mechanism for their valuable
contributions.
Germany attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child and,
in particular, to the situation of children in armed
conflict. I am proud to say that Germany is one of the
main donors in this field, both bilaterally and
multilaterally. We welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict

20

(S/2009/158) and fully endorse the recommendations
contained therein. At the same time, we are acutely
aware that the United Nations child protection
framework for children in armed conflict needs further
strengthening.
The international community has come a long
way in dealing with the issue of the protection of
children in armed conflicts since it was first included
on the agenda of the Security Council in 1998.
Resolution 1612 (2005) is rightfully regarded as a
milestone, as it created an effective international
monitoring and reporting mechanism for children and
armed conflict and a Working Group to provide followup to those reports.
Progress so far shows that the mechanism is
working. It provides Member States with evidence of
grave violations being committed against children in
armed conflict, in particular concerning the illegal
recruitment and use of children as soldiers.
At the same time, the naming and shaming of
perpetrators in the reports of the Secretary-General
seems to have a real impact on the ground, as some
parties to conflict enter into dialogue with United
Nations country-level task forces or even adopt and
implement time-bound action plans to address the
grave violations for which they have been cited. This is
no small achievement, given that these violations are
often perpetrated in a rule of law vacuum.
However, in our view, the impact of the United
Nations child protection framework on the ground in
situations of armed conflict is not as decisive as it
could and should be. Important challenges remain. The
international community must not watch and keep
silent in the face of deteriorating conflict situations,
like the one we are currently witnessing in Sri Lanka,
affecting children in particular. An immediate
humanitarian ceasefire is imperative in Sri Lanka to
allow for a United Nations-assisted evacuation of those
still trapped in the conflict zone, among them many
children.
Let me highlight three points to address the
challenges that I have mentioned. First, rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children remain
widespread in many armed conflicts and are
exacerbated by a culture of impunity. Germany
therefore welcomes and fully endorses the proposal
made by the Secretary-General to expand the so-called
trigger for the listing of perpetrators in the annex of the

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

annual report to also include cases of rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children in armed
conflict. In that regard, Germany calls upon the
Security Council to take appropriate steps as a matter
of urgency. Synergies with other protection agendas,
especially on sexual violence against women and
children in situations of armed conflict, as set forth in
Security Council resolution 1820 (2008), should be
realized, for example with regard to data sharing.
Secondly, in our view, it is essential that the
threat of forceful Security Council follow-up to
reported violations against children remain credible.
Regrettably, 19 of the approximately 60 armed groups
listed by the Secretary-General in this year’s report are
persistent perpetrators which have been repeatedly
listed for at least four years. We call upon the Security
Council to consider strong and urgent measures,
including targeted sanctions or referrals to the
International Criminal Court where appropriate,
against those parties that persistently ignore calls by
the Security Council Working Group to cease their
illegal practices with regard to children in armed
conflict. What we need is more systematic
communication between the Security Council Working
Group and the relevant sanctions committees.
And thirdly, the Security Council should remain
fully engaged in mainstreaming the issue of children in
armed conflict into all United Nations peacekeeping
and political operations. In that regard, we welcome
the deployment of an increasing number of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations and the
conceptual work on a policy directive in this field
currently being finalized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Let me conclude by reiterating our full support
for the analysis and recommendations of the report of
the Secretary-General and our firm commitment to join
hands with all those striving to improve the situation of
children affected by armed conflict worldwide.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Mexico on its
productive presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April and to express our satisfaction in seeing
Mexico follow France as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Morocco, along with the rest of the international

09-31740

community, expresses its thanks for the laudable efforts
of the Mexican authorities in responding to the current
influenza challenge from its onset. Morocco expresses
its solidarity with the people and Government of
Mexico in confronting this pandemic challenge.
(spoke in French)
Let me also thank you, Sir, for organizing the
debate, the importance of which was marvellously
illustrated by the poignant and moving testimony of
Ms. Grace Akallo.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for the
quality of his report (S/2009/158) and the strength of
his commitment. Our thanks go as well to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their efforts to protect
children.
Statistics are implacable: more than 2 million
children dead, 6 million disabled and 22 million
displaced. When they are not reduced to the status of
sex slaves or indoctrinated refugees, young boys and
girls whose fundamental rights are being violated for
the sake of war are living through atrocities and are
completely deprived of the real meaning of childhood.
We all vividly recall the suffering endured by the
children of Gaza, who are confronted by the logic of
war, with all its consequences on their psychological
state and their daily lives.
The experiences of terror and deprivation to
which children are subjected in conflict situations —
where children are systematically recruited by armed
groups and where they are killed, maimed, abducted
and subjected to violence — are shocking. That is why
the Council’s increasing attention to children’s issues is
entirely justified. The specific resolutions on the
subject adopted by the Council in the past 10 years,
which have given rise to the establishment of important
mechanisms, have certainly made significant progress
possible. That progress includes the creation of
monitoring
and
reporting
mechanisms,
the
implementation of specific action plans and the total or
partial release of children associated with armed
groups in specific situations.
Still, it must be recognized that progress remains
limited. Thus, the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, have a necessary role to play in
promoting national measures aimed at strengthening

21

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

the protection of children and effective implementation
of demobilization and reintegration programmes and
the establishment of socio-economic conditions that
discourage recruitment.
There is no disagreement that the responsibility
for putting an end to child recruitment lies first and
foremost with States. However, specialized institutions
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Health Organization and UNICEF must
strengthen their initiatives and coordinate their actions
with the Working Group, so as to define a strategy to
help those countries resolve their problems. The
approach must be preventive as well as responsive in
addressing the tragic consequences of conflicts.
Attacking the root causes of armed conflict is vital in
order to prevent all involvement of children.
Morocco is a party to the Optional Protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography and is prepared to associate itself with all
international efforts to curb the terrible tragedy of the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
In that spirit, my country reiterates its support for
the Paris Principles, which are aimed at protecting
children against illegal recruitment in armed conflict
and affording them appropriate reintegration in a
protective environment. We hope that the Paris
commitments will enable us to advance towards a more
inclusive approach, agreed upon by the international
community, on the importance of education
programmes for the prevention of recruitment, so that
all child soldiers can benefit from suitable reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes. The commitment of
Governments is essential to implement the Paris
Principles for the protection of children in armed
conflict situations and to achieve the final and
unconditional release of child soldiers before the
conclusion of peace agreements.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, allow me, Mr. President, to express
our solidarity with the Government and people of
Mexico on account of the outbreak of influenza that
has taken so many lives and has affected not only your
country but others on the planet. We feel solidarity
with Mexicans.

22

We also thank Mexico, in exercising the
presidency of the Council during the present month, for
having convened us to discuss children and armed
conflict. We are pleased to have had the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Patricia Espinosa Cantellano, with us.
That highlights not only the importance that Mexico
attributes to the matter, but also its active commitment
to advance the fight against the many atrocities
committed against boys and girls in situations of
conflict. We also appreciate the report on this matter
presented to us by the Secretariat.
Almost twenty years have transpired since the
Council first took notice of the fate of children in areas
of conflict, and ten years since resolution 1261 (1999)
was adopted — the Council’s first resolution dealing
with children and armed conflict. The results since the
adoption of that resolution, which was followed by six
others in the intervening years, have been decidedly
mixed. In spite of some progress achieved — thanks in
great part to the initiatives taken by the United
Nations — we have also been witness to changes in the
tactics of war by which the civilian population has
become even more exposed to a spiral of violence and
to new threats to boys and, especially, girls.
We believe that the adoption of resolution 1612
(2005) in July of 2005 was an important achievement
in offering a conceptual framework that helps
strengthen the protection of children who are victims
of conflicts. In particular, we must devote all our
attention to the social disintegration caused by genderbased violence and displacements, as well as the brutal
violence and sexual slavery to which girls are
subjected, and to the resulting stigmatization in their
communities.
Guatemala has actively participated, in the
framework of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, in the matter related to the progress made
in including questions regarding children and armed
conflict in United Nations political missions and
peacekeeping operations. We hope that the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations will finalize its policy
directive on mainstreaming the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts in peacekeeping activities,
as requested by the Special Committee since 2008.
This policy will also provide directions on the role and
functions of child protection advisers and will outline
the policy framework for their activities, further
defining
their
cooperation,
coordination
and

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

consultation with other key child protection actors in
the field.
We support the recommendation that, when
appropriate, specific child protection provisions should
be included in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and the deployment, on a case-by-case
basis, of child protection advisers should be foreseen in
those operations. However, we believe that the
Department must more precisely define the role and
responsibilities of these advisers and strengthen the
mechanisms and oversight arrangements to curb sexual
violence, as well as outline clear modalities for
cooperation with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes.
We praise the designation of a coordinator or
focal point to liaise with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence
against Children, within their respective mandates.
However, we reiterate our concern about the delay in
the appointment of a person to assume that latter post.
My delegation would like to stress the importance
of training on child protection matters for
peacekeeping contingents in the field, since the
effectiveness of our work is measured in the timely
execution of programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of boys and girls in
their communities or in the society. Those programmes
must receive more resources so that they become
sustainable in the long term.
Finally, I would like to refer to children accused
of illicit activities carried out during their affiliation
with armed forces or groups. They should be treated as
victims, in accordance with international law, in the
context of restitution and rehabilitative justice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I next give the
floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Ayoob (Afghanistan): As Ambassador Tanin
is in Havana to lead the Afghan delegation at the
Ministerial Meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, I have the honour to participate in this
meeting and to deliver, on his behalf and on behalf of
the delegation of Afghanistan, a statement on the
subject under the Council’s consideration, a subject
that is very important for my country.

09-31740

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important debate to discuss the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/158) and for chairing of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. The
presence of Her Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Mexico at our meeting this morning reflects the level
of the commitment of your delegation and the
effectiveness of its work on this issue.
We welcome Mrs. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and thank her for her
insightful briefing this morning. We also commend her
Office for its continuing efforts to protect children
affected by armed conflict. We welcome the recent
establishment of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in Afghanistan.
My delegation was deeply touched by the
testimony this morning of Grace Akallo, who spoke as
a former child soldier. We sincerely commend her
courage and strength.
My delegation welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict. In
November 2008, the Secretary-General’s countryspecific report on children and armed conflict in
Afghanistan provided us with an initial opportunity to
carry out fruitful discussion with our partners in the
Security Council Working Group on ways and means to
better implement resolution 1612 (2005) in the
challenging environment of Afghanistan.
For this debate to continue effectively, we must
recognize two facts: that the chief threat to children in
Afghanistan is terrorism, and that to overcome that
threat the international community and the Government
of Afghanistan must work together.
First, terrorism drastically affects the daily lives
of our people, particularly children. The deterioration
of the security situation in Afghanistan is the product
of the surge of terrorist activities carried out by
Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other associated terrorist and
armed groups. It is the Taliban and other terrorist
groups that have been and remain the main violators of
human rights, including children’s rights, in
Afghanistan, and those violations will continue as long
as the security situation does not improve.
Terrorists have increased attacks in our territory,
employing barbaric methods imported from outside

23

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Afghanistan, including the use of car bombs, suicide
attacks and improvised explosive devices. These
attacks deliberately target heavily populated areas,
where children are the prime victims. Terrorists are
recruiting, training and exploiting children as
combatants and sending them to operate as suicide
bombers. The intensification of the Taliban
intimidation campaign, accomplished through the
burning of schools, the destruction of health care
centres and clinics and attacks on female teachers and
schoolchildren, has created an atmosphere of terror
which prevents our children from accessing basic
Government services. The recent acid attack on a group
of schoolgirls was a horrific demonstration of the
particular vulnerability of girls.
The reported cases of alleged recruitment,
detention and sexual violence by individuals in the
Afghan Government or the National Army and Police
are disturbing to us, but they are isolated cases. For its
part, the Government of Afghanistan is deeply
committed to fully implementing resolution 1612
(2005) and to protecting the rights of children through
all possible means and mechanisms.
Afghanistan has developed domestic laws
relating to children, established juvenile judicial
institutions and ratified most of the international
human rights treaties including, in 2002, the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols. Our penal code prohibits sexual
violence against children and prohibits the recruitment
of persons below 18 in our National Police and below
22 in our National Army. According to our juvenile
code, the legal age of criminal responsibility for a child
is 12 years of age; children can be prosecuted and
sentenced only by a juvenile court and can be confined
only in a juvenile detention centre. Afghan national
legislation, particularly a recent law on combating
terrorist offences, strictly prohibits the detention of
children in adult prisons even if a child is accused of
terrorism or threats to national security.
We recognize the importance of governance and
the rule of law to improving and better implementing
all those legal provisions. We are making the necessary
efforts in that direction; all those efforts need sustained
international involvement.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
sincere appreciation to the international community for
the military and civilian personnel serving in

24

Afghanistan, who are assisting us in ensuring security
and enabling the implementation of the rule of law,
good governance and human rights, including
children’s rights. We are grateful for their sacrifices in
our common endeavour to preserve peace and security,
for their efforts to build the capacity of the Afghan
people and for their recent efforts to address, with us,
the issue of civilian casualties. We must continue to
move together to stop terrorism’s menace to civilians,
in particular children.
Afghanistan has made substantial progress in
ensuring the rights of children through legal
frameworks and other mechanisms. However, terrorism
continues to threaten the attainment of our goals. It is
our hope that, with the continuing help and focus of the
international
community
and
the
ongoing
determination of the Afghan Government, we can
improve the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005)
and protect our children, as the hope for our future, to
the best of our ability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina, at the outset, would like to thank the
delegation of Mexico, which holds the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April, for its
initiative in organizing today’s debate. We congratulate
the Mexican delegation on its efforts as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Our thanks go to those who addressed the
Security Council this morning. In particular, we
listened carefully to the statement of Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for which we are most grateful. And
we cannot fail to thank Ms. Grace Akallo for sharing
her perspective and her experience as a former child
soldier.
It is our understanding that the issue of the
protection of children, in all its aspects, falls primarily
within the purview of the General Assembly. In that
regard, we shall continue to work to strengthen the
mandates of existing mechanisms and to search for
new institutional solutions. We also view most
positively the progress made in the protection of
children affected by armed conflict since the adoption
of resolution 1612 (2005). This progress has been
achieved through the joint endeavours of States and the
mechanisms created by the United Nations system,

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

with the invaluable
organizations.

support

of

civil

society

the annexes, taking all forms of violence into
consideration.

We appreciate the action taken by a number of
national Governments, as outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/158). This includes their
commitment to action plans agreed upon by parties to a
conflict, consistent with resolutions 1539 (2004) and
1612 (2005) and with international law. But a source of
great concern is the widespread persistence of the
abhorrent practice of recruiting child soldiers,
including in cases of inadequate supervision of official
practice meant to ensure that young recruits are of
legal age, and of manipulating child soldiers in the
context of peace negotiations.

Thirdly, the action plans agreed upon have proven
to be a valuable tool, and we encourage the Security
Council to continue urging parties to armed conflict
situations to prepare and put into practice concrete
action plans with definite time frames in order to end
the illegal recruitment and use of children, as well as to
undertake concrete commitments regarding other types
of alleged violations and abuses.

We are also alarmed by the upsurge of violence of
all kinds, including attacks that impede the exercise of
the right to education and numerous recorded cases of
sexual violence in a context of insecurity and impunity.
Argentina attaches great importance to the
promotion and protection of the rights of children.
Every State has the imperative obligation to ensure that
its inhabitants fully enjoy human rights, even under the
most difficult circumstances. In that regard, we are
grateful for the recommendations set out in the report
of the Secretary-General, which we shall study
carefully. In addition to what we have said in previous
debates on this item, we wish today to underscore our
agreement on a number of points.
First of all, the fight against impunity and the
quest for justice are at the core of any effective
response aimed at preventing and eliminating human
rights violations in any situation. It is therefore
indispensable to make greater efforts to end impunity,
including in cases of systematic and generalized sexual
violence. It is imperative to ensure due process and
recourse for the victims to adequate legal remedies,
including the International Criminal Court, where
applicable.
Secondly, we have listened closely to the
statements of the representative of Costa Rica and
other delegations, and we agree with what they said.
We consider that the deliberations of the Security
Council Working Group should be extended to all
situations of armed conflict, where there is proof not
solely of the recruitment and use of child soldiers but
of any of the other five categories of grave violations,
including rape and other serious sexual violence. We
believe it relevant to review the criteria for inclusion in

09-31740

Fourthly, we are convinced of the need to carry
out effective programmes of demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation so that victims have a
real opportunity to be reintegrated into society. For this
purpose, these programmes must have sufficient
funding and pragmatic and effective mechanisms to
achieve sustainable results over time. We believe that
that is an indispensable component for peacebuilding
that must receive appropriate political attention in all
relevant forums, including the Peacebuilding
Commission.
In line with what I said earlier, we would like to
stress the importance of the programmes initiated by
some Governments with the support of the United
Nations and the international community to ensure
appropriate rehabilitation and reintegration of children
who have been released or who have managed to leave
armed groups.
Argentina reiterates its unshakeable commitment
to the protection of children from all forms of violence
and to continued cooperation with the Working Group
and all mechanisms contributing to the promotion and
protection of the rights of children in order to secure
for them the potential for a childhood free from
violence where their human rights can be fully
enjoyed.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, we thank you for having organized this
debate today. We welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/158) and thank Ms. Coomaraswamy
and all other representatives of the Secretariat for their
excellent work. My written text is the official text of
my statement, but I would like to focus my abridged
oral presentation on just a few points.

25

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

We all know that in spite of the marked interest
and action by the international community, violations
of law and abuses continue. A very recent example is
the desperate situation of thousands of children trapped
in the conflict zone in north-eastern Sri Lanka.
Credible reports indicate that several hundred children
have been massacred and that a number of hospitals
have been targeted for attacks during the fighting of the
past few months. The situation is even more worrisome
because humanitarian access to these children trapped
in the war zones is still severely restricted.
Additionally, it has been reported that the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam have intensified their use of
child soldiers. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Working Group should use
every available opportunity to engage the parties to the
conflict so that they will improve the situation on the
ground.
This situation should not let us forget other
serious situations, such as those in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, the Sudan, Somalia
and other hotbeds of tension and crisis.
Generally, we call on the Security Council to use
all its influence to ensure implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1612 (2005), to include this
question on the Council’s agenda and to make better
use of existing mechanisms and instruments, such as
sanctions, peacekeeping missions, political missions
and statements and resolutions.
We fully endorse all the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report and stress the
following points. First, we support the idea of
expanding the criteria that trigger the inclusion of
parties to armed conflict in the annexes of the reports
of the Secretary-General. This could be carried out
using an incremental approach, starting with the
intentional killing and maiming of children and
concluding with all six grave violations.
Secondly, we support the idea that all parties
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports
should prepare and implement concrete action plans to
halt the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts. The Council should take measures against
any party that does not comply with its obligations.
Thirdly, the Working Group should be
encouraged to report to the competent sanctions
committees those parties to conflict committing
repeated grave violations against children. Moreover,

26

targeted measures should be taken against parties or
individuals responsible for such violations.
Fourthly, we encourage the Security Council to
defer to the International Criminal Court when
appropriate regarding violations committed against
children that fall within its jurisdiction.
Finally, the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict should receive more significant
administrative support and should improve its methods
of work.
The question of children and armed conflict is
only one facet of the protection agenda on which the
Security Council, the Secretariat, the operational
system of the United Nations and all Member States
should focus. Still, it is vital to monitor the
implementation of decisions on the ground, including
their impact on the populations concerned.
Accordingly, it is imperative that, through our work at
Headquarters, we develop mandates, including the
terms of engagement of United Nations missions, in
order to facilitate protection activities, ensure that
recommendations coming from thematic debates are
reflected in work on specific countries, support as
much as possible protection on the ground in terms of
human and financial resources, build capacity and
conduct leading to good management of key dilemmas,
and ensure that all stakeholders on the ground work in
close cooperation on the basis of a common
framework.
There are a number of financial mechanisms to
support United Nations protection activities: the
peacekeeping budget; the regular budget, including
special political missions; the budgets of relevant
United Nations agencies; and the Central Emergency
Response Fund; and various other funds financed
through voluntary contributions. This variety of
mechanisms represents a challenge in terms of the
effectiveness of planning and the strategic use of
resources.
The lack of a broad view of transparency or
predictability in resources is an obstacle to the
effectiveness of protection activities. It is the
responsibility of all of us to find appropriate solutions
to resolve this problem. A common framework would
contribute to improving the current situation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina):
Mr. President, I would like to express our thanks to you
for having taken the initiative to convene this open
debate on children and armed conflict. This is an issue
to which Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches the highest
importance.
Bosnia and Herzegovina aligns itself with the
statement made by the delegation of the Czech
Republic speaking on behalf of the European Union.
As has been described in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/158), the overall situation
of children affected by armed conflicts continues to be
of serious concern. Children continue to suffer from
the horrors of war. Recruitment by armed groups and
widespread violence, including killing and maiming,
sexual violence, abduction and other grave crimes in
war-affected countries, is daily life for thousands of
children. Children also suffer from the indirect impact
of war, such as the loss of their families and homes,
hunger and various diseases.
Bosnia and
Herzegovina considers that
addressing the root causes of conflicts and adopting a
comprehensive strategy, with the participation of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies, such as
UNICEF, regional organizations, the parties concerned
and non-governmental organizations, could lead to the
development of more effective tools in fighting all
forms of violence against children. Bosnia and
Herzegovina believes that the Working Group of the
Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict is an
important body and should take more serious steps
vis-à-vis all parties involved to put an end to child
recruitment and to the serious violations against
children. It would be more effective if the Working
Group worked closely with existing sanctions
committees.
The protection of children under the provisions of
international humanitarian and human rights law
should be carried out under the scrutiny of the States
parties to the respective conventions, including the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, and the obligations
applicable under the Additional Protocols to the
Geneva Conventions of 1977 and the Convention on
the Rights of the Child of 1989. In that regard, States
parties should adopt appropriate measures at the
national and international levels for the prevention of
the recruitment of children and for their protection
from all forms of violence. In that regard, as a party to

09-31740

the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, adopted in May 2000, we join others in calling
upon those countries that have not done so to accede to
the Protocol.
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a State party to the
Rome Statute, considers that the International Criminal
Court is an adequate and indispensable legal body that
can take appropriate steps to investigate and prosecute
crimes perpetrated against children that fall within its
jurisdiction. It is the only accessible way to put an end
to impunity and to prevent crimes in those cases where
the judiciary system at the national level is not able to
do so.
With regard to child protection advisers, their
reports from the field are an indispensable tool for
obtaining a comprehensive assessment that will help to
learn lessons and to find the most effective solutions.
Deployment of child protection advisers should be
considered
during
the
preparation
of
each
peacekeeping operation and political mission,
respectively. I would like to stress that the participation
of child protection advisers in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process is of the
highest importance.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
recounts
disturbing incidents affecting the education sector.
Armed conflict is distorting education in a number of
countries around the world, and children who are
deprived of their right to education also remain
deprived of their right to a better future.
In conclusion, I would like to express the hope
that this open debate will contribute to the
deliberations of Security Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate. It shows the special interest that
Mexico attaches to the issue of children in armed
conflicts, as does your greatly appreciated chairing of
the Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/158), as well
as the Special Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Le Roy, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, for their

27

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

briefings. I would particularly like to say how much we
appreciated Grace Akallo’s very poignant testimony
this morning.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement that my
Czech colleague delivered on behalf of the European
Union. On behalf of Belgium, I would like to highlight
three elements for today’s debate and then to share
some thoughts as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission’s country-specific configuration on the
Central African Republic.
First of all, Belgium fully supports the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to broaden
and strengthen the mechanism of resolution 1612
(2005) so as also to include in the annexes of the
reports of the Secretary-General parties in conflicts
responsible for systematic sexual violence. The scourge
of sexual violence is well known. The Council, through
resolution 1820 (2008), has recognized that such
violence, in some conflicts, is used as a weapon of war.
We believe that broadening the mechanism should, first
and foremost, take into consideration the criteria of
sexual violence, without however prejudicing
additional future broadening. That would serve as a
significant step towards eradicating that most hateful
violence.
Secondly, during its recent mandate in the
Council, Belgium consistently emphasized the fight
against impunity, whether through national or
international mechanisms, such as the International
Criminal Court. Today, that Court is the appropriate
legal instrument for prosecuting those suspected of
having committed the gravest crimes, in particular
against children. I wish to recall that the Court is an
adjunct to national criminal justice systems and that it
is first and foremost up to those jurisdictions to act.
The fight against impunity is a fundamental element
for reconciliation and peace, without which children
will remain the victims of serious violations. We
therefore support the plea of the Secretary-General to
extend the action and responsibility of the Security
Council and of its sanctions regimes in order to adopt
appropriate sanctions against individuals or groups that
persist in recruiting and using children.
Thirdly, Belgium would like to underscore the
critical importance of reintegration programmes for
former child soldiers. My country therefore fully
subscribed to the Paris Principles in 2007. The
principal message of those guiding principles is that

28

preventing the recruitment of child soldiers and
facilitating their reintegration must be envisaged over
the long term, that is through programmes spread over
several years. In that regard, the international
community, together with national authorities, must
fulfil their responsibilities.
That prompts me to say that the issue on our
agenda today exceeds the scope of the Security
Council. The Peacebuilding Commission also has a
very important role to play, in particular in
coordinating
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration programmes and in sensitizing public
opinion on the issue of child soldiers. I would like here
to refer to the Central African Republic configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which, together with
the Government of that country, has recently renewed
commitments to the issue in its strategy to build peace.
The Central African Republic Government now needs
to ratify and to incorporate into law the relevant
international conventions and protocols to prevent
recruitment, but also to protect and re-integrate
released children. The Central African Republic
configuration is committed to heightening the
awareness of national parties and international partners
in order to launch appropriate programmes and
mobilize long-term financial support for the children
concerned.
In the process of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of armed groups, UNICEF is
currently implementing a demobilization programme
for child soldiers, which, under the agreement with one
of the rebel groups, the Armeé Populaire pour la
Restauration de la République et la Démocratie, should
soon lead to the demobilization of 105 children. The
Central African Republic configuration ensures
coordination between those efforts and other
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes.
Finally, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her consistent
and resolute action for children in conflicts. Belgium
particularly appreciates her field visits, such as
recently in the Democratic Republic of the Congo or in
the Central African Republic. Her presence has a real
impact on the attitude of the parties to the conflict and
undoubtedly contributes to stemming the suffering of
children in conflicts. We greatly admire her strong
ongoing commitment for the cause of children in areas
of conflict.

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): I should like to sincerely congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council and on having convened this open
Council debate to consider the issue of children and
armed conflict. It is undoubtedly a highly sensitive and
very interesting topic for the international community,
in particular for a country such as El Salvador, which
has experienced conflict. Indeed, it is so because of its
cross-cutting implications and because of the moral
and political challenges that it entails in the area of
peace and security. It is also important in terms of
respecting and promoting the human rights of children
and adolescents, relevant international law and postconflict peacebuilding processes.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General
regarding the approach and the recommendations set
out in his eighth report on children and armed conflict
(S/2009/158).
El Salvador attaches great importance to the issue
of children and armed conflict as a matter of principle
firmly established in international law related to the
rights and the protection of children in armed conflicts,
including, among other instruments to which my
country is a State party, the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Likewise, as a
post-conflict country, El Salvador recognizes the great
value of the international community’s efforts to put an
end to the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts and other grave violations committed against
children affected by armed conflict.
In that context, our country considers it essential
to continue to make progress in implementing the
monitoring and reporting mechanism, in submitting
action plans to stop the recruitment and use of children,
and in mainstreaming issues related to children and
armed conflict in United Nations political and
peacekeeping missions.
Moreover, as amply documented by relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, rape and other
grave acts of sexual violence committed against
children in conflict and post-conflict situations are a
vital concern of the international community. Such
aberrant acts are clearly used as a weapon of war,
sometimes wielded to humiliate victims and subject
them to the military tactics of parties to conflict,

09-31740

thereby forcibly displacing specific populations
targeted by such acts and causing serious humanitarian
crises. El Salvador recognizes the importance of
eliminating such practices, which undermine the rights
and the protection of children in both conflict and postconflict situations.
In that regard, we should consider incorporating
into the Organization’s new international peacebuilding
architecture the systematic analysis and formulation of
specific recommendations for the Security Council on
this issue to supplement the efforts currently being
made by the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.
As a result of its experience in the area of
peacebuilding, El Salvador believes that the protection
of children’s rights and the full reintegration of
children into post-conflict societies are fundamental
elements that must be considered and incorporated into
the language of peace agreements, peacebuilding
strategies and national reconciliation processes.
El Salvador welcomes the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General in his report on children
and armed conflict. In particular, we wish to highlight
the importance of considering the feasibility of
including in country teams, which are established
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), officials
responsible for monitoring gender-based violence.
Likewise, officials concerned with the area of gender
violence and the protection of children, in particular
disabled children, should jointly establish modalities to
share information and coordinate their activities,
including in the area of access to justice and legal
recourse. In addition, we should fully consider possible
links between that suggestion and the Security
Council’s follow-up on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Furthermore, special mention should be made of
the situation, caused by armed conflict, in which
children are involuntarily separated from their families.
El Salvador, as a post-conflict country, has addressed
that situation by establishing an inter-institutional
commission to search for children who have
disappeared as a result of armed conflict. The
commission seeks to cooperate with public institutions
involved in or responsible for child protection in
finding children involuntarily separated from their

29

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

families, thus promoting family reunification based on
the best interests of the child. Here, we express to
Council members my country’s willingness to share the
experience gained by the inter-institutional commission
if this is considered appropriate.
Finally, we should like to commend the excellent
work done by Special Representative Coomaraswamy,
to whom I pay tribute this afternoon. I also wish to
reaffirm the political will of the Government of
El Salvador to continue to promote measures aimed at
strengthening the rule of law and democratic
governance as basic tools for ensuring the effective
protection of the human rights of all Salvadorans and,
in particular, children in post-conflict situations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Musawi (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to express my country’s appreciation
for the section on Iraq contained in the report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/158). We very much
appreciate the significant role played in that regard by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
My delegation would like to make the following
comments about the report’s section on Iraq. First, the
report covers the year 2008, and we all know that the
situation in Iraq has generally improved since then.
Indeed, the last few months of 2008 and the first few
months of 2009 witnessed a number of positive
developments, including clear improvements in the
security situation and their overall positive impact on
citizens and on the performance of the Government,
whose ability to meet the people’s security and safety
needs has obviously improved. In paragraph 43 of his
most recent report on the activities of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (S/2009/102),
covering the period December 2008 to February 2009,
the Secretary-General states:
“In recent months, Iraq witnessed gradual
stabilization and further improvements in security
conditions, with a lower number of violent, highvisibility, mass-casualty attacks by militias,
insurgents and criminal gangs.”
Secondly, the ability of terrorist organizations,
including Al-Qaida, to carry out attacks has declined,
and a number of terrorist leaders have been killed or

30

have left Iraq. Moreover, Al-Qaida has lost some of its
field commanders. Other leaders have left or have been
arrested, which confirms that the organization has lost
its capacity to control the situation on the ground and
to recruit. This is the truth of the matter, as pointed out
by the Secretary-General in paragraph 50 of his report
(S/2009/102):
“That the majority of these threats were not
realized could be interpreted as a further sign that
militia and insurgent leaders are losing influence,
or that their capability and resources are being
depleted.”
Clearly, this organization is a foreign body, a
cancer eating away at Iraqi society, and we expect that
it will soon be eradicated.
The Iraqi Government has made painstaking
efforts in a number of areas to ensure that all citizens,
including children, will be able to enjoy their human
rights, as noted in paragraph 41 of the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (S/2009/102).
However, the report does not mention the positive
effect of the cooperation between the Government and
the Mission, and does not fully or accurately portray
the situation on the ground. The reference in the report
to the presence of cases of child recruitment by militias
should have been submitted to the Iraqi Government so
that we could, together with the Mission, express
ourselves on these points, before the inclusion of
various pieces of information in the report of the
Secretary-General. To this extent, the report lacks
credibility, and is based on exaggerations and a lack of
specificity. It is incompatible with the most recent
reports submitted by the Mission on the situation in
Iraq. We would hope that, in the future, in cooperation
with the Mission, the Office of the Special
Representative will be able to submit more specific and
updated information to reflect the reality of the
situation.
Additionally, in terms of strengthening and
protecting the rights, safety and security of children,
various measures have been taken. We have developed
a law to protect Iraqi children under the principles of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols. We are finalizing a draft piece of
legislation on the establishment of a children’s
parliament in Iraq. We have conducted a study to
ensure the rights of orphans. We have taken measures

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

along the border to stop the trafficking of children. We
are endeavouring to reduce the phenomenon of the use
of children in armed conflict. A number of programmes
have been established in collaboration and
coordination with UNICEF, such as one to protect
children in situations of hardship, such as displaced
children. We have established programmes to help
children suffering from psychological traumas, with
follow-up and inspection units for these children. We
have promulgated a law prohibiting the use of child
labour under the age of 15 or until such time as they
have completed their primary education. We have also
worked to include the culture of the rights of the child
in school curricula, taking measures to prohibit all
forms of violence against children. We have tried to
ensure the protection of children from threats related to
armed conflict, working in close cooperation with
UNICEF and establishing specialized centres in
residential neighbourhoods to monitor ongoing
violations. The first centre for children traumatized by
war was established with the help of the Ministry of
Health, the Ministry of Social Affairs and civil society.
We have also rehabilitated and rebuilt schools
destroyed by conflict and war. We ratified the two
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child in 2008.
In conclusion, we would like to warmly thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We want to emphasize
that it is our intention to continue to cooperate with
United Nations agencies to ensure the protection of
human rights and the rights of children, which is a
priority for my Government.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Palihakkara (Sri Lanka): My delegation
wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting on a subject that is very important to my
country. Allow me to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for your very able leadership of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
In situations of armed conflict, children are the
most vulnerable and deserve every form of protection
possible. We are only too aware of this in Sri Lanka, as
we deal with the Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)
terrorism and its related violence. We appreciate the
role of the Secretary-General and the valuable
contribution
of
his
Special
Representative,

09-31740

Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and her team under her
mandate to address this important issue.
As a party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, Sri Lanka has enacted progressive legislation
providing for the protection of children and has
established institutional mechanisms to promote and
create
a
protective
environment
for
them.
Notwithstanding these measures taken as a State party,
non-State actors continue to use innocent children for
violent purposes, disregarding repeated censure on the
part of the Government and, of course, of this Council.
We are conscious that the primary responsibility
for the protection of children and promotion of their
welfare lies with the State. It is imperative for the State
to ensure that children are not in danger and to prevent
them from being used as accessories to violence. We
have consistently rejected in the strongest possible
terms the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict as unjustifiable under all circumstances. In
fact, the Council will recall that Sri Lanka voluntarily
submitted to the Working Group the case of a terrorist
organization, the LTTE, using children for combat. We
have been steadfast in advocating that this practice
stop.
Sri Lanka was among the first Member States to
volunteer to set up a national task force, in accordance
with resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005), to
monitor and report on the activities of the LTTE. We
support this Council imposing the strongest possible
measures against those who perpetrate such crimes.
In this context, Sri Lanka reiterates its continuous
policy of zero tolerance for child conscription and all
other grave violations against children. We strongly
believe in addressing issues of children and armed
conflict in the terms set out in resolution 1612 (2005).
The Council must consider this issue with a view to
supporting peacebuilding and security in conflictaffected societies, in order to enable States to protect
their children from non-State actors who violate
children with impunity.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/158)
refers to the recruitment of children as young as
14 years old by the LTTE, which used to operated in an
area in the north of Sri Lanka. The report shows that
recruitment by this group has intensified in recent
months. The Secretary-General has listed the LTTE as
a persistent violator since its first listing in 2003. In
that regard, we call upon the Security Council to

31

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

consider deterrent action against such persistent
violators. The breakaway faction of the LTTE, now
registered as a political party, has entered into a
tri-partite action plan with UNICEF and the
Commissioner General of Rehabilitation in December
2008, and has released most child conscripts. It is in
the process of accounting for the remaining children,
most of whom have returned to their families. UNICEF
has reported substantial progress, but more work
remains to be done. We appreciate the valuable work of
UNICEF in that regard.
The transformation of a terrorist group into a
political party, thereby allowing it to enter the
democratic process, is a difficult and at times perhaps
imperfect process, but that must be acknowledged as a
positive step. The LTTE’s release of former child
conscripts into a process of rehabilitation must be
welcomed and encouraged. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral encourages the Council to insist that
“parties in situations of armed conflict . . .
implement concrete time-bound action plans to
halt the recruitment and use of children . . . .”
(S/2009/158, para. 164)
We are pleased that we have already initiated such a
process with one of the groups that was responsible for
using children for combat in our country.
The Secretary-General in his report urges the
Council
“to consider means by which targeted measures
may be applied against persistent perpetrators of
grave violations against children” (Ibid.,
para. 167).
The LTTE in Sri Lanka falls well within that category
and deserves stronger targeted measures. In line with
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations,
our
Government has launched successful disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
established rehabilitation centres with assistance from
UNICEF and we remain fully committed to the
reintegration process. As recommended by the
Secretary-General, we hope that programmes for the
effective
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration of children will receive timely and
adequate resources and funding.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms rape
and other grave acts of sexual violence committed
against children in armed conflict, referred to in the

32

report. There can be no place for such grave violations.
We must find effective means to ensure that all actors
abide by those principles. Any expansion of the
mandate can be effective only when non-State actors
are held to account through deterrent measures. Even
on the core issue of the recruitment of children, we
have hardly been able to make any change on the
ground with the obduracy of groups like the LTTE.
This will not inspire confidence in the process
undertaken by the Council.
For instance, it is now over a decade since the
LTTE publicly undertook to cease the recruitment and
use of children as combatants and to release children
within its ranks. That commitment was never
implemented by the LTTE, which has continued to
dramatically step up its recruitment and use of children
as combatants. That continued long after the Council
adopted resolution 1612 (2005) urging entities like the
LTTE to cease such practices forthwith, release
children within their ranks and enter into action plans.
Member States must deploy all efforts to find
ways and means to make such non-State actors fall in
line. The initiative by the Security Council to address
the issue of children in armed conflict and subsequent
efforts by the Working Group must be made to focus
more on the real underlying issue of the recruitment of
children. Tangible international action as opposed to
mere expressions of concern is needed.
There is a need to encourage and guide former
members of armed groups who have renounced
violence and demonstrated a commitment to release
children and cease child conscription. There is equally
a need to take collective measures, including targeted
sanctions, against those who continue to repeatedly
violate resolution 1612 (2005), so as to demonstrate the
Council’s serious commitment to ending the use of
children in armed conflict.
As the LTTE terrorism in Sri Lanka nears its end,
the main priority for the Government is to care for and
protect the children and people affected by that conflict
in general, and especially, those who suffered as a
result of the LTTE’s persistent and deplorable practice
of using child soldiers and human shields — a
sentiment that was expressed by many delegations,
including the Special Representative this morning.
The Government has comprehensively briefed
Council members at several interactive discussions
concerning the measures it has taken in that regard.

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Olinger (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
First of all, I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
debate on children and armed conflict and to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for her
tireless commitment and her presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2009/158). I welcome its
quality and relevance. My delegation supports the
statement made by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.
I wish to emphasize a few points and principles
that are important to my country, which supports
bilaterally a number of organizations that are working
towards mitigating the plight of children in armed
conflict, in particular UNICEF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Today, there is a range of legal and political
instruments that seek to prevent the most serious
suffering of children in armed conflict. Our common
action to protect children in armed conflict also
requires ratification, and especially implementation of
relevant international instruments such as the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. In that context, we must recall the importance
of ratifying the Rome Statute, which contains an
important provision defining the act of conscripting or
drafting children younger than 15 years of age into the
armed forces as a war crime.
My Government believes it is important to bring
to justice all of the perpetrators of war crimes and
massive violations of human rights and humanitarian
law, especially when those crimes have been
committed against children. Impunity cannot be
tolerated, and my delegation fully agrees with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General in his report,
that the Council must not hesitate to refer violations
committed against children in armed conflict to the
International Criminal Court.
The 2007 Paris Conference was also a turning
point that recognized that violations of the rights of
children are violations of international law and that a
State must not only protect children on its territory, but
must also do its utmost to put constant pressure on
armed groups to obtain the release of conscripted
children. Two years later, it is essential to continue to
follow up on those commitments.

09-31740

Reading the report of the Secretary-General
confirms the fact that, in spite of strong international
mobilization, children continue to be the first
casualties of armed conflicts. I am speaking of child
soldiers, who are on the front lines of more than 30
conflicts throughout the world, as well of the millions
of children suffering from the atrocities of war,
including maiming and sexual violence. In that context,
my delegation fully supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to broaden the monitoring and
reporting mechanisms under resolution 1612 (2005) on
grave sexual violence against children.
Luxembourg calls upon the Security Council, in
line with the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral, to ensure that all peacekeeping operations
have sufficient resources to implement a child
protection policy, in particular through the deployment
of child protection advisers. The advisers should also
draw attention to situations where peacekeeping might
be carried out in a way that acts to the detriment of
children.
All conflict situations in which atrocities are
committed against children require our urgent
attention. I wish to note a few specific cases. At
present there is fighting in Sri Lanka, and civilians,
including many children, are once again the main
casualties. While violations of the rights of children are
not known in their full scope, it is clear from the
Secretary-General’s report that the various parties to
the conflict, in particular the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam, have conscripted children, and that a large
number of children have been kidnapped.
While the Government of Sri Lanka has assumed
some responsibility for children leaving armed groups
by promoting their reintegration, indiscriminate aerial
bombardment and long-range artillery fire are causing
grave suffering among the civilian population,
particularly children. I join my voice to all those
calling for an immediate ceasefire.
In conclusion, I wish to say a word on Burundi,
on behalf of which my country is involved in the
Peacebuilding Commission. Luxembourg welcomes the
demobilization of former child soldiers, including girls,
from the ranks of the Forces nationales de libération
(FNL), and appeals strongly to the FNL and the
Government to pursue the demobilization of other
children in compliance with international norms. It is
important now to facilitate their return and sustained

33

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

socio-economic reintegration through education and
vocational training programmes. This situation
demonstrates that the Peacebuilding Commission can
play a critical role in the mobilization of resources for
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
processes and in supporting awareness campaigns
concerning child soldiers.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by expressing our appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening this debate on the comprehensive report
(S/2009/158) submitted by the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict, and to his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her objective and
balanced briefing, which exposed the grave violations
that children face in armed conflicts, including killing,
maiming, rape and sexual violence, abduction,
recruitment, attacks on schools and hospitals being
used as shelters, denial of humanitarian access, their
use as human shields, and arbitrary detention, in
violation
of
international
law,
international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
The report adopts a constructive, pragmatic and
cooperative approach towards all situations reported,
researched, monitored and investigated. It was drafted
following broad consultations with all United Nations
entities and relevant task forces committed to the
principles of dialogue and target-sharing, as well as
with Governments that hold the primary responsibility
for protecting children. Such cooperation has
ultimately led to some progress in such countries as
Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Philippines and Colombia, and to positive
developments on issues related to violence against
children in the Sudan. Those developments include the
adoption of a presidential decree of pardon for 99
children out of 110 recruited by the Justice and
Equality Movement, who attacked Omdurman and
were captured by the Sudan Armed Forces, and the
cooperation of the Government of the Sudan with the
United Nations in addressing violations by rebel
groups against children on both sides, in investigating
Government violations and in bringing proven
perpetrators to justice.
However, despite all the efforts and field visits,
the report paints a disturbing picture of ongoing

34

violence against children in conflict zones and of new
forms of violence in some of those areas. This
phenomenon requires close coordination between the
Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council in studying the root causes of
the increased use of children in armed conflicts, the
main causes of violence against children, and the
means to fully implement international standards and
to guarantee full respect for international law and
international humanitarian law, including through the
revitalization and implementation of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
in order to prevent any involvement of children in
armed conflicts.
We have followed with great concern the grave
atrocities perpetrated by the Israel Defense Forces
against children in Lebanon and the Palestinian
occupied territories, including the illegal use of cluster
munitions by Israel during the 2006 attacks on
defenceless people in the villages, schools and farms of
Lebanon, as revealed and recorded in the report and
monitored by various United Nations agencies. We
demand that the Security Council ensure Israel’s
cooperation with the United Nations and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict by handing over relevant data,
including the necessary information on landmines and
cluster bomb sites. That would allow those munitions
to be cleared and prevent the victimization of more
children exposed to the threat of explosive remnants of
war in the affected areas; yet Israel continues to ignore
all the Special Representative’s appeals in that regard.
As for Gaza and the occupied Palestinian
territories, the report reveals old and ongoing grave
violations by Israel against Palestinian children. These
include the killing of thousands by the Israel Defense
Forces and the injuring and maiming of thousands
more by the use of phosphoric bombs, missile strikes,
internationally prohibited ammunition, tank fire, aerial
bombardment and rubber-coated bullets in numerous
ongoing attacks by Israeli settlers against children in
villages. The Israel Defense Forces have also used
Palestinian children as human shields, bombing
schools and killing and injuring the students and
teachers therein. Israeli settlers, too, have attacked
schools, including those of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East and others, hospitals, infrastructure and
humanitarian relief agencies, and have severely

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

hindered access to humanitarian assistance and medical
relief services. All of these acts violate international
law and call for the direct intervention of the Security
Council to ensure that these atrocities are effectively
addressed and prevented from recurring and that their
perpetrators are brought to justice.
In so doing, the Security Council and the General
Assembly must give due attention to the
implementation of the recommendations adopted by
the Committee on the Rights of the Child following its
review of the first and only report submitted by Israel,
in 2002, on the implementation of its commitments
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
Government of Israel continues to completely ignore
those recommendations, which include taking all
immediate and necessary measures to end violence
against children; taking all immediate and necessary
measures to prevent the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflicts; investigating forthwith all incidents
of the killing or injuring of children and bringing the
perpetrators to justice; and compensating the victims of
human rights violations, especially children, and
rehabilitating and reintegrating them into society.
At the same time, we demand that Israel
implement the recommendations set forth by the
Human Rights Council at its most recent session
concerning the universal periodic review of the
situation of human rights in Israel, in particular those
related to Palestinian children under occupation.
Egypt
supports
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the criteria set out in the annexes
of the report be broadened to include not only those
perpetrators convicted of recruiting children as soldiers
and of sexual violence against children, but also those
guilty of all six forms of grave violations against
children in armed conflict, on the condition that
indictment relies on verified data, field visits and field
follow-ups, as well as data collected through the
coordinated efforts of all the relevant United Nations
agencies and programmes, in close consultation with
the Governments concerned and with the support of all
United Nations Member States.
In conclusion, there is a special role for the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We believe it is necessary to follow up
on its recommendations, which were adopted after
careful study of each situation and after due
consultation with parties concerned, including

09-31740

Governments and the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflicts, specially those
recommendations regarding children in the occupied
Arab territories. We also stress how important it is for
the Working Group to take into consideration
recommendations adopted by the Committee on the
Rights of the Child regarding the situation of children
in armed conflict, bearing in mind the Committee’s
role as a comprehensive mechanism bringing together
expertise from many Member States with a valueadded perspective that should be used to ensure that its
potential benefit is realized to the greatest extent
possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Zhanibekov (Kazakhstan): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the important issue of children and armed conflict.
Almost 20 years after the World Summit for
Children and 10 years after adoption of Security
Council resolution 1261 (1999), on children and armed
conflict, the issue of grave violations of the rights of
children in armed conflicts is still an important item on
the Security Council’s agenda. Moreover, because of
the rising number of conflict situations worldwide, the
data on children affected by hostilities in certain
regions remains daunting.
The Security Council has defined six types of
grave violations of children’s rights as crimes under
international humanitarian law: the recruitment and use
of child soldiers, the killing and maiming of children,
rape and other grave sexual violence against children,
attacks on schools and hospitals, the abduction of
children and the denial of humanitarian access to
children.
We believe that by making full use of existing
tools, the United Nations system can promote a
considerable decrease in the number of children
affected by armed conflicts by preventing violations of
children’s rights and addressing impunity of violators.
The basic data collection instrument is the monitoring
and reporting mechanism on grave violations of
children’s rights, as established by resolution 1612
(2005). That instrument is a main source of data for
adequate measures by the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to address child
rights violations.

35

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Kazakhstan supports activities making use of this
unique tool and highly appreciates efforts of the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict to extend the research
scope of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. We
must acknowledge that this process is a considerable
step towards successful elimination of violations of
children’s rights in armed conflicts. Incorporating new
components into the scope of the research of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism could lead to
more balanced and comprehensive protection of
children’s rights, including those relating to health.

Kazakhstan has paid off. This policy also includes 100
merit-based educational scholarships provided annually
to students from Afghanistan and Tajikistan. Missing
the opportunity to provide young people with a proper
education can lead to the loss of a generation that
should be the foundation for building a newly
fashioned State.

I would like furthermore to stress the issue of the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former combatants
and children affected by armed conflict. During a
previous Security Council debate, Kazakhstan
underlined the necessity to put in place the conditions
for ensuring the education of children who have been
victims of the consequences of war. The high-quality
education of children is a key to avoiding exploitation,
violence and their recruitment into existing armed
groups. Professional education of children affected by
armed conflict is not a short-term investment.
However, it is vital to draw the attention of the world
community to the possibilities of adequate education
for such children as an intrinsic part of establishing a
post-conflict system. For this reason, an educational
process requires proper financial and technical support
from sponsoring countries.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.

Kazakhstan believes that lack of education and
the resulting poverty and inadequate level of
development can only exacerbate the condition of the
population in conflict areas. In this regard, we entirely
support the initiative of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, together with
UNICEF, on preparing a thematic collection containing
the best examples of the reintegration of children into
society through education.
In spite of the absence of armed conflict on the
territory of our country, Kazakhstan has acquired solid
national experience in overcoming financial and social
difficulties. A decision not to cut financing for the
educational system was accepted even in the current
difficult period of development. The international
merit-based Bolashak — “Future” — scholarship
system for gifted young people founded by the
President of Kazakhstan has been operating
successfully for 15 years. As a decade and a half of
practice shows, this policy of the Government of

36

We believe that active discussion during the
current open debate will draw well-deserved attention
from all stakeholders to efforts to overcome the most
destructive consequences of war: the undermining of
the life and health of future generations.

Mr. Ndabarasa (Rwanda): My delegation wishes
to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
address the Council. We greatly appreciate your
delegation’s laudable efforts in organizing this debate
on children and armed conflict and congratulate it on
its assumption of the Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. We also congratulate the
French delegation on the successful conclusion of their
mandate as Chair of the Working Group.
Allow me to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy,
for her tireless efforts in highlighting the issue of
children and armed conflict. My thanks go also to the
Secretary-General, to Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary General for Peacekeeping Operations, and to
Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, for
their briefings and for the commendable work they have
done in addressing the impact of armed conflict on
children. By the same token, allow me to pay particular
tribute to Ms. Grace Akallo for her testimony and her
resilience, and for putting a face on the issue before us.
The issue of children and armed conflict is a
symptom of the failure to comprehensively address the
causes of conflict and to utilize existing mechanisms
for the prevention of conflict. If we are to adequately
address this scourge it is imperative that we utilize the
mechanisms we have in place to address the causes of
conflict and to prevent conflicts from arising in the
first place.
Allow me to address a few specific issues in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/158). The report
acknowledges the significance of the recently
concluded “Umoja Wetu” joint operations between the

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda. These operations have greatly undermined
the capabilities of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and its sub-groups and
have led to the reintegration of the Congrès national
pour la défense du peuple (CNDP) into the Congolese
Armed Forces. But, most important, they have resulted
in the repatriation of refugees held hostage by the
FDLR and its sub-groups, many of whom were child
combatants. However, the FDLR and its sub-groups,
which are listed in the report as persistent offenders,
continue to forcibly recruit children into their ranks and
commit serious crimes, including sexual violence. My
delegation calls upon the international community,
through the Security Council and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), to support and build upon the
progress made by the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda and to utilize the
targeted measures, including sanctions, at its disposal to
eliminate the threat posed by the FDLR and its
sub-groups.
The genocide in Rwanda in 1994 included some
of the most inhumane acts of violence targeted at
women and girls and the use of sexual violence as an
element of genocide. My delegation therefore
welcomes the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
expand the protection framework by adding rape and
other grave acts of sexual violence against children as
a criterion for inclusion on the annexed lists, as well as
to strengthen the monitoring and reporting of those
crimes.
We welcome the progress made in mainstreaming
children and armed conflict issues into peacekeeping
and political missions. We have taken particular note of
the efforts outlined by Mr. Le Roy with regard to
MONUC-UNICEF collaboration to address the issue of
children and armed conflict in the Kivus. We also
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Department of
Political Affairs
in
that
respect.
However,
mainstreaming alone will not address the issue of
children and armed conflict. The Security Council
needs to empower peacekeeping missions to implement
policies on the ground through clearer and more robust
mandates.
In his recommendations, the Secretary-General
correctly points out the regional dimensions of this
issue and the need to establish mechanisms and
strategies for coordination and cooperation. My

09-31740

Government and that of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo have shown the way forward. We urge the
international community to follow our lead in taking
practical and pragmatic steps to address the issue of
children and armed conflict.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
delegation’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
commend the Mexican delegation for its dedication in
successfully guiding the Council’s work, as well as for
the participation at this meeting of your country’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I also thank your
delegation for convening this open debate and for
providing us with a second opportunity this month to
address the Council on an important issue, in this case
one that affects the most vulnerable members of
society: children.
The Council’s interest in the issue of children and
armed conflict is commendable, but it should not be
relegated
to
the
theoretical
realm.
The
recommendations of the Secretary-General and of the
Security Council’s Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict must be implemented. The Council’s
responsibility regarding the protection of children in
armed conflict should not be limited to monitoring the
situation as regards recruiting, arming and exploiting
minors in the camps and on the battlefield. It should
also monitor the situation with regard to children who
are not able to fully enjoy their rights or whose rights
are denied altogether — rights that have been
guaranteed to them under international law and
conventions. This includes denial of the rights to
health, education and access to humanitarian assistance
in conflict situations and humanitarian disasters. We
should therefore focus on strengthening monitoring and
reporting on serious violations of the rights of children
in armed conflict. That should also include violations
of the right of children to personal security, health and
education.
Although the international community has amply
demonstrated its concern about such serious violations,
we note the fragility of the international will in many
instances when it comes to addressing the issue of
children being deprived of education in situations of
armed conflict, including foreign occupation, despite

37

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

the fact that education is a fundamental right of the
utmost importance to children affected by conflict.
Roadblocks that prevent students from attending
schools and universities — thereby depriving them of
their legitimate right to education — result in their
falling far behind in academic achievement and
produce a culture of despair and fear among young
people, rather than the culture of hope and life that is
the primary reason for putting an end to conflict in the
long term.

Finally, it is crucial that we not lose sight of the
fact that children are the most precious resource in the
building of peaceful societies. The Government of
Qatar will seek to cooperate with international partners
and international organizations in order to ensure the
right of children to education in conflict situations. The
Security Council should also renew its commitment to
international efforts aimed at protecting and promoting
the right of children to education, so as to promote
international peace and security.

The military aggression by Israeli forces in the
Gaza Strip late last year was a glaring example of the
types of violations to which children in armed conflict
situations are subjected. That aggression included the
killing of hundreds of Palestinian children at the hands
of Israeli forces, including students sheltering in
schools that were directly hit and in hospitals deprived
of urgent medical supplies. The Secretary-General
highlighted some of those grave violations in his report
(S/2009/158) to the Council submitted pursuant to the
presidential
statement
issued
as
document
S/PRST/2008/6.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.

In that spirit, Her Highness Sheikha Mozah bint
Nasser Al-Misnad, First Lady of Qatar and Consort of
His Highness the Emir of Qatar, took the initiative as
UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic and Higher
Education to deplore the destruction of educational
institutions of the Gaza Strip and called on the Security
Council to develop a plan to designate schools and
educational institutions as safe havens for students and
their families and to ensure that they had access to
humanitarian services, deliveries of basic goods, and
evacuation services for the sick and wounded.
Previously, Her Highness had addressed a letter to the
Council (see S/2009/12) calling on it to assume its
responsibility and investigate crimes perpetrated by the
occupying forces against Palestinian civilians, in
particular children.
We reiterate our call for the Council to
investigate the Israeli army’s direct attacks on Gaza
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, so as
to determine who was responsible and bring them to
justice. In that regard, I should like to refer to the
report of the Secretary-General’s Board of Inquiry into
that situation in order to emphasize the importance of
following up on it.

38

Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on a subject that is of
great concern to all of us. My delegation also joins
others in expressing our thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, for her informative briefing.
Armed conflict always takes a human toll and
causes devastation. It is even more shocking when
children become its victims or are forced to become
armed perpetrators in conflicts. Myanmar shares the
view that the most effective and sustainable solution to
protect children in armed conflict is to address the root
causes of conflict. Therefore, the promotion of
sustainable development, the eradication of poverty,
the promotion of national reconciliation, good
governance and the protection of human rights would
go a long way towards preventing and resolving
conflicts.
Myanmar has taken concrete steps to prevent
conflict and to protect children in armed conflict.
Stringent laws and regulations have been put in place.
Under the Defence Services Act, Myanmar’s military
prohibits the conscription or recruitment of children
under 18 years of age. In order to prevent underage
recruitment, new recruits for the military services must
undergo stringent scrutiny, not only during the
recruitment and training period but also during the
post-training period. To further strengthen that
screening process, in 2004, the Government established
a high-level committee for the prevention of the
military recruitment of underage children. Under the
committee’s supervision and surveillance, between
2004 and 2009, a total of 296 instances of underage
recruitment were detected, resulting in discharge from
military service. While those children were returned to
their respective guardians, punitive action was taken

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

against military personnel who failed to abide by
recruitment rules and regulations. In 2008 alone,
punitive action was taken against 23 military
personnel. The Committee also works in close
cooperation with UNICEF and the United Nations
Resident Coordinator’s office in the area of
information-sharing and awareness-raising campaigns.
With the support and cooperation of the United
Nations country team, the action plan is being updated
to bring it in line with international standards. Updated
information on the work of the Committee has been
provided to the United Nations country team on a
regular basis. This includes lists of and detailed
information on underage children who have been
discharged from military service. For ease of
verification and follow-up by the United Nations
country team, the addresses of the discharged underage
recruits will be provided in future through the
information-sharing
process.
The
Myanmar
Government has also extended an invitation to the
United Nations country team to be present during the
hand-over of the underage children to their respective
guardians.
Advocacy and awareness-raising campaigns were
also carried out for military personnel, police
personnel, social workers and the general public. The
Government, with assistance from UNICEF and other
non-governmental organizations such as World Vision
(Myanmar) and Save the Children (Myanmar),
conducted seminars and workshops on the subject. The
Social Welfare Department, in collaboration with
UNICEF, published and distributed to members of the
military and armed groups a pocket-sized handbook on
preventing the recruitment of underage children.
Despite the commitment made at the highest level
and the concrete steps taken by the Myanmar
Government, which have been recognized in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/158), it is
regrettable that the well-trained and disciplined
Myanmar national army, the Tatmadaw Kyi, is still
listed in annex I of the Secretary-General’s report.
Myanmar urges that due recognition be given to the
progress made by the Government and that our national
army be removed from the list in future reports.
Myanmar wishes to underscore that the
Government is also making progress in the national
reconciliation process. Of the armed ethnic insurgent
groups, 95 per cent, a total of more than 100,000

09-31740

people, returned to the legal fold between 1989 and
2008. The olive branch is still extended to the
remaining 5 per cent. The former insurgent groups are
now working with the people and the Government on
the development of their respective regions. They are
also actively participating in the national political
process aimed at transforming Myanmar into a
democratic nation. Today, peace and stability prevail in
almost all corners of Myanmar. The country is no
longer in a situation of armed conflict. The situation in
Myanmar is therefore no longer relevant to the
discussion of the issue of children and armed conflict.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that my
Government is committed at the highest level to
preventing the recruitment of child soldiers into
Myanmar’s armed forces. To this end, Myanmar will
continue to support and cooperate with the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations country team.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the
delegation of Mexico on the effective manner in which
you have conducted the work of both the Security
Council during the month of April and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. My delegation
appreciates your initiative in convening this debate of
the Council.
In the political Constitution of my country, we
give priority to children’s rights, since we consider that
their protection is in society’s highest interests. This
precept is reflected in our institutional structure, which
permits the implementation of public policies aimed at
protecting children and, in particular, those children
whose rights have been infringed.
In the context of our comprehensive child welfare
policy, in December last year Colombia voluntarily
accepted the monitoring and reporting mechanism
provided for in Security Council resolution 1612
(2005). The voluntary nature of its acceptance is based
on the fact that the situation in Colombia is covered in
annex II of the report of the Secretary General
(S/2009/158) and is not on the Security Council’s
agenda.
In accepting the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, my country recognizes the contribution

39

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

that the United Nations can make to the national
Government’s primary duty to protect children affected
by the actions of illegal armed groups.
The Colombian State has established a
comprehensive strategy to address the prevention of
the recruitment and use of children by illegal armed
groups, as well as the protection, release and
reintegration of children who have been rescued from
such groups.
The first of these aspects, prevention, is the main
objective of the intersectorial commission created by
the Government of Colombia in December 2007. The
strategies of this commission, led by the Vice-President
of the Republic, include promoting the transformation
of family, community and institutional environments
into factors that safeguard children’s rights. The aim is
to consolidate protection networks that can reduce
children’s risk of exploitation by illegal armed groups.
Since its creation, the commission has focused its work
in 61 municipalities with high social and economic
vulnerability, where illegal armed groups are present
and the risk of recruitment has been reported.
In terms of the protection and restitution of the
fundamental rights of children rescued from illegal
armed groups, the Colombian Institute for Family
Welfare has provided assistance to 3,940 such children
to date. The programmes of the Institute seek to
provide comprehensive physical and psychological
care and to prepare children and youths for complete
reintegration into society.
My delegation has taken note of the eighth report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
children and armed conflict. As we have indicated on
other occasions, we do not consider it appropriate to
include references to criminal organizations or gangs in
the Secretary-General’s reports, as such organizations
do not fall within the purview established in the
Council’s resolutions. One example of this is the case
of criminal groups devoted to drug trafficking.
Furthermore, my delegation wishes to express its
concern over some passages in the report that go
beyond existing provisions of the Security Council’s
resolutions concerning children and armed conflict.
This applies particularly to references to Colombia
included in paragraph 147 and in the listing on page 38
of the report. The mechanism in Colombia is about to
be implemented. It is therefore inappropriate to
evaluate it in advance, even more so when this goes

40

beyond the framework established by the Council’s
resolutions.
Allow me to make some observations on the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in his
report.
The Security Council resolutions on children and
armed conflict have established a clear distinction
between situations that are on the agenda of the
Council and those that are not. The existence of
annex I and annex II in the report of the SecretaryGeneral is sufficient embodiment of this distinction,
which should therefore be maintained.
Likewise, the Council should continue to attach
greater weight and priority to the fundamental issue
that led to the creation of the mechanism — the
recruitment and exploitation of children. Also, any
implementation of targeted measures must be in
accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter.
Colombia, for its part, rejects every form of
sexual
violence,
including
rape
and
other
manifestations of sexual abuse. They are even more
reprehensible when they prey on children. My
delegation considers that Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) constitute the guiding
compass on this matter.
Allow me to conclude with an unequivocal
reiteration of the commitment of the Government of
Colombia to the protection and promotion of children’s
rights. The reference point of that commitment is the
framework established by the Security Council, as well
as the existing mechanisms and procedures. In that
spirit, we will maintain a continued dialogue to
advance towards the goals identified.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, let me
thank you, Sir, for convening this important open
debate and express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2009/158) on children and
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict for her comprehensive
presentation, as well as the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations and the Executive
Director of UNICEF for their briefings on the matter.

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
contribute to the activities of the existing United
Nations mechanisms and other relevant organizations
and agencies with the aim of ensuring more effective
protection of child rights and improving the situation
of children affected by armed conflict.
Azerbaijan’s interest in the topic under
consideration is obvious and derives from its practical
experience in addressing the impact on children of the
armed aggression against my country and in engaging
in international efforts to ensure respect by the relevant
party of its obligations under international law.
The occupation by Armenia of the territories of
Azerbaijan exerts considerable influence, inter alia, on
the humanitarian aspect of the problem and primarily
affects the most vulnerable groups. Azerbaijan
continues to suffer one of the highest proportions of
refugees and displaced persons in the world, large
numbers of whom are children. The most serious
international offences have been committed in the
course of the conflict. Even children have not been
spared. During one night alone in February 1992, when
the town of Khojaly in the Nagorny Karabakh region of
Azerbaijan was captured by invading Armenian forces,
63 children were intentionally killed and dozens were
maimed and taken hostage. Of more than 4,200 people
reported missing in connection with the conflict, 47 are
children.
In recent years, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been inscribed firmly on the international
agenda and a solid body of international legal norms
and standards has been elaborated. Important steps
have been taken through the application and
enforcement of these norms and standards to achieve
accountability for grave child rights violations. Indeed,
the international community has witnessed some
unprecedented initiatives to address impunity.
The engagement of the Security Council has
increased the general awareness of the need to protect
children in armed conflict, significantly advanced the
scope of actions and created opportunities to improve
common approaches in this regard. Although progress
has been made in a number of situations of armed
conflict, children are still suffering in many places
worldwide and continue to be the primary victims of
war. This bitter truth represents a profound challenge to
the international legal order and therefore requires the
international community to redouble its efforts to

09-31740

eliminate and prevent illegal practices affecting
children’s rights, as well as to fight impunity for grave
violations.
It is important to acknowledge the equal weight
of all grave violations. Azerbaijan shares the view that
the existing criteria of violations should be expanded to
include those responsible for the intentional killing and
maiming of children. At the same time, particular
consideration should be given to internally displaced
children in the context of ensuring their inalienable
right to return, and to the implications for the
protection of child rights of illegal policies and
practices in situations of foreign occupation.
Another challenging issue requiring urgent action
is that of children taken hostage and reported missing
in connection with armed conflict. The General
Assembly, in its resolution 63/183, of which
Azerbaijan was a main sponsor, requests States to pay
the utmost attention to the problem of missing children
and to take appropriate measures to search for and
identify such children and to reunite them with their
families.
We look forward to the adoption of the
presidential statement, which will focus on the ways
and means by which the international community can
continue to contribute to identifying long-term and
sustained solutions to the problem.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Sahussarungsi (Thailand): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Thailand, I wish to
warmly congratulate Mexico on your excellent work,
Sir, as President of the Security Council for the month
of April. I would also like to join other delegations in
expressing our solidarity with Mexico in your effort to
tackle the current public health crisis.
Thailand appreciates the leadership of Mexico in
advancing the agenda of children and armed conflict in
the Security Council. We share the commitment and
concerns of the international community on this critical
issue. In that connection, my delegation would like to
take this opportunity to share with the Council our
views on this important issue.
First, Thailand notes that the Security Council
has made significant contributions to the issue of
children and armed conflict, in accordance with its
mandate to maintain international peace and security.

41

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

We welcome the ongoing mainstreaming of child
protection in various tasks of the United Nations. In
particular, we welcome the ongoing attempt to
incorporate children’s issues into peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council and to
ensure that children’s concerns are duly reflected and
taken into account in all phases of mission planning.
We also welcome the mainstreaming of a childconscious approach in various political and
peacebuilding missions.
In the meantime, we have been following with
interest the efforts to strengthen the present mechanism
established by the Security Council on the issue of
children and armed conflict. While we believe that
there is certainly room for improving and consolidating
the current mechanism, we agree with the view
expressed earlier that an incremental, step-by-step
approach, based on thorough reflection and
consideration of the Council, should be the way
forward. We cannot stress enough that such key
principles as respect, sincere dialogue and cooperation,
the building of trust and confidence, and consent
should form the basis of all undertakings of the United
Nations agencies in their relationship with the
concerned Governments.
Secondly, because challenges relating to children
are multidimensional and diverse, Thailand believes
that greater coordination and coherence among relevant
United Nations forums and agencies are needed. In
addition to the Security Council, we welcome active
interest in child-related issues in the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, United Nations funds and programmes, as
well as relevant human rights treaty bodies. We believe
that each of those forums and agencies has its
uniqueness, strengths and constraints, in line with their
respective mandates. With better coordination and
coherence among those diverse instruments, the United
Nations system as a whole will be able to better
respond to the challenges pertaining to children around
the world.
Thirdly, Thailand strongly believes that a holistic
approach is needed to address challenges relating to
children and armed conflict in a sustainable manner.
We need to understand that each situation is unique and
that there is no one-size-fits-all prescription to every
situation around the world. The best way to address
these challenges in the long term is to tackle, with
understanding, the political, economic and social

42

conditions that have given rise to each situation. We
join other delegations in reiterating the primary
responsibility of the States concerned for ensuring the
effective protection and promotion of the rights of the
child in their respective jurisdictions.
At the same time, we believe that the
international community can play a complementary
role by providing constructive encouragement and
appropriate support to those States. In that regard, we
call on the international community to invest more in
areas that can make a real difference on the ground,
such as the provision of basic needs, the improvement
of people’s well-being, basic health care, education,
poverty alleviation, security, the rule of law, good
governance and respect for human rights. All of those
have both empowering and protection effects on the
societies concerned as a whole.
Fourthly, Thailand’s commitment to the cause of
the advancement and protection of children has been
and will always be strong, firm and consistent. That
seriousness has been well reflected in our efforts
domestically, regionally and internationally. At present,
Thailand is a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols,
including that on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. We are committed to the effective
implementation of the obligations contained therein.
We have invested heavily in various measures to
promote, protect and develop children throughout the
country so that they can become a productive force in
society. We have been doing our utmost to ensure
universal access to quality education and a safe
learning environment for our children. Special
attention has also been given to the issue of human
resource development to ensure that all children in
Thailand, regardless of their background, are well
equipped for the challenges of the globalizing world.
At the same time, earnest efforts have been made to
promote the appreciation of diversity, tolerance,
moderation and social harmony among children in
Thailand.
At the regional level, Thailand, as the Chair of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
has been working closely with other ASEAN member
States to advance the issue of human rights in the
region, including the rights of the child. Later this year,
ASEAN is scheduled to establish a human rights body
to advance human rights in the region. ASEAN

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

member States have also been working together
through various initiatives to promote and protect the
rights of the child as a part of the ASEAN communitybuilding process.
Last but not least, Thailand cannot stress enough
that the utmost care should be exercised in the
preparation of the Secretary-General’s report on the
issue of children and armed conflict. It should be clear
that the scope of the report should be restricted strictly
to situations of armed conflict in accordance with
applicable international law. In that connection, we
would like to underline that any reference in such a
report to any country where there is no situation of
armed conflict in accordance with applicable
international law — for example, a reference to
Thailand — is not only unwarranted but also
misleading, and therefore should not be repeated in the
future. A consultative and cooperative approach based
on the willingness to listen and understand the
complexity, sensitivity and nuances of each case is
needed to ensure that any well-intentioned effort does
not have unintended adverse effects on the ground, in
particular inadvertent impacts on children themselves.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): First of all,
allow me to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico for the initiative to convene us today to launch
a discussion on such an important issue. Allow me also
to commend the Secretary-General for the report
(S/2009/158) he has submitted on an issue that leaves
none of us indifferent. We would also like to express
our gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy for her
detailed presentation of the report.
I join all previous speakers in their determination
to ensure children’s right to live and grow in peace and
dignity, which is a primary responsibility of any
Government and any society. Today’s discussion and
the moving testimony of Ms. Akallo are tangible
evidence of how unprotected many of those who
constitute the most vulnerable segment of our societies,
children, continue to be.
I come from a region that has experienced a
number of armed conflicts in recent decades. The
problems and concerns mentioned here are therefore,
unfortunately, not purely humanitarian in nature for us.
Today, a final resolution to the conflicts in the South

09-31740

Caucasus is still pending. A no-war/no-peace situation
cannot ensure a safe and decent future for children and
young people who have already witnessed all the
atrocities that wars bring. It is our belief that only a
fundamental and comprehensive political settlement of
the existing disputes can bring long-lasting peace and
stability to the region, thereby securing the rights of
our children to a peaceful future.
Armenia has more than once reiterated its
commitment to the peaceful resolution of the existing
conflicts, for the benefit and progress of the entire
region. In that regard, I reserve the right to respond to
the statement of the delegation of Azerbaijan, which
has once again used this high forum to misled Member
States with its unchanged rhetoric. It is well known
that it was Azerbaijan that, two decades ago, unleashed
a full-scale war against what was at that time its own
peaceful population of Nagorny Karabakh, forcing tens
of thousands of people, including children, to quit their
homes and become refugees and internally displaced
persons, and leaving thousands of them orphaned and
maimed.
The military actions undertaken by our neighbour
have had unpredictable consequences for Azerbaijan
itself. Today, it is in everyone’s interest to take decisive
steps to move the peace process forward in order to
protect our children from renewed violence. Instead,
we continue to hear militaristic rhetoric from highlevel Azerbaijani authorities, which is not only
detrimental to the establishment of the confidence that
is so badly needed between our two peoples, but also
creates an atmosphere of hostility and hatred in which
new generations of Azerbaijani youth are being
brought up.
Armenia strongly believes in the need to achieve
a comprehensive settlement to conflicts through the
negotiating process. We are grateful for this
opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
guaranteeing the protection of children.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Benin.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to express my delegation’s high
appreciation for the way in which your country, Sir, has
led the work of the Security Council this month. The
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico
has considerably enhanced the quality of this debate.

43

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

My delegation notes with great satisfaction the
Secretary-General’s personal contribution and the
diligent participation of the Deputy Secretary-General.
We see all this as strong evidence of the recognition of
the gravity of the situation of children in armed
conflict. We pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and her entire team, as
well as to the task leaders of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, for their untiring efforts and
praiseworthy self-sacrifice in discharging the heavy
burden entrusted to them.
The Secretary-General’s very disturbing annual
report (S/2009/158), which Ms. Coomaraswamy
eloquently presented to the Council, says a great deal
about the scale of the challenge posed by the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict and
of the massive violations of their human rights. We
welcome the commitment of the members of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
charged with responsibility on this issue. They have
played a significant role in achieving progress in the
implementation of the action plans adopted by parties,
in cooperation with the mechanism, thus demonstrating
the great utility of the mechanism in assisting affected
children.
The invaluable contribution of UNICEF to the
implementation of child protection in the field, in
conditions that are well known to be extremely
difficult, is a particular credit to its leaders and staff at
headquarters and in the field. To my country, Benin —
which negotiated and co-sponsored resolution 1612
(2005) in the hope of putting a rapid end to the
aforementioned phenomena — their upsurge during the
reporting period is most alarming. The situation
requires bold measures to increase the pressure on
parties to conflicts that continue to commit grave
violations of children’s rights. In that respect, the
Security Council should use the instruments at its
disposal to obtain the cooperation of unrepentant
violators of children’s rights.
There is an urgent need to further develop the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to ensure
that it covers all crimes committed against children and
to end the prevailing use of double standards. My
delegation advocates the inclusion on the list of criteria
of the six identified violations of children’s rights, to
include the no less horrendous practice of sexual
violence against children. Such practices are

44

sufficiently serious for the International Criminal Court
to involve itself by initiating proceedings against
perpetrators in cases where national jurisdictions are
unable to provide justice to victims.
The necessary arrangements must be made to
ensure that children exposed to such reprehensible
practices are not abandoned to their sad fate. The
responsibility to assist, which is incumbent on the
international community, requires action. These crimes
are part and parcel of the responsibility to protect that
it must fulfil through the competent entities, which
must use the means at their disposal. Peacekeeping
operations should be fully up to speed in that respect.
We note the briefing on that issue by the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain le Roy.
In all circumstances, there is a need to end
impunity for crimes against children in armed conflict.
The United Nations should fully exploit every
opportunity for action under resolution 1612 (2005). If
there should prove to be a need at this stage of its
implementation for an additional resolution to ensure
the universality of the mechanism and to enhance its
effectiveness in the fight to protect children in armed
conflict effectively, no artificial obstacles should be
raised to hinder its adoption.
We must give serious consideration to
strengthening national mechanisms for effective
follow-up and assistance to affected children.
Appropriate assistance programmes should be
established at the national and local levels to ensure the
rehabilitation and lasting social reintegration of
demobilized children. The testimony of Ms. Grace
Akallo has shown us the path we must follow in order
to provide a better future to children mistreated in
armed conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation associates itself
with the presidential statement to be adopted at the end
of this meeting. The deadline which the Security
Council has set for finalizing its deliberations on the
issue of extending the annexes to the report represents
a commitment that we duly note. Beyond the efforts
under way to increase pressure on violators of
children’s rights in armed conflict, the best form of
protection would be the cessation of such conflicts. We
have always cherished that hope. We must enhance
diplomatic measures to reconcile belligerents and to

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

help countries at war to return rapidly to the path of
peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the eighth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/158) on children and armed
conflict and of the positive developments referred
to in the report, and notes the continuing
challenges in the implementation of its resolution
1612 (2005) reflected therein.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to address the widespread impact of
armed conflict on children, and its determination
to ensure respect for, and the implementation of,
its resolution 1612 (2005) and all its previous
resolutions on children and armed conflict, as
well as respect for other applicable international
law related to the protection of children affected
by armed conflict.
“The Security Council stresses, in this
regard, the importance of adopting a broad
strategy of conflict prevention, which addresses
the root causes of armed conflict in a
comprehensive manner in order to enhance the
protection of children on a long-term basis,
including by promoting sustainable development,
poverty eradication, national reconciliation, good
governance, democracy, the rule of law and
respect for and protection of human rights.
“The Security Council acknowledges that
the implementation of its resolution 1612 (2005)
in situations listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/158) has
generated progress and invites the SecretaryGeneral, where applicable, to strengthen the
efforts to bring the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to its full capacity in order to allow
for prompt advocacy and effective response to all
violations and abuses committed against children.
In this regard, the Council reiterates its request to
the Secretary-General to provide additional
administrative support to its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

09-31740

“The Security Council reiterates its equally
strong
condemnation
of
the
continuing
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict
in violation of applicable international law,
killing and maiming of children, rape and other
sexual
violence,
abductions,
denial
of
humanitarian access to children and attacks
against schools and hospitals by parties to armed
conflict. The Council condemns all other
violations of international law, including
international humanitarian law, human rights law
and refugee law, committed against children in
situations of armed conflict. The Council
demands that all relevant parties immediately put
an end to such practices and take special
measures to protect children.
“The Security Council expresses deep
concern that civilians, in particular children,
continue to account for a considerable number of
casualties resulting from killing and maiming in
armed conflicts, including as a result of deliberate
targeting, indiscriminate and excessive use of
force, indiscriminate use of landmines and cluster
munitions and use of children as human shields.
“The Security Council further expresses
deep concern with the high incidence and
appalling levels of brutality, of rape and other
forms of sexual violence against children, girls
and boys, committed in the context of and
associated with armed conflict, including the use
or commission of rape and other forms of sexual
violence in some situations as a tactic of war.
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of including in the annexes to the
Secretary-General’s reports on children and
armed conflict those parties to armed conflict that
commit acts of killing and maiming of children
that are prohibited under applicable international
law or acts of rape and other sexual violence
against children that are prohibited under
applicable international law, in situations of
armed conflict, and expresses its intention to
continue its consideration of this issue, in order to
take action within three months of this date.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on
parties to armed conflict listed in the annexes of
the Secretary General’s report (S/2009/158) that
have not already done so to prepare and

45

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

implement, without further delay, concrete timebound action plans to halt recruitment and use of
children in violation of applicable international
law, and to address all other violations and abuses
committed against children and undertake
specific commitments and measures in this
regard, in close cooperation with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and the United
Nations country-level task forces on monitoring
and reporting.
“The Security Council expresses its concern
with situations where insufficient or no progress
has been made by parties listed in the annexes to
the Secretary-General's reports in halting
recruitment and use of children in violation of
applicable international law, including through
the preparation and implementation of concrete
time-bound action plans, and reiterates its
determination to ensure respect for its resolutions
on children and armed conflict, making use of all
the tools provided in its resolution 1612 (2005),
including action as appropriate in accordance
with paragraph 9 of its resolution 1612 (2005).
“The Security Council strongly emphasizes
the need for concerned Member States to take
decisive and immediate action against persistent
perpetrators of violations against children, and to
bring to justice those responsible for the
recruitment and use of children in violation of
applicable international law and other violations
against children through national justice systems
and, where applicable, international justice
mechanisms and mixed criminal courts and
tribunals, with a view to ending impunity for
those committing crimes against children.
"The Security Council reiterates the primary
responsibility of States in providing effective
protection and relief to all children affected by
armed conflicts, and calls upon them to comply
with
their
obligations
under
applicable
international law, including the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and the Optional
Protocols thereto, and encourages States to
strengthen national measures for the prevention
of violations against children in armed conflict,
including recruitment and use of children and
their use in hostilities in violation of applicable
international law, inter alia, by enacting

46

legislation that explicitly prohibits such
recruitment and use as well as other violations,
and urges States that have not yet done so to
consider ratifying or acceding to this Convention
and its Optional Protocols.
“The Security Council reiterates the
importance of the full, safe and unhindered
access of humanitarian personnel and goods and
the delivery of humanitarian assistance to all
children affected by armed conflict, and stresses
the importance for all, within the framework of
humanitarian assistance, of upholding and
respecting the humanitarian principles of
humanity,
neutrality,
impartiality
and
independence.
“The Security Council remains concerned
with the illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons and its effect on and their use by
children in armed conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes the
sustained engagement of its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and requests it to
adopt, with the administrative support of the
Secretariat,
timely
conclusions
and
recommendations in line with resolution 1612
(2005). The Council encourages its Working
Group to continue its review process, to enhance
its ability to follow up the implementation of its
recommendations and the development and
implementation of action plans to halt
recruitment and use of children, and to consider
and react in a timely manner to information on
situations of children and armed conflict, in
collaboration with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNICEF. It also invites its Working Group to
enhance its communication with relevant Security
Council sanctions committees, including by
forwarding pertinent information.
“The Security Council commends the work
carried out by the Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
emphasizes the importance of her country visits
in promoting collaboration between the United
Nations and Governments and enhancing
dialogue with parties to armed conflict.

09-31740

S/PV.6114 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council also commends the
work carried out by UNICEF as well as other
relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, within their respective mandates,
the child protection advisers of United Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political
missions
in
cooperation
with
national
Governments and relevant civil society actors.
“The Security Council encourages the
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in mainstreaming child protection into
all peacekeeping missions, in close collaboration
with the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF, and encourages the
deployment of child protection advisers to
peacekeeping operations, as well as into relevant
peacebuilding and political missions.
“The Security Council
Peacebuilding Commission to
promote child protection in
situations under its consideration.

invites the
continue to
post-conflict

“Given the regional dimension of some
conflicts, the Security Council encourages
Member States, United Nations peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and political missions and United
Nations country teams to establish appropriate
strategies and coordination mechanisms for
information exchange and cooperation on crossborder child protection concerns such as
recruitment, release and reintegration of children.

09-31740

“The Security Council recognizes the
important role of education in armed conflict
areas, including as a means to achieve the goal of
halting and preventing recruitment and rerecruitment of children in violation of applicable
international law, and calls upon all parties
concerned to continue to ensure that all children
associated with armed forces and groups
systematically have access to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes where
they can benefit, inter alia, from education.
“The Security Council also urges parties to
armed conflict to refrain from actions that impede
children's access to education, in particular
attacks or threats of attack on school children or
teachers as such, the use of schools for military
operations, and attacks on schools that are
prohibited by applicable international law.
“The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit his next report by
May 2010 on the implementation of its
resolutions on children and armed conflict.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/9.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

47
