RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

925 (X). Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (25
October 1955) (item 27) ......................... • • • • • • • • . • • • . • • • • • • ·
926 (X). Advisory services in the field of human rights (14 December 1955)
(item 62) ............. , • • • • • • • • · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · -. · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
927 (X). Question of th~ sa~ety of ~ommercia! aircraft flying in the vic~nity of,
or inadvertently crossing, mternattonal frontiers ( 14 December 1955) ( item 61)
928 (X). Ratification of, or accession to, the Convention relating to the Status
of Stateless Persons (14 December 1955) (item 12) ...................... .

925 (X). Report of the United Nations High
CommiHioner for Refugees

Bea,-ing, in mind Economic and Social Council resolution 589 (XX) of 29 July 1955,
Considering that under the Statute• of his Office the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is
charged with the duty of seeking solution~ f!)r the problems of refugees through voluntary repatnatton, resettlement and integration,

13

14
15

attained and the High Commissioner enabled fully to
implement the programmes planned for those years.
537th plenary meeting,
25 October 1955.

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report1 of the United Nations
High Commissioner for _Refugees with the annexed !eport of the United Nations Refu~ee Fund Executt!e
Committee, and of the progress which has been '!lade m
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 832
(IX) of 21 Octobet 1954,

13

926 (X). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Considering that, by Articles 55 and 56 of the Un~ted
Nations Charter the States Members of the United
Nations have pl~dged themselves to promote universal
respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,

Noting with conce,-n that the approved target for governmental contributions to the United Nations Refugee
Fund for 1955 has not yet been reached,

Recognizing that technical assistance, by the in~ernational interchange of technical knowledge through mternational co-operation, represents one of th~ means. by
which it is possible to promote the huma~ nghts ob1ectives of the United Nations as set forth m the Charter
and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,

1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts to effect solutions by
the above-mentioned means, under due safeguards to be
-applied by him in accordance with his responsibility
under the Statute of his Office to provide international
protection to refugees within his mandate ;

Recalling General Assembly resolution 729 (VIII) of
23 October 1953 authorizing the Secretary-General to
render, at the request of Member States, services which
do not fall within the scope of existing technical assistance programmes, in order to assist those States in promoting and safeguarding the rights of women,

2. Notes with satisfaction that the United Nations
Refu~ee Fund Executive Committee, in laying down the
principles which are to govern the implementation of
the programme for permanent solutions under General
Assembly resolution 832 (IX), has directed that the
main emphasis of the programme should be on the reduction of the number of refugees in camps ;

Recalling General Assembly resolution 730 (VIII) of
23 October 1953 aud1orizing the Secretary-General to
render, at the request of any Member State, technical
advice and other services which do not fall within the
scope of existing technical assistance programmes, in
order to assist the Government of that State within its
territory in the eradication of discrimination or in the
protection of minorities, or both,

3: Urges States Members and non-members of the
United Nations to give early and serious consideration to
makinJ contributions to the United Nations Refugee
Fund m order that the targets for 1955 and 1956 may be
1 01/iciol Records of the General .A11embly, Tenth Session,
Swppfement No. 11 (Af29(1l. and Add.1).
• Ibid., Fifth Session, S•nlement No. 20, resolution 428 (V),
annex.

Recalling General Assembly resolution 839 (IX) of
17 December 1954 authorizing the Secretary-General to
render, at the request of Member States, services which
do not fall within the scope and objectives of existing
technical assistance programmes, in order to assist those
States in promoting freedom of information, and Economic and Social Council resolution 574 A (XIX) of

14

General Assembly -

26 May 1955 requesting the Secretary-General to take
steps to put into operation a programme to promote
freedom of information by providing such services as
experts, fellowships and seminars,

Taking account of the arrangements previously established by the General Assembly concerning the regular
technical assistance programme and the advisory services
of the United Natiop.s in its resolutions 200 (III) of
4 December 1948, 246 (III) of 4 December 1948, 305
(IV) of 16 November 1949, 418 (V) of 1 December
1950, 518 (VI) of 12 January 1952 and 723 (VIII) of
23 October 1953,
Considering that the specialized agencies, within their
competence and by virtue of their regular programmes
of technical assistance, are already rendering important
services to their members with a view to ensuring the
effective observance of human rights,
1. Decides to consolidate the technical assistance programmes already approved by the General Assembly
( relating to the promotion and safeguarding of the rights
of women, the eradication of discrimination and the protection of minorities as well as to the promotion of freedom of information) with the broad programme of
assistance in the field of human rights proposed in the
present resolution, the entire programme to be known as
"advisory services in the field of human rights";
2. Authorizes the Secretary-General:

(a) Subject to the directio0s of the Economic and
Social Council, to make provision at the request of Governments, and with the co-operation of the specialized
agencies where appropriate and without duplication of
their existing activities, for the following forms of
assistance with respect to the fielc! of human rights:
( i) Advisory services of experts ;
(ii) Fellowships and scholarships;
(iii) Seminars ;
( b) To take the programme authorized by the present
resolution into account in preparing the budgetary estimates of the United Nations;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake the
assistance provided for in paragraph 2 (a) above, in
afreement with the Governments concerned, on the basis
o requests received from Governments and in accordance with the following policies :
(a) The kind of service to be rendered to each country
under paragraph 2 (a) ( i) shall be determined by the
Government concerned;
( b) The selection of the persons under paragraph 2
(a) (ii) shall be made by the Secretary-General on the
basis of proposals received from Governments ;
( c) The amount of assistance and the conditions under which it is to be rendered shall be decided by the
Secretary-General, with due regard to the greater needs
of the under-developed areas, and in conformity with
the principle that each requesting Government shall be
expected to assume responsibility, as far as possible, for
all or a considerable part of the expenses connected with
the assistance furnished to it, either by making a contribution. in cash, or by providing supporting staff, services and payment of local costs for the purpose of carrying out the programme ;
(d) The assistance shall be applicable to any subject
in the field of human rights, in addition to the subjects
covered by the relevant resolutions of the General As-

Tenth Session

sembly, provided however that the subject shall be one
for which adequate advisory assistance is not available
through a specialized agency and which does not fall
within the scope of existing technical assistance programmes;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report regularly
to the Economic and Social Council, to the Commission
on Human Rights and, as appropriate, to the Commission on the Status of Women, on the measures which he
takes in compliance with the terms of the present resolution;
5. Recommends that the specialized agencies continue
to develop their technical assistance activities with a view
to aiding Member States to further the effective observance of human rights ;
6. Invites the specialized agencies to communicate to
the Economic and Social Council, for transmission to
the Commissio_n on Human Rights, any observations
which they may find appropriate on the above-mentioned
assistance and on any new measures of assistance which
they may deem necessary with a view to assisting Member States in furthering the effective observance of
human rights;

7. Expresses the hope that international and national
non-governmental organizations, universities, philanthropic foundations and other private groups will supple•
ment this United Nations programme with similar programmes designed to further resea£ch and studies, the
exchange of information and assistance in the field of
human rights ;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to inform Member
States of this new programme and of the procedures to
be followed in obtaining assistance;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council to submit to the General Assembly at its thirteenth session a
report containing :
(a) An evaluation of the projects carried out under
the programme of advisory services in human rights,
with particular reference to the extent to which these
projects have furthered the aims and purposes of_ the
United Nations in the field of human rights;
( b) Recommendations concerning the future of the
programme.
554th plenary meeting,
14 December 1955.

927 (X). Question of the safety of commercial
aircraft flying in the vicinity of, or inadvertently croHing, international frontiers
The General Assembly,
Mindful of incidents involving attacks on civilian aircraft innocently deviating from fixed plans in the vicinity
of, or across, international frontiers,
Noting that such incidents cause loss of human life
and affect relations between States, and that the problem
is therefore a matter of general international concern,
1. Calls upon all States to take the necessary measures
to avoid such incidents ;
. 2. Invite~ th.e attention of the appropriate international orgamzations to the present resolution and to the
debate on the matter held in the General Assembly at its
tenth session.
554th plenary meeting,
14 December 1955.
