UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/27
11 May 1995
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND FRENCH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3534th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 May 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General’s third
progress report of 3 May 1995 (S/1995/350) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) and the oral briefing from the
Secretariat.
"The Security Council welcomes the positive developments in Angola.
It welcomes in particular the meeting in Lusaka on 6 May 1995 between
President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi which took place in a positive
atmosphere and gave new impetus to the consolidation of the peace process
and the furthering of national reconciliation in Angola. The Council
commends the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, of the observer States to the Angola peace process, of States of
the region and, in particular, of the President of Zambia which assisted in
bringing about this meeting. It expresses the hope that the meeting will
mark the beginning of a regular and constructive dialogue between the
President of Angola and the leader of UNITA.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol (S/1994/1441, annex) concerning
inter alia reduction of cease-fire violations, the disengagement of forces,
the cooperation among the parties and UNAVEM III, the signing of the status
of forces agreement and the providing of logistic facilities for the
mission. The Council welcomes the ongoing deployment of UNAVEM III support
units and stresses the importance of a timely deployment of the infantry
battalions of UNAVEM III.
"The Security Council is however concerned by the slow progress in
other areas. It stresses the necessity for the increased cooperation of
the Government and UNITA with the United Nations in carrying out all major
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and relevant Security Council
resolutions. While welcoming the release of the first group of prisoners,

95-14270 (E)

110595

/...

S/PRST/1995/27
English
Page 2

the Council urges the parties to expedite this process. Urgent attention
should be given to the quartering of UNITA soldiers by the parties as well
as the United Nations and the withdrawal of government troops to their
barracks in order to permit the incorporation of UNITA troops within the
national army and police in accordance with the Lusaka Protocol. The
Council stresses also the importance of the completion of the disengagement
process and the improvement of communication links with UNITA in all
regions. It recalls the conditions set forth in Security Council
resolution 976 (1995) for the deployment of infantry units and calls upon
the parties in Angola to take all necessary steps to ensure that these
conditions are met promptly for the timely deployment of sustainable
infantry units throughout Angola capable of fully discharging their
mandated tasks.
"The Security Council particularly underlines the urgency of a mineclearance programme and calls upon the parties to provide, as promised, the
funds and equipment necessary in order for the programme to become
operational, and to begin mine-sweeping operations on major roads under
their control. The demining, the opening of major roads and repair of air
fields and other infrastructure are of crucial importance for the
expeditious deployment of UNAVEM infantry units, the distribution of
humanitarian aid, and the return of displaced persons to their places of
origin. The Council invites the donors as well as the United Nations, its
agencies and non-governmental organizations to support actively demining
actions.
"The Security Council notes with satisfaction the amelioration of the
humanitarian situation in Angola and calls upon the parties to cooperate
without restriction with the United Nations and other humanitarian
international organizations to facilitate the distribution of aid in all
the regions and to intensify their efforts to guarantee the security of
humanitarian transports and of UNAVEM personnel. It requests Member States
to continue to support the ongoing humanitarian activities in Angola and to
disburse as soon as possible the contributions pledged during the donors’
meeting in February 1995.
"The Security Council will continue to monitor the situation in
Angola closely and looks forward to the next monthly report of the
Secretary-General."

-----

/...
