UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS.
FOURTH YEAR

425th MEETING: 19 MAY 1949
425emcSEANCE:

19 MAl 1949

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
.PROCES··VERBAUX OFFICIELS
QUATRIEME ANNEE

LAKE SUCCESS, NEW· YORK.

j"

. {40 p.}
br --

No. 28

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Four hundred and twenty..fifth meeting

Quatre cent vingt-einquieme seance
Page

Page
1. Provisional agenda

1
2. Adoption of the agenda .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
3. The Hyderabad question (continued) ...• 1

1. Ordre du jour provisoire •••••••••.••••
2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour •.•..••....
3. La question de Haiderabad (suite) •.••

Relevant dO.cwnents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official
Records.
All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital
letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicaies a reference
tll a United Nations document.
'

Les documents pertinellts qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans le
texte des seances du Const'il de securitesont publies dans des supplements
mensuels aIDe Proces-verbaux officiels.
Les documents de,j' Nations Urdes portent tous une cote, qui se compose
de leUres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'mle cote dans
un texte signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document des Nations Unies.

1
1
1

-UNITED r.~ATIONS

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES.VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. ~'8

QUATIDEME ANNEE

No 2~

FOUR HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIFTH MEETING

QUATRE CENT VINGT-ClNQUIEME
SEANCE

Held at Lak!l S~eccess. New York.
on Th1wsday, 19 May 1949. at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le jeudi 19 men 1949. a 15 heures.

President: Mr. J. CHAUVEL (France).

President: M. J. CHAUVEL (France).

Present: The representa:tives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canaqa, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingc'1om, United States of Amedca.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Argentine. Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

1. Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/425/
.' Rev.l)

1. Ordre du jour provisoire (S I Agenda '425 /Rev.1)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption, de l'ordre du jour.

2. The Hyderabad question;
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1949 from the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Commonwealth Relations of Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
Council concerning the Hyderabad question (S/1317).

2. La question de Haiderabad:
a) Lettre adressee par le Ministre des affaires
etrangeres et des relations imperiales du .
.Pakistan, le 4 mai 1949, au President du
Conseil de securite, touchant la question
de Haiderabad (S/1317).

2. Adoption of the agenda

2. Adoption de l'ordre du jour

The agenda was culopted without discussion.

L'ordre du jour ·est aaopte.

3. The ~yderahad question (continued)

3. La qllestion de Haiderabad (suite)

At the -inVitation of the President. Sir Benegal
N. Rau. representative of India. and Sir Mohammed Zafrullah Khan. representative of Pakistan.
took their places at the Se.curity Council. table.

Surl'invitation du President, Sir Benegal N.
Rau, representant de l'Inde, et Sir Mohmnmed
Za!rulla,h Khan, reprBs~ntQtnt du Pakistan, prenn(/nt place a·la tab-le du Conseil.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I would remind the members of the Council that.
at the 384th meeting of the Security Council held
on 15 December 1948, the representative of Pakistan was. asked to come to the Council table. In
answer toa question by the President, he said that
his statement would take a considerable time. It
was then decided that this statement should be
given when the Security Council was once more
meeting at Lake Success. In accordance with this
decision, the representative of Pakistanis asked
toda,y to address the C9uncil.

Le PRESIDENT: Je rappelleque, le 15 decembre
1948, au COUiS de la 384eme seance du Conseil
de stkurite, le representant du Pakistan a ete
appele a prendre place a la·. table du COL:seil. En
reponse a une question du President, le representant du Pakistan a dtklare que SOl'. expose serait
fait au moment ou le Conseil de securite serait
de nouveau installe a Lake Success. C'est en
application de cette decision que· le representant
du Pakistan est appele, aujourd'hui,a prendre
la parole.
.

N,

2
Before hearing the representative of Pakistan,
I should like to bring to the Council's attention a
letter addressed by the representative of India
(S/1324), in which he asks to be heard on the
question of the Council's competence. Considering the nature of the remarks which the Indian
reQresentative intends to make, and unless there
is ~ny objection from the Coundl, I consider that
he has the right to be heard first.
Since there are no objections I shall call upon
the representative of India.
As is customary, s1mult(Uleous interpreta?on
will be used for the speeches oHhe representatIves
of India and Pakistan, inasmuc.'lt as these two
States are not members of the Cottndl.

Avant de donner la parole au representant du
Pakistan, je signale au Conseil une lettre adressee
par le representant del'Inde (8/1324), aux termes de laquelle celui-ci demande a. etre entendu
sur la question de la competence du Conseil. Etant
tionne la nature des observations que se propose
de nous presenter le representant de l'Inde, et
sauf objection du Conseil, je considere qu'il doit
etre entendu, en premier lieu.
Puisqu'il n'y a pas d'objections, je donne la
parole au representant de l'Inde.
Comme d'habitu.1e, it sera fait usage de 1'interpretation ~imult&nee pour les interventions des
repTl~sentants de l'Inde et du Pakistan, etant
donnt~ que ces deux Etats ne sont pas membres
du Conseil.

Sir Benegal N. RAu, (I:uia) : I am very grateful to the members of the Security Council for
giving me this opportunity to amplify what has
been stated in the letter which members have
already received regarding the issue of competence. When I speak of comptence, I prefer to
say that the question I am arguing is the competence of Hyderabad to make this complaint. I do
not wish to be d' -'.1rteous in any way and,
although it comes t" the same thing, I sho~lr
rather not refer to the competence of the Secunty
Council to hear Hyderabad. I hope to be very
brief.
Let us see where we now stand. This case
started as a complaint by Hyderabad on 21 August
1948 [S/986] under Article 3~, paragraph 2. of
the Char'~r of the United NatlOns. That Article
reads:
"A State which is not a Member of the United
Nations may bring to );he attention of the Se~urity
Council or of the General Asesmbly any dispute
to which it is a party if it accepts in advance, for
the purposes of the dispute, the obligations of
pacific settlement provided in the present
Charter."
Menlbers of the Council will notice that the
Article opens with the words "A State". Hydera, bad has never been a State in the international
sense, .as I shall explain presently. India contended and still contends that Hyderabad was not
competent to appeal to the Security Council under
the Article in question.
While the issue of competence thus raised was
pending, India was forced to take certain action
in Hyderabad to put an end to the prolonged
lawlessness and disorder which were disturbing
not only Hyderabad itself but also the adjoin~g
districts of India. When 1 say lawlessness and
disorder, I am not using an idle phrase.

Sir Benegal N. RAu (Inde) (tratiuit de
l'anglais) : Je suis tres reconnaissant aux menlbres
du Conseil de securite de m'avoir donne cette
occasion de developper ce -lui a eU~ dit dans la
lettre dont ks membres sont deja. saisis, en ce
qui concerne la question de competence. Je tiens
a. preciser que, lorsque je parle de competence,
j'entends celle de Haiderabad a. presenter cette
plainte. Je ne voudrais manquer de courtoisie
en aucune maniere et, bien que cela revienne au
meme, je pre£ere laisser de cote la question de
savoir si le Conseil de securite a competence pour
entendre Haiderabad. Je me propose d'etre bref.
Actuellement, la situation est la suivante: Cette
question a commence par la plainte que Haiderabad a formulee le 21 aout 1948 [S/986], en
vertu du paragraphe 2 de l'Article 35 de 1a Charte
des Nations Unies ainsi conl;u:
"Un Etat qui n'est pas Membre de 1'Organisation peut attirer l'attention du Conseil de securite
oude l'Assemblee generale sur tout differend
auquel il est partie, pourvu, qu'it accepte prealablement, aux fins de ce differend, les obligations
de reglement pacifique prevues dans la presente
Charte."
Les membres du Conseil remarqueront, que
l'Article commence par les mots "Un Etat". Or,
Haiderabad n'a jamais ete un Etat au scns international du mot, comme je le demontrerai. L'Inde
a toujours estime que Haiderabad n'a pas competence pour faire appel au Conseil tie securite
aux termes de l'Article dont il s'agit.
Pendant que la question de competence ainsi
soulevee etait pendante, l'Inde a ete 'contrainte
de prendre certaines mesures en Haiderabad pour
mettre un terme 'a. l'anarchie et au desordre qui
troublaientde fac;on prolongee non seulement
Haiderabad lui-meme, mais aussi les regions
avoisinantes de l'Inde. Lorsque je dis anarchie
et desordre, je n'use pas d'une formule vide de
sens.
'
, Les revelations du proces de Sydney, Cotton,
qui vient de se terminer a. Londres, surprendront
sans doute les membres du Conseil de securite;
mais, et je regrette d'avoir a. le dire, elles n'etonneront guere les habitants de l'Inde.

The disclosures made at the trial of Sydney
Cotton, which has just concluded in London, ~il1
probably come to the members of the Secunty
Council as, a surprise, although I am distressed
, to. say that they ~ri1l not be a great surpdse to
the people of India.
Cotton was convicted two days ago, and was
ordered to pay a fine, for gun-running in Hyd~ra­
bad. It is to be noted that he pleadedgul1ty.
According to the evidence at the trial-the trial
was held in a London court-the offences related
to the carrying of arms and ammunition of war

Il y a deux jou.rs, Cotton a ete condamnea. une
amende pour contrebande d'armesen Haiderabad.
Ilconvient de remarquer qu'il a plaide cQupable.
D'apres les temoignages produits au proces, proces qui a eulieu devant uil tribunal de Londres,
le ,delit avait trait au transport d'armes et de

.-"'"
munitions au champ d'aviation de Warangal dans
la province de Haiderabad, le 10 jui11et 1948 je prie les memb::es du Conseil de securite de
prendre not~ de cette date - soit un mois au
moins avant que Haiderabad eut adresse sa
plainte au Conseil de securite. Cotton se rentiit
d'abord en Haidera')ad et y rencontra le general
El Edroos, qui commandait l'armee de ce pays.
Je rappelle les faits qui ont ete reveIes au prJces.
Le general El Edroos remit a Cotton des lettres
destinees a de hauts fonetionnaires eu Pakistan
dans lesquelles it leur demandait lenr aide pour
pennettre aux avions d'atterrtr. Les armes et
lel' munitions etaient toujours designees par le
terme ufruits et legumes" et les canons antiaeriens par le terme U fromage". Cotton rencontra
a Londres, dans les bureaux de la compagnie a
laquelle il appartenait, un haut fonctionnaire du
Ministere de la de£ense nationale du Pakistan,
dont le nom a ete communique, mais que je ne
tiens pas a repeter id. Un autre haut fonctionnaire du Pakistan asslstait a cette rencontre. Son
nom a egalement ete mentionne au cours du proees, mais je pre£ere ne pas le citer id.
La rencontre suivante eut lieu le 20 mai, a SeThe next meeting took place 01;1 20 May at
Secunderabad. Giving the details of the contract, cunderabad. Donnant des precisions sur le contrat
which is said to have been destroyed when Hy- qui a, parait-iI, ete detruit lors de la capitulatiGn
derabad capitulated, an official witness said that de Haiderabarl, un temoin officiel a declare que la
the sum of 400,000 pounds sterling was to be somme de ..:. :0.000 livres sterling devait etre
paid to the firm. There was also mention of pay- payee a la compagnie. 11 etait egalement fait
ment to certain officials in Karachi. The contract mention de sC':nmes remises a eertains hauts foncwas finally drawn up at the house of the Hydera- tionnaires de Karachi. Le contrat fut etabli sous
bad Agent-General in Karachi on 27 May, nearly sa. forme definitive chez l'agent general de Haidethree months before Hyderabad's complaint to the rabad, a Karachi, le 27 mai, soit pres de trois
mois avant que la plainte de Haiderabad ffit ,
United Nations.
adressee a 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies.
From the start until June, two air trips' carryDepuis le debut des pourpa:ders jusqu'au mois
ing arms and ammunition were' made daily and de juin, deux voyages aeriens eurent lieu quotithe effort was speeded up towards the end of diemiement pour le transport d'armes et demuniJune. On 10 July an aeroplane was flown to tions et les efforts redoublerent vers la fin du
Warangal carrying 920 rifles or Sten .guns alld mois de juin. Le ·10 jui11et, un avion transportant
64 boxes ef ammunition, 'each box containing 920 fusils ou mitndllettes Sten et 64 caisses de
1,000 rounds. That was the particular transaction munitions, eonten'.mt chacune 1.000 cartouches,
for which Cotton was convicted.
atterrit a Warangal. C'est pour cette transaction
que Cotton aete eondamne.
Je demande aUX membres du Conseil de prendre
I ask the members of the Security Council to
note the dates. The contract was finally drawn bonne note des dates. Le contrat fut definitivement
up. on 27 May 1948; the complaint was dated passe le 27 mai 1948; la plainte est datee du
21 August 1 9 4 8 . ,
21 aout 1948.
The operations which India Was compelled to . Les operations que l'Inde fut obligee d'entretake did not start until about the middle of Sep- prendre ne commencerent pas ;:want lami-september. In these circumstances, the surprise is tembre: Dans ces conditions, ce qui est surprenant,
not that India acte..., but that it did not act earlier. ce n'est pas que l'Inde ait agi, mais bien qu'elle
.India was ultimately driven to take action. The n'att pas agi plus tot. En fin de compte, 1'Inde
operations lasted only three or four days, because se trouva contrainte de prendre certaines mesures.
the people of the State were really behind them. Les operations entreprises ne durerent que trois
At the end of that period, the Ministry which had ouquatre j ours, parce que la population de .1'Etat
authorized the complaint resigned, and the ruler, avait pris- le parti de l'Inde. Ala fin decette,
the Nizam, withdrew the complaint. The letter periode, le ministere qui avait autorise l'envoideof withdrawal addressed by him to the Secretary- , laplaintedemissionnait et le chef du GouverneGeneral on 22 September 1948 [S/1011] con- ment, le Nizam, retirait ladite plainte. La· lettre
cluded as follows:
par laquelle il retirait cette plainte a ete adressee
par le Nizam au Secretaire general le 22. sep~
tembre 1948 (5/1011); <elle se tefminait de la
maniere suiyante:
'.
UTo resolve all doubts in the matter,'r now
, U Afin de dissiper tous les doutes
cet egard,
formally address this letter to· you and request nous nous adressonsformellement a· V;)Uspar .la
you to note that the complaint, made by my presente lettre et VOllS prions de noterque la
G?vernment to the Security. Council has been plainte adressee par notre ,Gouvernernerifau
, 'Ylthdrawn by me. I would add for your informa- Conseit de securite a eteretiree par notts. Nons
that on 17 SePtember.~~~48, the Ministry, at , ajouterons,a titre d'information, que leminis-:at the Warangal airfield in Hyderabad State on
10 July 1948-1 ask the members of the Cot!ncil
to note the date, 10 July 1948--at least a month
before Hyderabad made its complaint to the
Security Council. Cotton first went to Hyderabad
and me'.: General El Eclroos, who was in charge
of the Hyderabad army. 1 am mentioning the
facts which came out at the trial. Generai El
Edroos gave Cotton letters to Pakistani officials
asking them fo assist by granting landing facilities.
Arms and ammunition were always described as
'(fruit and vegetables", and anti-aircraft guns as
"cheese". Cotton met an official of the Pakistan
Defence Department-the name has been given
but 1 do not wish to repeat it here--at the offices
of Cotton's firm in London. Another Paldstani
official was also present at the meeting. His name
also has appeared in the evidence, bet 1 would
rather not mention it here.

a

_*

t"~e 1:" i:Sist:m~"':

19~

l

wh?se instance the said oomplaL,t was made, :
sur
duquel !"dile plaiute .vait
resIgned and I personally assumed charge of my ete fortmdee a demlssl0nne le 17 septembre
J
Sta~. The delegation to the Security Council et que nOllS avons assume personnellement le
which had been sent at the instance of the said gouvernement de notre Etat.· La deleg'cl.tion qui
Ministry has now ceased to have any authority avait ete envoyee au Conseil de securite a la
to represent me or my State."
demande dudit ministere n'a plus maintenant
aucun pouvoir pour nous representer nous-memes,
ni pour representer notre Etat."
Le 5 octobre .1948, le Nizam· faisait suivre cette
On 5 October 1948, the Nizam followed this
up with a Firman or decree, in the foHowing communication d'un firman, ou decret, eon~u dans
les termes suivants:
terms:
"It a ete pOl'te p, ma connaissance; et j'ai ega"It has been brought to my notice, and I have
also seen in the foreign Press, that statements lement .::onstate dans la presse etrangere, que· des
have been made to the effect that I am acting declarations ont ete publiees aux termes desunder dun~ss and that I am not allowed free queUes j'agirais a mon corps defendant et n'aumovement-in short, that I am not a free agent rais pas de liberte de mouvemen~; bref, je
in any matter. This is absolutely incorrect. On n'aurais men libre arbitre en aucun domaine. Ces
the contrary, my relations with the Indian Union declarations sont absolument fausses.· Au conand the military administration. are .extremely traire, roes relations avec l'Union indienne et
cordial. No pressure ef any kind is being brought l'administration militaire sont des plus eordiales.
on me. In fact I am paid all the respect and the Aucune pression d'aucune sorte n'est exereee sur
c~urtesy due to the high position I hold as Head
moL En fait, je suis traite avec tous les egards
of the State."
et toute h courtoisie qui sont dus a· mon rang de
Chef de l'Etat."
It will thus be clear that whatever al;tion India
Il est· done bien clair que, queUes qu'aient eM
took was in effect directed not against the Head les mesures prises par l'Inde, eUes n'etaient' pas
of the State nor, of course, against its people, dirigees contre le Chef de l'Etat ni, bien entendu,
but against'a particular set of ministers who, were contre son peuple, mais contre un certain c1a.tJ de
kept in power by a military· organization known minist,~s, qui etaient maintenus au portvoir par
as the Razakars.
une organisation militaire conIiue sous le nom de
Razakars.
.
Comment ces roinistres sont-ils parvenus an
How did those Ministers get into pmver? I
'shall not use my own words but shall borrow pouvoir? Ce n'est pas mon opinion que je vais
• Lord Mountbatten's: they got into power by donner, mais ceUe de lord Mounthatten: ils se
engineering "a coup" ht November 1947 which sont empares du pouvoir en faisant "un coup
"caused India completely to lose their faith in d'Etat" au mois de novembre 1947,cQup d'Etat
Hyderabad". The document in which these'words rea la suite duquell'Inde a perdu toute confianc{,
appear has been printed in The Complaint of -en Haiderabad". Le texte d'ou·. ces rrlpts sorit
Hyderabad against the Dominion of India, Ap- extraits figure a la page 135 [te.:rteanglais 1 du
pendices, page 135,
.
document intituleComplaint of Hyderabad against
the Dominion of India, Appendices.
What were the methods which those Ministers
Quelles on't ete les methodes empl~yees par ces
used? Once again. let me quote. from a letter ministres? Permettez-moi de citer encore un
written to the Nizam by Lord Mountbatten, who, passage d'une lettre ecri~e au Nizam par lotd'
referring· to certain incidents which had hap- Mountbatten. Voicice qu'il disait au sujet de
penedshortly before the coup, said:
certains incidents qui se sont produits pert apres
le coup d'Etat en question:
" .... if these methods of coercion had not been
"Si les methodes de contraint1e n'etaient pas
. permitted to .interfere with the carrying out of . venues entraver, a tin moment crucial, l'execution
Your Exalted Highness's wishes at so crucial a . des volontes de Votre Altesse Serenissime, les
moment, the story of relations hetween India and relations entre l'Inde.et Haiderabad auraientpris
Hyderabad would have been written by a very un tour bien different et infinitnent plus heureux.."
different and far happi~r pen".
Tels sont les ternies employes par lqrd Mount.:.
These are Lord Mounthatten's words, and the
document appears in· The Complaint of Hydera- batten. Cette lettre figure a la page, 83 [te.:rt~an­
bad against the Dominion of India, Appendices, glais] du document intitule CO'Inpla'i,nt of. H~de..
rabad against the Dominion·of India, Appendices:
page 83.
Par qui ces ministres ont-its ete soutenus?
What support did they enjoy? Once more I
shaUnot use any words of my own, because I Cette fois encore, ce n'est pas moi"ej.t1i repondrai,
represent one particular side in this controversy. carje representel'une des parties ac~di£rerend.
. I shall quote agai1+ from Lord Mountbatten's Je citerai un passage d'une lettre e{:r1te par lord
letter to <the Nizam .written on 8 April 1948, Mountbatten au Nizam le 8 avril ,1948, c'est.a-dire cinq mois en:viron apres le coup d'Etat:
nearly five ml;>nths after the coup:
"Vous avez ~ertainementremarqt:le' qu'au cours
"You will have noticed that during the course
of the last few months, the ruler of nearly every de ces derniers IDois les. chefs de presque- tous les
State inthi§sub-continent which is in relationship Etatsqui, .dans la· peninsule ii:l,dienne, sont en
with the Dbminion o£:tndia. has,introduced, -or relation avec le Dominion de .1'Indeont etabli, oU
.
has declared his intention: of introducittgin the biendeclar~ avoir l'intention d'etabErprochainenear future~· truly responsible and representative ment, un gouvernement v~:~~~~~~~."~:~po~;~
w

~." . . '

•

-

.

government. I say "nearly every State' for there sable et representatif. Je dis "presque taus les
is one exception..:~Hyderabad. It is impossible, Etats", parce qu'i! y a une e:lCception, Haiderabad.
for any fair-minded person in the outside world Toutepersonne qui, de l'e~terieur, porte un j'ageto ,ievr the present (~vernment,of lIyderabad ment equitable sur le gouvernement actuel de
but as nne representing and, indeed dominated by, Haiderabad ne peut le considerer que comme un
a party which commands the support of only a gouvernement representant un parti et domine
part (\f the minority community in the State' . . '. par ce parti, lequel n'p.st appuye que par une
I am not saying this as GovernQr~General of India. fraction de la minorite de la population . • . Et
I am saying it as an impartial observer and as a je ne dis pas cela en ma qualite de Gouverneur
well-wisher of Hyderabad."
general d~, l'Inde, mais ep. observateur impartial
qui souhaite la prosperite de Haiderahad."
Qu'ont done fait les mini~tres en question lorsVVbat did these particul~rM;inisters dQ while
in power? That they could. not maintain law and qu'ils etll.ient au pou.voir? Qu'it n'aient pas pu
order has already been stated; but t1:ley also made maintenir l'ordre et la loi, on le !\ait deja, m~lis
pretty free with State funds. I have pere a list it y a pl1.!-s:. its ont dispose avec beaucoup. de
of pecuniary transactions-not e:Khaustive--run- Iegerete des fonds de l'Etat. rai SQus ~es ye~
ning to over 2.5 million pounds sterling-that is toute une liste de transactions iinancieres - et
10 million dol1ars...,.....which, to put it mildly, re- cette liste n'est pas complete - qui portent sur
quires a good deal of e:lCplanation. Some of them plus de d~ux millions et 'demi de livres sterling,
find a sinister f>xpll.\nation in the facts which soit 10 millions de dollars, et dant le moins qu'on
have just come to light in the course of Sydney puisse dire, est qu'e1les 'sont difficl1einent ekpli~
Cotton's trial.
cables. Toutefois, une triste explication de c~r~
taines de ees transactions vient ,d'etre donnee pal
les ,faits qui ont ete reveles au cours du proces
de Sy'mey Cotton.
'
Let me repeat: the ac;:tiOIl ",hich India was
Perm~ttez-moi de le rep~ter:, les mesures que
forced to take was n()t d~rected ll.g~inst the people i'Inde a ; 1:e obligee de prendre n'etaie.."1t pas c;liri..
of Hyd~rabad, or even C1,gainst the ruJ,er, Qut gees CODl,te le peuple de Hll.iderabad, ni. COJ:,l.tre
against a fascist, clique which had us~rpedpower le chef de eet Etat, mais bien contre une band~ '
and wa.s misusing it in a manner that threatened de fascistes qui. avaient usurpe le pouvoir et dont, ,
the t~anquilHty gf Indi!1 as :wella,s Hyderabad les acres ietaient le tro~ble dans l'Inde,et en
itself. As s~)Qn as the~~ m€;n l,"esigIIeq.· and the Haiderabad J.neme. Des' que ces. hOl.nln~s ' e~rent
Nizam was free to assumecharge,he withdrew demissionne et que le Nizam a pu p~endre1;:t dlrecthe· complaint 'fV4id~ they had ~ade to the United tion des affaires publiqttesJ ce ,·dernief. a retir~ ·la
Nations:
plainte qt;t'il avait adresse~ aux Nati~ns Uriies.
I·ask, is there al1ything. of inteffiational si~ifi~
Je pose la question: Y. a-t-il quol que ce soit
cance ,n ~ll ~his ?Do n<:>t let Us; 1:l~decl away by dans ces incidents qui ait une port~~,intef.!l~'"
words. This cOD1pl~hlt is not really . made by tionale ? Ne nous !ai~sons P<lS ~garer pa.r les mCl)t~.
Ifyderabad, but by certain individuals whQ had. La plainte qon.t i1 ~'agit, ce n'est pas Haiderab<ld.
once usurped a littlebrief autlWrity ~n Hyderabad qui l'adeposee, mais des individus qui,' pendant
and hay~ n0'Y lQ§t it. ~'h~y hav~ ceased to repre- un temps tres l;ourt,. aVl:\ienfustlrpe lepouvoir
sent th~ ruler; they neVer represellt~cl the peopl~. en :aa~4eraba.cl) et q1,ti depuis l'ont perdu. Ces:
~"hat~ver dilSlmte or situ:itiol:1 they c~-eated·in individus ne representent plus le chef de l'Etat , et
~J:q.erab~d hl;ls nQW cc;>me to <ll1 ~d, and con., ja111ais ils n'olit represent~ le peuple. Toute sitlJa"
dItions !1regradu~ny s~tt1ing down to nQr1l1~; tionque ceshon:ut!esoritpu ereer, tout differend
he Nizam an,d ~iso&1<;er~ Pave bee]], co-ope~a.t- qu'ils ant pu provoquer en Haiderabad, ont pri~
mg with the Indian a\ltl1Qritie~ in Hyderabad fqr fin aujou.rd'hui et la ~ituation redevient progress~"
the restoration of law and 'oJ.:deJ.:. 'No Hindu- vement nQrmale. Le, Niza!Ii et SOJ;1' personnel
Muslim clashes ~ave' been reported during the las~ <:ooperent C\vec les a,utorites de nnde au reta:bli$..
two or three months. Relations between the sementde l'ordre et de la loien Haiderabad~
t,,:o .commul1ities are cordial: . Various good-will Depl1isdeu..'C 01,l trois Dloisa,ucunhetlrt Ile s'e~t
. mISSIons •led .bypromillent Muslims fr9D1 variou$J produit ~ntre lndiet1set .. Mahqmetans et. ce5.
parts of lndIa~a~e toured Hydera:bad. There is l·grGupes.entre~~I1l1el1td.es ~elatiol1sempreintes 4~
po .ban or re~1rlctlonon the .entty of. any yisitorcordi~lite.; lIa\dera1;>a<1. a ~te. visite par4il.Ierent~s
mtolIyderahad. Pfe~!> represen~atives from rnd!!! ,. mIs,sion!> :<1,e ~onciliationcon4uites par de~p~r",
~p.d •abro~d, have vIsIted,. the S~ate without le~ or~onnalites.em4t~t~~;tppartenant~u~ populatiQP~
hIlldra1.1ce.
'
'IllUsulI11l;\lJ,esdes differentes, parties 4e rInd~, A,1J'"
~une b~rri~re, !iueun,e res~riction~'~st O,ppq{3~~!!
l'ep.tree QtrS "isitet11~seti, If~iderabadldes corre~ ...
pond.!1n.t~ge press.e vevus· de l'llldeou de retran...
ger (;mtvisit~ Haidera,bad, sa,ns entraye 11i «:0Pc"
trainte.·
'

:r

T.he future of the State and its relationship with

, C'~st le peuplede Haiderabad qui deciderflcde·

for C011,vemng aCOl1stItuent assembly for this
purpose.•·.Electoral·roUs.based on adult franchise"
are ~1.19;erpr,epar:ition.. lt is hoped that all arrange-'
m~nts for elections to. the. constituent assembly
wIll be completed by this autumn.. Meanwhile a
distingt1ished retired· Botish official, who 'was Sir

bleeconstituante.se reunissea cet effet. Les adultes
auront le droit de vote, et des listes electorales
sont en preparation.. On peut esperer qu'a l'at;1tomne ,tQut sera pret pour les ,elections a r Assemblee •constituante.Deja, le GOllvernement de
l'lnde anomme commeconseiller a1.Ipresde'

lndla~ l;tre matters which have been .left to be Jlavenii.'" de l'Et~t .et de ses relations· avec .l'lnde.~
decided. by !he people. f.\r.t~ngements· are in train. D~s dispositions ontetepriseSPO\1r.qu'W1eAss~­

bz_.......~

----._

..,

6
,

Mohammed Zufrullnh's secl'etary when Sir MOk l'administration de Haiderabnd un dastingue fonck
hammed ZafrulIah wasLaw Member in the GOVk tionnaire britannique enretraite ql1i a ete, il y
ernment of India nine or ten years ago-I refer a neuf ou dix ans, le secretaire de Sir Mohammed
to Sir George Spence-has been appointed by th~ Zafrttllah, quand celui~cl faisait partie du Gouk
!Government of Indiacas.:an adviser to the Hydera~ vcrnement de l'Inde en qualite de juriste - je
bad Administration. This will show to the Security .' 'r;eux partei' de Sir G\lorge Spence.. Voila qui
Council how anxiotts the Government of India montre a'.t Cwseil de securite combien le GOUk
is to see that even the provisional administration vernelr4 mt de l'Inde desire que meme l'administra.
is conducted in accordance with the highest tion ptovisoire soit exercee conformement aux
standards, with no discrimination against a.'1y meillel,lrs principes, et sans discrimination a
partlcular section of the people.
regard d'aucune partie de la popttlatiori.
1 referred a moment ago to the question
J'ai dit tout it. l'heure que la question se posait
whether Hyderabad is a State for international de savoir si Haiderabad doit etre, du point de
purposes. Up to the passing of the Indian Inde~ vue untemational, considere comme un Etat Il
pendence Act in 1947, it had, beyond contl~oversy, est certain qu'avant l'lndian Independence Act de
no international e."tistence, The fact is so well- 1947 Haiderabad n'avait du point de vue intema·
known that it is unnecessary to cite any authority. tional aUcune existence. Ce fait est si bien etabli
qU'il n'est bcsoin d'invoquer aucune autorite"
It has, however, been contended by some persons
Toutefois certaines personne~ ont pretendu que
that it became an independent State as the result Haiderabad etait devenu Etat independant, a la
of too Indian Independence At't. It is on this suite de l'btdian Independence Act. Et c'est par une
footing that its position has sometimes been argumentation de ce genre que 1'on a voulu mettre
thought to be simi1at to that of Indonesia. There is sur le meme plan Haiderabad et l'Indonesie; or,
not the slightest analogy between the two cases. it n'y a pas la moindre analogie entre les deux
The Indo~esian Republic has been granted de cas. La Republique d'Indonesie a ete reconnue
facto recognition as ~ State by several countries de facto. par plusieurspays - les Etats-Unis
-by the United States of America, by the United d'Amerique, !e Roya.ume~Ur..i, 1'Egypte, l'Inde,
Kingdom, by Egypt, by India, and by other d'autres pays encore - P.1ais aucun pays n'a jamals
cQuntries-but no country has ever recognized reconnu Haiderabad, de facto ni de j1ere, comme
H yderabad either de jure or de facto us an Etat independant.
independent State,
Au cours de la discussion de l'Indian I ndepen.
On 14 July 1947, during the debate in the
House of Commons on the Indian Independence dence Act, Sir Hartley Shawcross, du RoyaumeAct, Sir Hartley Shawcross, the Attorney-Gen~ Uni -'- c'est-a-dire du pays meme ou cette loi a
e.ral of the United Kingdom, the very country ete adoptee - a declare, le 14 juillet 1947, a la
that passed this Act, said: "... this, at least, can Chambre des Communes: "On peut' dire ttne
be .said. with certainty, that we do not propose t~hose aU.J1J.oins avec c:ertitude: c'est que nous
ID recognize the States" that is, the Indian States n'avons pasl'ifiterition de reconnaitre les Etats",
"as sellarate international entities on 15 August, c'est-a-dire les Etats indiens "comme des entites
internatienales separees lorsque la loi entrera en
when the Bill comes into operation."
vigtieur, le 15 aoftt."
C'est ainsl quememe le Royaume-t1ni, parfaiThns, even the United Kingdom, which knew
intimately all the facts relating to the Indian tement au courant de tous les faits interessantl~
States, including Hyderabad, declined to recog- Eta.ts indiens, y compris Haidetabad, s'est refuse
nize them as becoming international entities upon a reconnaitre q'l1'ils deviendraient des entites
the. passing of the Indian Indepevderice Act. It internationalcs apres le vote de l'Indian Indepenshould be remembered that, from Novembet 1947 dence Act. I1 convient de se rappeler que, depuis
onwards, tbe!"e has been a standstill agreement, or noveinbre 1947, un Accord de statu quo, ou un
an •equivalent. arrangement, under which th~ Do'- arrangement similaire, a charge le seuJ Dominion
minion of India has aclusive charge of Hydera- de l'Inde des relations intemationales de Haidebad's foreign relations.. That is one great differ- rabad. C'est la unedifference essentielle entre
ence between Hyderabad and the Indonesian HaIderabad et la Republique d'Indonesie. Il y
Republic. .The other differenc.. ' is equally impor- a une autre difference tout aussi· irimortante. le
tant. I~ sure that the members of this Security suis certain que les membres du Conseil de secuCouncil are familiar with the map of India. There rite connaissent bien la carte de l'Inde. Sur cette
is a chain of. Indian States. stretching in a line carte on· peut voir une chaine d'Etats . indiens
from north to south and east to west. If Hydera- s'etendant dtt nordau sud et de l'est a l'ouest. Si
bad and the rest of them .can claim to be inde~ Haiderabad et les a::tres Etats peuvent pretendre
pendent States, as a. result of the Indian Inde- etredes Etats independa,nts, en raison de l'Indian
pendence Act, and if they can become independent Indepe.ndence Act, et s'ils peuvent obtenircette
by virtue of their own claim, irrespective of independance du seul fait de leur revendication,
:recognition by any other country, then there will sans avoirbesoin d'etre reconnus par aucun autre
pays, ce sera la fin de l'Inde.
bean end to India.
Indonesia is not in the heart of the Netherlands
L'Indonesie ne se trouve pas auceeur des
as Hyderahad and the other Indian States are Pays-Bas comme Haiderabad et les autres Etats
in the heart of India. As some one has said, indiens se trouvent au ceeu! de l'Inde. L'onpeut
"You can live without your appendix and be the vivre, a-t-on dit, sans son appendice et ne s'cn
healthier for it. bl~t you. cannot live without your porter que mieux, mais on ne peut pas vivre sans
heart:' I should like to make· this perfectly son ceeur. Je desire faire entendre c1airement
clear, thai· India cannot possibly recognize any qu'il est impossible aI'Inde de reconnaitre l'inde{if these Indian States lying within its borders as pendance d'aucun des Etats indiens qui se trouvent
independent, any more than the United States a l'interieur de ses frontieres, de meme qu'il est

I

.~

pi

i
of .}.merica can allow the Ludependence of its
southern [ es. Let us not forget that the trouble
in Burma ~.arted with a claim of independence by
a certain State of the Union. With this object
lesf~l before it, India cannot possibly agree to
be dismembered or dis~ntegr~ted by allowing any
of these Indian States to claim international statehood. Hyderabad was not a State in the international sense before the Indian Independence
Act;' it 1S not one new by virtue of the standstill
agreement and the arrangements that followed it;
and it cannot be one at any time in the future
if India is to live. We cannot defy or ignore
geography.

impossible aux Etats-Unis d'Atllerique de permettre que ses Etats du sud soient independants.
N'oublions pas que les troubles en Birmanie ont
commence lorsque l'un des Etats de l'Union a
revendique ~on independance. Instruite par eet
exemple, rInde ne peut consentir a etre demembree iOU desintegree en permettant l'un de ces
Etats indiens de revendiquer la qualite d'Etat sur
le plan international. Haiderabad n'etait pas un
Etat, au sens intemational an ter~, avant
l'India·n Independence Act, it ne l'est pas devenu
dn fait de "'Accord de statt~ quo et des arrangements qui l'ont snivi; i1 ne pent le dcvenir a aueun moment a ravenir, si l'Inde doit s!lbsister.
Nous .ne pouvons pas braver la geographi.:; ·;lU
feindre de l'ignorer.

a

It follows that any dispute with Hyderabad is
I1 s'ensuit qu'aucun tiifferend avec Haiderabad
not an international dispute. All matters relating n'est un differend de caractere international Tou-.
to Yvderabad are now dealt with regularly by tes les affaires concernant Haiderabad sout mainth, Dvernment of India as matters of domestic tenant normalenlent traitees par le Gouvemement
conc~n. Questions are put and answers are given de l'Inde comme des questions relevant de sa
in all such matters in the Indian Constituent competence. C'est a l'Assemblee constituante de
Assembly to which the Government of India is l'Inde. devant laque1le le Gouvernement de nnde
responsible. India has at present, even after the est responsable, que les problemes de cet ordre
creation of Pakistan, a population of something sont poses et que repo!1se est faite aux questions, _
like 30 million Muslims, and no ~vernment cz.n souIevees. L'Inde possede act"JeUement, meme
possibly afford to ill-treat so large'illm influential apres la constitution du Pakistan, une population
a population, or indeed, any section of it. They d'envrron 30 millions de Musulmans et aUfrlln
ha':e been ~ted re~resentati~n ,according to gouvernement ne s~urait se. p~rmettre de mal:
theIr numbers In the Indian Constituent Assembly, 1 traiter une populanon aUSSl lmport.<t.nte, aUSSi
The Indian Cabinet is a oompDsite one. It (;on- int1uenteni meme une f....-action quelconque de
tains seven ffindus, two MusIiw.s, two Christians, cette pop~ation. Lee Musulmans ront representes
two n.lembers 'Of the Scheduled Castes-:-or the proportionneUement a. leur nombre a l'Assemblee
so-called untouchables-and one Sikh. Any C{,~stitua1lte de l'Inde. Le cabinet de l'Inde a une
genuine grievance of the Muslims in any part of composition mooe. se compose de sept Hindous,
India can he voiced by any Muslim or.· other de deux Mnsulmans, de deID.. Chretiens, de deu."C
member in the Constituent Assembly, which is hors-caste'et d'un Sikh. Tous!esgriefs legitimes
at once a safeguard against incorrect or exag- des Musultnans de n'importe quelle partie du
gerated statem,entsand a means of prompt redress territoire de l'Inde peuvent etre exposes pat les
where the facts call Ior redress.
membres, musulmans ott autres, de l'Assemblee
constituante - ce qui e,st a la fois un moyen
de reprimer promptement les abus quand ils ont
ete eftectivement consommes et de prevenir les
affirmations incorrectesou exagerees.
Au cours des demiers mOls s'est etabIie une
In recent months there bas sprung up a very
salutary practice of what are called Inter-Do- pratique tres'satisfaisante, celle des conferences
minion Confe:-ences between India and Pakistan entre Dominions, qui reunissent les representants
to discuss pToblems suCh as the rehabilitation of de l"Inde et du 'Pakistan pour discuterde prorefugees, the treatment of minorities, and so on. blemes tels que le relevement des' rMugies, le
traitement des minorites, etc.
. Puis-je demander si,dans les conditions que je
May I ask whether any usefUl purpose is served,
in the circumstances which I have described, by mens de decrire, le' mamtientle la question de
keep~g tb.e subject of Hyderabad any longeion Haiderabad a. l'ordTe du jour du Conseil presente
the :agenda of this Council? As I have said, what une utiIite quelconqrie? Comme je l'ai dit, ce qui
has, happened UT what is happening in Hyderabad se passe ou s·est passe en Haiderabad ne peut etre
cannot be said to be a matter of international con- considere c~mme ayant' une importance sur le.
Cetn. Not only that,' but adequate constitutional plan international. De plus, il existe dans l'Inde
means, of .1'edress exist in India itself for any desmoyens constitutionneIs suffisants pour redresmatters requiring .' redress. These" recurrent ser tous les griefs legitimes. Jevoudrais assurer
attempts to agitate the subject in this Security le Conseil que les tentatives souvent repetees pour
. (A)unci1, w~ch is thousands of :miles away from creer i propos de Raiderabad unecertaine agithe actual sceneo! events, .ean, I submit, serve no tationau ConseiIde securite, qui se trouve a une
.useful purpose. They merely give 0ppoitunities distance si grande des Iieux memes ou se derou!or statements whiCh inflame communal passions lent cesevenements, sont des tentativeB qui ne
In
and disturb India's internal tranquillity. peuvent servir aucune fin utile. Les debats ne
Qurte apart from· any question-of-jrrrts-diction, if sont que pretex.tes a. des declarations qui enfIamt:he Security Cooncil desires any information on Inent les passions religieuses dans l'Inde et 1:rouany specific points from India, there should be no blent ainsi la paix inreneure' de ce pays. Tonte
great difficulty in supplying it. But I respectfully question de competence mise a. part, si le Conseil
urge that to :retain this subject any longerbn de securite desire- des informations sur i'une
the agenda of this Seeuritv CounCIl ,~ neither quelconque des questions conct(>tes qui se posent
essary nor desirable, .apartfromthequestion dans l'Inde, il ne sera pas diffidie de les lui four-

I

n

!ndia

rnt

8
of competence, on which I have already said a
great deal.

niI'. Mais j'insiste re::':i!ectueusement sur le fait
qu'i! n'est ni necessaire ni desirable, meme si on
ne tient pas compte de la question de competence
sur laquelle je viens de m'etendre l,mguement, de
maintenir la question a l'ordre du j~ur dtJ Conseil
de securite.
Le PRESIDENT: Je remarque que, conformement
a la coutume, le representant de l'Inde, apropos
de la question de competence, a aborde assez
largement le fond du debat. Quoi qu'il en soit, je
repete que la decision d'entendre, dans l'affaire
de Haiderabad, le representant du Pakistan, a ete
prise le 15 decembre dernier. L'un des membres
du Conseil desire-t-il presenter de nouvelles observations sur cette decision?

The PRESIDENT (translated from French) i
I. observe that, in accordance with custom, th~
representative of India, in dealing with the question of jurisdiction, has spoken at some length
on the substance of the matter. However that
may be, I repeat that the decision to hear the
representative of Pakistan on the question· of
Hyderabad was taken on 15 December last. ')oes
any member of the Council wish to make additional observations with regard to that decision?
Since there are no observations, I call upon the
En l'absence d'observations, je donne la parole
representative of Pakistan to speak.
au representant du Pakistan.
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan):
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan)
I am extremely grateful to the Security Council (trttduit de l'anglais) : Je suis tres reconnaissant .
for affording me this opportunity of making au Conseil de securite de me permettre d'exposer
my submission on behalf of Pakistan on the le point de vue du Pakistan sur le probleme de
problem of Hyderabad. In the course of my sub- Haiderabad. Au cours de: ma declaration, speciamission, and mainly at the beginning of i\:, I lement au debut, j'essaierai de traiter aussi la
shall attempt to deal with the question of compe- question de competence, que le representant de
tence also, which the representative of India has l'Inde a soumise au Conseil. Pour le moment; je
placed before the Council. At this stage I could ne pourrai traiter cette question que d'un point
only deal with it from an academic point of view. de vue purement academique. Un expose des
The narrative of events relating to Hyderabad evenements concernant directement Haiderabad,
itself will indicate, with reference to the actual et notamment de la situation actuelle, etablira
position, to what extent the submission made on jusqu'a quel point ·les argument::; presentes au
behalf of India can bear exmination. Before I nom de l'Inde peuvent supporter l'examen. Avant
enter upon my submission on the problem itself, d'aborder le probleme, je voudrais presenter au
I wish to make two brief submissions to the Conseil deux breves observations de caracte.re
_Security Council on a very general character. I tres general. Peut-etre pensera-t-on qu'il etait it
do so with apologies as they might appear to be peille besoin de presenter ici des observations
matters of so simple a character as hardly to aussi simples; d'avance, je prie le Conseil de
m'excuser.
need mention here.
In .the first place, it has been assu;med by the
En premier lieu, le representant de l'Inde a
representative of India that a discussion of the pretendu que, si le Conseil discutait ce probleme,
problem before the Security Council will lead cela aurait pour effet d'enflammer l'opinion pu~
merely to the inflaming of public opinion and blique et de creerdes difficultes pour le Gouvernemight lead to embarrassment for the Government ment de l'Inde, sur son propre territoire. La
of India within India itself. On that point I declaration que je vais faire (et je sais que l'Inde
desire to submit that-although my submission se refuse completem.e'nt a accepter le point de vue
is bound to present a point of view to the Security que je vais exposer au Conseil, qu'elle contE:ste
(:ouncil with which India entirely disagrees and meme), j'essaierai de fappuyer sur des faits mwhich it contests-I shall attempt to make my contestables: sait sur des faits qui sont exposes
submission on the basis of facts which are either
uncontested, in the sense that they are contained dans la correspondance officielle echangee entre
in authoritative correspondence which has passed les Gouvernements de l'Inde et de Haiderabad,
between the Governmep.ts of India and Hydera- soit sur de5 faits provenant de sources qui ne
bad, or are drawn from sources which cannot be peuvent, en aucuire fac;oh, eti:'e soupl;onnees. de
desc;ribedas in 'any sense prejudiced against ~ndia. prevention contre l'Inde. Je m'efforcerai, autant
I shall refrain as .far as possible from making que possible, de ne rien dire qui' puisse offense~
my su.·bmission to the Council in any manner qui que ce soit, pas meme l'Iilde - bien que les
which could cause .any offence' in any quarter, points de vue de l'Inde et du Pakistan soient, je
including India itself, though as. I have said, our l'ai dejarappele, fort differents.
points of view differ seriously in respect qf this
matter. .
-.
.
Secondly, I wish to submit, as a preliminary
La sel:onde observation preliminaire que je
sta.tetnent, that it is a very naive· simplification of tiens
faire est la suivante: c'est simplifier le
this problem to say that . India, out of its own probleme d'une maniere vraiment trop naive que
necessities or considerations of its own security, de dire que l'Inde a ete oblige~ de prendre de
was' compelled to take this· action and that, the telles mesures poursauvegarder sesinterets pro~
action having been completed, there is nothing pres et sa prQpresecurite et que, tes mesures
more to do about it. I am sure th;it the narration ayant eteexecutees, il n:y a plus den a faire. Un
)fevents wilIconvincethe members of the expose des evenements convaincra, Yen suis sur,
3ecurity Council that I lldia's action, by whatever les membresdu Conseil que l'action menee par
name it might be· described on one side or the l'Ind,e, de quelque fal;onqu'on la qualifie de part
other, was entirely unjustified; that it amounted .e~"ii~'a~ltre, ~t~:a~solu:ent injustifiee et. qU~

a

if Fm

..

9
to a breach of international peace; and that it
constitutes a threat to the maintenance of peace
and a continuation of aggression which calls for
redress.
The Security Council is charged under the
Charter with the duty of taking such action as
shollld safeguard international peace, and is the
only body which is competent to deal with prob~
lerns of this character, and indeed is. obliged to
deal with them and must deal with them if the
world is not to revert altogether to chaos and disorder. The question of Hyderabad has been pend;.
ing before the Security Council, as has just been
mentioned by Sir Benegal N. Rau, since 21 August
last, but for one reason or another-the main one
being the disinclination of India to have it discussed before the Security Council-the story of
what happened has not yet been placed before
the Council. So far as the area and population of
Hyderabad are concerned it is well known that,
apart from the questions raised by therepre~
sentative of India as to whether it is a State or
not and whether it is entitled to independence or
not, the problem of Hyderabad relates to a very
large area and a very substantial 'population, an
area of 82,692 square miles and a population of
between 17 and 18 millions.
What is the historical position of Hyderabad?
Is or was H yderabad, in the international sense,
a State or not? Ever since it became a Stat~f
whatever kind it is it never has been. a part of
India, except in the geographical sense. Tp confine
oneself to recent times, during the British rule
over the greater part of the sub-continent of
India, the Nizam of Hyderabad was in alliance
with the British. The relationship was sometimes
described as a subordinate alliance, or at other
times· by the statement that the British exercised
paramountcy or suzerainty over the Nizam.
In lay language, it amounts to this: that, as
the result of treaties betweein the United Kingdom
and the Nizam, the Nizam's foreign relations
were conducted by the British, and the Nizam
was not at liberty to establish independent foreign
relations with other States. Under section 7 of
the Indian Independence Act of 1947, all treaties
·between the Indian States and the United Kingdomcame to an end, and, with those treaties,
the relationship of paramountcy or suzerainty
also came to an end.

No doubt the .Security Council would like to
know the answer to the following question: If
the only restriction Upon the Nizam's full sovereignty came to an end, then what did Hyderabad
become, if it was not an independent State or a
State entitled to its independence? Sir Benegal
N. Rau has quoted froin the speech of the
Attorney~General of the United Kingdom, made
during the course of the discussions of the Indian
Independence Bill, s.::ving that it Was not the
intentio11- o,f His Majesty's. Government to· grant
recognition to the Indian States as independent
States, on 15 August 1947. That does not mean,
as I shall presently shnw, that the States would
not become, from that date, independerit. AIl
that was indicated was .that it was the hope of
His Majesty's. Governinent that the Indian States
would decide either to accede to either Pakistan
. or to India, and in order not to create barriers
~e way of t= fUlfi~:::~: that hope, it was,

cette action constitue, sur le nlan international, une
rupture de la paix, une mtnace contre la paix,
une agression qui demande reparation.
Le Conseit de seeurlte, aux termes de la Charte,
doit prendre toutes les mesures necessaires au
maintien de la paix internationale, it est le seul
organe ayant competence pour traiter ces ques~
tions; it faut qu'il les traite, sinon le monde tom~
ben'. dans le desordre et le chaos. Le probleme de
Haiderabad est soumis au Conseit de seeurite
depuis le 21 aout dernier, comme Sir Benegal
N. Rau vient de le rappeler. Or, pour diverses
raisons, dont la principale est que l'lnde ne tenait
pas a. ce que ce debat ait lieu, l'historique des
evenements n'a jamais ete :fait devant le COilseil.
En dehors de la question posee par le representant
de l'inde - celle de savoir $i Haiderabad est ou
non un Etat, et s'it a droit ou non a. l'independance - it est un fait bien connu, c'est que le
probleme de Haiderabad interesse tme region qui
a une tres grande superficie et une population tres
importante: .une sU1Jerficie de 214.175 kilometres
carr<~s, petipIee de 17 a. 18 millions d'haLitants.

QueUe est historiquement la position de Haideiabad? Du point de vue international, .Haiderabad
est-il, a-t-it ete, ou n'est-il pas, un Etat? Depuis
qu'il est devenu un Etat - de quelque genre que
ce soit - Haiderabad n'a jamais ete considere,
sauf geographiquement, comme une partie de
l'Inde. Pour ne parl:er que d'une epoque reccnte,
le Nizam de Haiderabad a ete l'allie des Britanniques au temps ou leur domination s'exerc;ait
sur la plus grande partie de la peninsule indienne,
et l'on a dit tantot que le Nizam etait un allie de
second plan des Britanniques, tantot qu'il etait leur
vassal.
En langage simple, la situation est la suivante:
aux termes des traites passes entre le RoyaumeUni et le Nizam, ~e Gouvemement britannique
assurait les relations internationales du Nizam,
lequel n'avait done pas le droit d'entrer en rapport
direct avec les Gouverncments etrangers. La
section 7 de l'Indian Independence Act a mis fin,
en 1947, a. tous les traites en vigueur entre le
Royaume~UnieUes-.Etats indiens et, par consequent, a. la domination (I!1 :-,uzerainete ~xercee par
le Royaume-Uni sur ces Etats.
Le Conseil de secttrite se post".ra assurement
la question que void: attenduque lli seule limite
imposee a. lapleine souverainete du Nizama ete
supp'rimee, qu'~st. done devenu Haiderabacl, sinon
un Etat' independantou un Etatayant droit. a.
l'independance? L'attorney g~n~ral du RoyaumeUni a declare, au cours de la discussion d~ l'Indian
Independence Bill--- Sir Benegal N. Rauvient de
le rappeler - que le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste
n'avait pas l'intention de r~connaitre J'independance des Etats indiens le 15 aont 1947. ceta ne
signifie pas, et je vais le demontrer, queces Etats
ne sont pas devenus independants a. partir de
cette date. Tout ce que l'attomey general VQlltait
dire C'etait que le GouvernemeIitde Sa Majeste
esperait que les Etats indiens se joindraient, ou
bien au Pakistan, pubien a. J.'Inde.. Et, pour ne
pas mettre obstacle a. la realisation .decet ~s:poir;,
on declara que le Gouvemement de Sa MaJeste
n'entendait .pas reconnaitre les Etats in<:iielils a. la.

-

10

announced that His Majesty's Government did I meme date Oll les deux Dominions etaient crees
not intend to grant those States recognition im-I' et "it les Etats indiens devenaient independants
mediatdy after the date on which the two Do- ou avaient droit l'indcpendance. Comme je vais
minions were going to be brought into existence l'exposer, le Gouvernement de Sa. Majeste espeand the States were to become independent or rait que, par la suite, les Etats indiens decideraient
entitled to their independence. As I shall presently de se joindre a l'un ou a l'autre des Dominions.
show, the hope of the Government was that, in ToutefoisJ si certains de ces Etats pre£eraient dethe course of time, the States would decide to meurer isotes, ils en auraient le droit. Telle etait
accede either to one Dominion or to the oilier. bien la position adoptee par II Gouvernement de
However, such of them as did not would be Sa Majeste, je vais le demontrer, et l'Inde eUeentitled to stand alone, if they so chose. That meme l'a admis l'an dernier, devant le Conseil de
was the position, as I shall sho\v in a moment, of securite [227eme sea1Jce].
His Majesty's Government. India itself admitted
last year before the Security Council [227th meeting] that that was the position.
Le Premier Ministre du Royaume-Uni,
The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
Mr. Attlee, speaking on the Indian Independence M. Attlee, parlant a la Chambre des Communes,
Bill in the House of Commons on 10 July 1947, le 10 juillet 1947, au sujet de l'Indian Indepe1Jsaid:
dcuce Bill a declare:
"With the ending of the treaties and agree"En meme temps que les traites et accords prenments, the States regained their independence. It nent fin, les Etats recouvrent leur independance.
is the hope of His Majesty's Government that all C'est l'espoir du Gouvernement de Sa Majeste
States will, in d'le course, find their appropriate que tous les Etats, le moment venu, trouvent la
place ;,vithin one or other of the Dominions within place qui leur convient au sein de run ou de
the British Commonwealth. But, until the consti- l'autre des deux Dominions, dans le cadre du
tution of the Dominions has be&n framed in such Commonwealth britannique. Mais tant que la
a way as to include the States as willing partners, constitution des Dominions n'aura pas ete etablie
there must be a less organic form of relationship de faC10n a incorporer les Etats en tant qu'assobetween them and there must be a period before cies volontaires, les liens existant entre les uns
a comprehensive system can be worked out."
et les autres devront avoir un caractere moins
organiquc et un certain temps devra s'ecouler
avant l'institution d'un regime d'ensemble."
Qu'est-ce a dire? C'est dire que les Etats indiens
What does that mean? It means that the States
would be independent, that it was hoped that seront independants; que 1'0n espere voir ces
they would choose to accede either to one Do- Etats se joindre a run ou l'autre des Dominions,
mion or to the other, but that time must be given mais qu'it faut laisser aUx Etats le temps de prenfor them to make the decision and, in any case, dre une decision et que, en tout cas, its prendront
they must make that decision· to come in with cette decision librement. Evidemment, cela veut
one or the other willingly. It obviously meant, dire encore que, si les Etats ne se joignent pas
therefore, that if they did not come in, they would a run ou l'autre Dominion, its demeureront indecontinue to be independent. 'Fhey might find it pendants. En fait, it pourra se reveler diffidle
awkward, in actual fact, to continue that inde- pour ces Etats de cemeurer independants, soita
pendence; by force of their geographical situation cause de leur situation- geographique, comme
-as the representative of India has said-for lack le representant de l'Inde Fa fait observer, soit
of resources, or, in the case of many of them, parce qu'ils manquent de ressources, soit, et c'est
lack of size, etc.-but the juridical position was le css de beaucoup d'entre eux, parce qu'its ont
perfectly clear;
une trop faible etendue, etc. - mais la situation
de ces Etats est, du point de vue juridique, parfai'tement claire.
The Attorney-General has been quoted. Let
On a cite deja ce qu'a dit l'attorney general,
me give a slightly more extensive quotation from mais je voudrais lire maintenant un plus long
his remarks during the course of the debate in extrait de sa declaration a la Chambre des Comthe House of Commons on 14 July 1947:
munes, le 14 juillet 1947:
"His Majesty's Government realize that' it is
"Le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste reconnait
bound to be some time before the States will have qu'un certain temps devra s'ecouler avant que les
all the information before them to enable them to Etats disposent de tous les renseignements qui
take a final decision. Indeed, the'constitutions of leur sont necessaires l,)our prendre une decision
the Dominions will have to be altered so as to per- definitive. Il faudra, certes, que les constitutions
mit and provide for the accession of the States and des Dominions soient modifiees pour pel'mettre et
to define the terms on which that accession may prevoir l'adhesion des Etats et pour en determiner
take place. We believe that tlle future of the les conditions. Nous pensons que, dans l'avenir,
States inevitably lies in association with British les Etats sero:.:t fatalement amcnes a s'associer
India, with whose territory their own are inextri- a l'Inde britannique, dans le territoire de laquelle
cably intertwined. But, we regard the decision leurs propres territoires sont etroitement imbri-·
which the States have to take as being their de- ques. Mais nous considerons que c'est aux Etats
cision, and we do not intend to bring any pressure eux-memes qu'il appartiendra de prendre une
to bear upon them. We hope, as I have said. that telle decision; et notre intention est de n'exercer
the .States will associate themselves with 0111e or sur eux aucune pression. Notre espoir, je l'ai
other of the new Dominions in a federal or treaty dit, est que les Etats s'associent a run QU a l'autre
relationship on fair terms, fairly and amicably des nouveaux Dominions par des traitesou par
negotiated Mr. Patel, speaking from the newly des liens federa~~~'.~~~~:~_,~~~ditions eq~~t:bless1'l

n

11
et a la suite de negociations m~nees dans un esprit
de justice et de cordialite. Toute idee de contrainte
a eta ecartec, ainsi que M. Patel l'a declare au
nom du Ministere des Etats qui vient d'etre constitue."
Lord Listowel, qui etait aiors Secretaire d'Etat
Lord Listowel, then Secretary of State for
India, speaking in the House of Lords on 16 July pour l'Inde, a fait la declaration suivante devant
1947, in the course of the debates on the Bill, la Chambre des Lords, le 16 juillet 1947, au cours
de la discussion du projet de loi:
observed as follows:
teA la date ou les nouveaux Dominions seront
"From the date when the new Dominions are
set up, the treaties and agreements which gave us crees, les traites et accords aux termes desquels
suzerainty over the States will become void. From nous exer~ons notre suzerainete sur les Etats
that date, the appointments and functions of the cesseront d'etre en vigueur. A partir de cette date,
Crown Representative and his officers will termi- le representant de la Couronne et son personnel
nate and the States will be masters of their own cesseront d'exercer leurs fonctions, et les Etats
fate. They will then be entirely free to choose deviendront maitres de leur destin. Le8 Etats sewhether to associate with one or other of the ront alors entierement libres de decider, sdt de
Dominion Govemments or to stand alone and His s'associer a l'un ou a l'autre des Dominions, soit
Majesty's Government will not use the slightest de demeurer independants ; le Gouvernement de Sa
pressure to influence their momentous and volun- Majeste n'exercera pas la moindre pression sur
tary decision. Whatever the future relationship ces Etats pour influencer la decision capitale
between the ne\v Dominions and the States qu'ils auront a prendre librement. De quelque
may be, it will require prolonged consideration nature que puissent etre les liens qui s'etabliront
and discussion before the final adjustment can be dans l'avenir entre les Etats et les nouveaux Domimade."
'
nions, it faudra que la question soit longuement
etudiee et discutee avant que des dispositions definitives puissent etre prises."
Ces quelqu('s extraits de declarations faites deu
I trust that these brief excerpts from the
speeches of responsible Miilisters, including the vant le Parlement par des ministres responsables,
Prime Minister, before Parliament, when the le Premier Ministre y compris, au moment ou
India Independence Bill was under discussion, le projet de loi sur l'independance de I'lnde etait
will put it beyond doubt that so far as His en discussion, montrerontde fa~on convaincante
Majesty's Government and the British Parliament la position du Gouvernement et du Parlement
are concerned, the position was and is that on britanniques: it etait admis qu'a la cessation de la
the termination of suzerainty-which was the suzerainete britannique, seule restriction a la souonly restriction upon the sovereignty of the verainete des Etats, ceux-ci deviendraient indeStates-these States becam~ independenlt. And it pendants et qu'il leur appartiendrait, en dehors
was then for them, voluntarily and without any de toute pression ou coercition, de dedder s'ils
pressure and coercion, to decide whether each of se rattacheraient individuellement a l'Inde ou au
them would accede to India or to Pakistan, or Pakistan, ou si, aux termes de la Declaration de
would, in the terms of the then Secretary of State, lord Listowel, alors Secretaire d'Etat, its demeuLord Listowel, stand alone.
reraient independants.
Pour ce qui est de l'attitude de nnde elle-meme,
In so far as the position of India itself is concerned, the very able and learned representative l'eminent et erudit representant de l'Inde, charge
of India, who was in charge of India's case on de de£endre la cause de I'Inde dans la discussion
Kashmir before the Security Council-Kashmir de la question du Cachemire au Conseilde secubeing another of the Indian States-said the fol- rite (et le Cachemire est un autre des Etats inlowing, on 15 January 1948, when addre~sillg the diens), a declare le 15 janvier 1948, ~la 227eme
227th meeting of the Security Council:
seance du Conseil de securite:
"... when the Indian Independence Act· came . "Le 15 aout, lorsque l'Acted'independance
into force, Jammu and Kashmir"-this was the entra en vigueur, le Jammu et le Cachemire"
State involved in that Jispute-"like other States, c'etait l'Etat en cause dans le differend "contre les
became free to decide whether it would accede autres Etats, devinrent libres de decider s'ils
to the one or the other of the two Dominions, or voulaient s'integrer a l'un ou a l'autre des deux
remain ilndeperident". I repeat "remainindepend- Dominions, ou demeurer independants." Je repete
ent".
"demeurer independants".
This is a clear recognition of that fact that
C'est la reconnaitre que, du fait del'Indian
the result of the Indian Indepe.ndence Act was Independence Act, les Etats devenaient indepenthat the States were· independent. They could dauts. Ils pouvaientpar la suite opter pour leur
~hereafter choose to accede to one or the other : rattachement a l'un ou a l'autre des deux Domiof th two Dominions, or they could remain nions, ~ its pouvaient rester independants.
independent.
Le meme jour, le representant del'Indea de,On the same day, the same representatIve, addressing the Security Council, said the clare egalement au Conseil de securite:
following:
"La question dustatut a venir du Cachemire
tiThe question of the future status of Kashmir
vis-a-vis her neighbours and the world at large, eri ce qui concerne ses voisins et le' monde en
and a further question, namely, whether she general, et la. question ulterieure, a savoir si ce
. s~ould withdraw from her accession to India, and pays doit se retirer de l'Inde et acceder au Paeither accede to Pakistan or remain independent, kistan tin rester. independant avec le droitd'obteconstituted States Departnlent. has dismissed the
idea of coercion:'

b

K

12
with a right to claim admission as a Member of nir l'admission aux Nations Unies en aualite de
the United Nations---:-all this we have recognized Membre, cette question, nous l'avons ~ reconnu,
to be a matter for unfettered decision by the doit etre decidee Iibrement par le peuple du Cachepeople of Kashmir, after normal life is restored mire, lorsque la vie normale sera retablie la-bas."
to them."
Peut-on. douter, dans ces conditions, que l'Inde
Is there 9ny doubt that so far. as India is concerned it recognizes the right of the States t9 ait reconnu le droit des Etats a. se rattacher a
accede to ~me or the Qther, or to remain independ- l'un au a l'autre des Dominions ou a. rester indeent with the right to claim membership in the pendants avec la faculte de demander leur admisUnited Nations? In the case of Kaslunirt K~sh- sion a. l'Organisation des Nations Unies? Le
mil' chose accession. The Maharaja wrote a letter Cachemire, lui, a choisi le rattachem~nt a. l'Inde.
purporting to offer accession to India. The sub- Le Maharadjah a ecrit une lettr~ demandant ce
jects took violent exception and a section of them rattachement. Par contre, les sujets se sont eleves
rose in revolt. That sectiDn of the people wanted. violemment contre cette initiative et une fraction
to accede to Pakistan. 'It was agreed between de la population s'est revoltee, Parce qu'elI€? vouIndia and Pakistan that the question wh~th~r lait etre rattachee au Pakistan. It fut done convenu
Kashmir should accede to Pakistan or to India- fmtre l'Inde· et le Pakistan que la question de
that beipg the only issue b~tweeri th~ rqler and savoir si le Caehemire se rattacherait a l'Inde ou
his p~ople-:-should.b~ decid~d by m~ans of a free au Pakistan ~ ce qui constituait le seul differend
and Impa1"~1a1 ~lebIsclt.e. In. the cas~ of .Hyqera-j entre le souverain et son peu.ple - serait tranbad, the slt~lltlpn that arose was ddIerent. . The chee en toute liberte et equite par voie de pleruler and hIS Goverpment, ~or reas0I?-s .whIch I biscite. Dans le cas de Eaiderabad, la situation
shaII place. before the SecurIty Cooncl! In a few. .est differente. Pour des raisons que je vais expomoments, In the words of the ruler hImself, de- ser au ConseiI de securite le souverain et son
cided n';lt ~o accede to Pakistan or to India, but Gouvemement, d'apres le~ propres termes du
to remaIn Independent.
souverain lui-meme, op~rent non pas pour le
rattachement au Pakistan ou a l'Inde, mais pour
l'indepenclance.
The problem is different, but the juridical aspect
Le probleme est different mais, sur le plan juriof the question admits of no doubt, and it admits dique, iI ne peut y avoir aucun doute, eomme it
of no doubt in th~; words of the representative ressort des declarations du representant de l'Inde
of Indi!l hi!l1s~f. But the clinchip.g argument, if lui-meme. L'argument decisif, si je puis dire, a
I might sor~spectfuIIy submit, has been advanced ete avance pat" l'eminent representant de l'Inde
by the learned represeIltative of India himself h.li-meme, cet apres-midi devant le ConseiI de
this afternoon while addressing the Security seeurite. I1 a dit que le peuple de Haiderabad est
Council. He has said that the decision whether mire d'opter ou non pout son rattachementa
the State qfHyderabad should or shoulq not l'Inde et qu'il fera connaitre son choix par voie
accede to India has been 1eft to the free wIll of de plebiscite, que des preparatifs sont en cours
the people wIlo will decide it by means of a plebis- a. cet effet, que des listes electorales sont etablies,
cite, preparations· for which are now going for- et ainsi de suite.
ward by w~y .of preparation of electoral roles,
and so forth.
Sir Benegal N. RAU (Illdia): I should li~~ to
speak .•.

S'irBel1~g<j.1 N. RAu (Il1de) (traauit de
l'{lnglais) : Je demande la parole ...

Sir lVlopamqxed ZAFRUL~~ Khan (Pakistan):
I thought tl!e expression used was that ~t. was for
the p~ppl~ pf :ijyder~bad to decide t4«:ir relationship with India, but ~f th,e repr~sentative of India
desires to correct me, I am quite willing that he
sho~lq iptervene ~Ild do so, ~s I lllight wen pave
mis!mder~tood wha~ h~ was st~ting.

.Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan)
(traduit de l'anglais) : I1 me sembhlit, d'apres les
termes employes; que le representant de l'~nde
avait 'voulu dire qu'il appartenait au peuple 'de
Haiderabad de decider deja nature de ses rapports
av~e l'Inqe, Jnais $~ le r;presenta1!t ,de l'~nde
qesirji: me reprendre, je SUIS to~t .pret f ~ccep~er
ses corrections, car il se peut queJe n'ale pas blen
cO!1lpds "le" sens de ses dec1~ra#ons.

The PRESIDE:NT (tran~lated fr.om French):
Does the representative of IIldi~ wish to corr~ct
a pas,s~ge in tl1e s.tatement 0.£ th~ rep~~sent;:l#ve
ofP~kistan?
. .
.

Le PRESIDENT: Le representant de l'Inde
desire-t-il rectifier' un passage de l'expose du
r~presetJtant dq Pak~stan?
.

Sir Benegal N. RAu (India) : The e,xact words
used are: "The future 6f the State and its rel~­
tionship with India are matters which hav~ been
1 .it to be decided by the people. Arrangements
~r~ in trail1forcotrvep.ing a ~onstituem assembly
·for thi!> Rurpo~e."
.

Sit Benegal N. RAu (Inde) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Les termes employes sont les suivants:
"Cest le peuple de Haiderabad qui decidera de
l'avenir de l'Etat et de ses relations avec l'Inde.
Des disp.Qsitions ont ~te prises pour qu'tJlle Assemblee eonstituante se reunisse a cet ~ff~t."

Sir Mohammed ZAFRUI.LAH ·Khan (Pakistan)·:
Sir Mohammed ZAFRTJLLAH Khan (Pakistan)
I accept that~orrection: "tile future and the .State (traduit de l'iLnglais) : Je.prends aete de eette
and its. relationship with Jndia". .Now has the correction:" "l'avenir de l'Etat et ses relations
State a choke as to what relationship it would . avec l'Inde". Mais l'Etat est-i1libre actuellement
have with India? And if it has a choice and the d;exercer un choixen ce qui concerneses relations
people, as the result of this plebiscite, re~otd their avec l'Inde? Et s'il le peut et si le peuple, par le........

13
decision in favour of independence, will India
recognize that decision or will it not?

jeu du plebiscite, opte pour l'independance, l'Inde
reconnaitra-t-elle ou non cette decision?

Sir Benegal N. RAu (India): I think I have
made it clear that in so far as the question of
independence is concerned, India's position is that
no Indian State within its borders can be independent.

Sir Benegal N. RAu (lnde) (traduit de
l'anglais) : Je crois avoir nettement indique que,
pour ce qui est de l'independance, l'lnde estime
qu'aucun Etat indien situe a. l'interieur de ses
frontieres ne peut etre inaependant.

Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan):
I quite understood that position. As a matter
of fact, the representative of India did go
on clearly to state that India cannot recognize
the independence of any of ·those States under
any circumstances. I was merely drawi11g attention to the fact, which I shall elaborate a little
further when I come to the question of the negotiations between the two States, that while India
goes on saying that today, in the course o~ these
negotiations India clearly stated, and India still
goes on to imply, that it is for the people to decide
what the relationship of the State to India is
going to he.

Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakistan)
(trciduit de l'anglais) : Ce1a, je l'ai hien compris.
En fait, le representant de I'Inde a aussi declare
sans equivoque que l'lnde ne peut, en alicun
cas, reconnaitre l'independance de run quelconque
de ces Etats. J'attirerais simplement l'attention du
Conseil sut le fait suivant, sur lequel je reviendrai par la suite lorsque j'arriverai aux negociations entre les deux Etats: contniirement a. ses
affirmations actuelles ati sujet de l'independance,
l'Inde a declare sans amhages ati cours des negociations entre nos Etats et elle continue it laisser
entendre rtlaintenant qu'i1 appaftierit au petiple
de decider de la nature des rapports futUrs entre
Haiderabad et l'Inde.

Or, une decision implique un choix; iriais le
Now, a decision means choosing either one thing
or another. The representative of India has not . representant de l'Inde n'a pas expliquequelle
explained what choices are. open to tpe people alternative est laissee au peuple. Lui donnera-t-on
from which to make their selection. Will they be le choix entre le rattachement it l'Inde et l'indecalled upon to decide, "Do you accede to India, pendance ou entre le rattachement it l'Inde et le
or do you want to remain independent?", or will :, rattachement it l'Inde?
they be called upon to decide, "Do you accede to
India or do you accede to India?"
Sir Benegal N. RAu (Inde) (trad~it de
Sir Benegal N. RAu (India): So far as inde~
pendence is concerned, I think it has been made . l'anglais) :. En ce qui cortcerrie l'independance,.
clear that India will not recogilize any of. the : je pense qu'll a ete etahli clliirement que l'Inde
Indian States within its borders as independent, :. ne reconnaitra l'independance d'aucun des Etats
in the same way as which, in the old days, no Iir- ; indiens sitties a. l'interieur de ses frontieres,; de
dian State was regarded as independent. However, i meme, dans le passe, aucun Etat iridien n'etaif
there are two choices open; the State can decide i considere coinme indeperidant. Cependant, l'Etat
to accede, .which carries with it the privileges of : se ti'ouve en presence de deux possibilites : il peut
membership in the legislature, and so on; or it soit opter pour son rattachement a. l'Inde, ce qui
need not accede-but it will be subject to having i entraine, entre. aufres privileges, ce1ui d'avoir
its eXternal affairs looked aftel" by India. So far : acces au corps legislatif, soit ne pasopter pour ce
as independence is concerned, India's position. is rattachement et accepter, alors, que l'Inde s'ocquite cleat. Withih those limits, it is open to' the cupe de ses affaires exterieures. L'attitude de
State to say either "Wesliall accede"· or <'We ! l'Inde est done tres c1aire.Dans ces liinites. l'Etat
shall remain outside"....:;;but, in that hiffer case, it est libre de se rattacher it l'Inde oU den'Y'pas
w-ill b.e in tHe sam,e position iit which it was in: ,consenfit; mars, dans ce· derider cas, sa: pos-ition
the days befoi"e 1 9 4 7 . . s e r a exaciemeht la ttleme qa'avant 1947.
Sir Mohammed ZA:FRULLAH Khan: (Pakistil.li y
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULUH Khan (Pakistan):
I shall notcarry ona controversy across the. table' : (traduit de l'dttglais): Je ne V'ai:s pas engager
with my learned and distinguished ffiend. By : une contro\Terse avec nion ertidii et dlstingue
this. time, I hope; the Security Council is· in fUll ! artli. ]'espere que le Conseil est ttlain'tenant en
possession of tlie facts as to Wha.t Irtdia'sposition .; possessior -'le fous les ele·ments qui definissent
is today: that t.1fe' people of Hyderabad will have' la position ~..::tuelle de nnde, a savoir que 1ep~it­
the.choice of deciding whether theY' will accecJ:~t6 pIe de H&iderabad pourra choisir de· se rattachef
India and. h'a.nd bver the conduct of their foreign a. l'Iude en abandonnant it ce pays 1~ soin de diri..
affairs to' Tndia or whether they will not accede~ ger ses affaires etrailgeres 6u· de rester ind-epento India~f1d will hand over the conduct of their' i dant, en corifiant qtiuird meme a l'Iride la condtiite
foreign affairs to India just the same.
.
de ses affaiies etrangeres'..
Je soutiens que, du porntde vue jtiddique, la
situ:ation est ~laite,du fait de l'Ind'iart IndepenIridian Independence Ad. arid on. the. expIanatron dence Act et des .e~pHcations que le Premier. Mi..;
of tIiose terms ftfrnisned to the Britisli Parliament nl~tre et ses col~egue5 ont fourrties au Parlement
bytne British prIme M:iri~s£er ani} his colleagues, btitannique a.n sujet de eette loi. L'Inde a reconnu
,Oii theadffiissiCllis Of India' itself; nothing cbl1ld: elle-iTieine (et rien ne peut .~.tre plus. daira. eel:
be c1eal'efi:1ia:ti'tlie §fafemerit 01 Sir Gdpa-laswa~i egard qtl~ la dedaratio'u' de Sir Gopalaswami
AyYiingaroefore the . . Security Gofincil [E27th' AyY~l1igar deva~t le Coii~ei1'de securite). [227eme
. mee#ng)'thattlie States were eritiNed' tdth'eir SBtlnce] selonlaqueUe les Etats avaient droit a
bindependence and. that, asS:. matfer~f. fad£ su~rr l'fhdependarice et que.. de fait, ceUX:d'ehtt~_e~~.,L...
My submission is, however, that the juridical

posifiori~is, quite. clear, both on the termscii the

14
of them as chose to stand out had the right to
become Members of the United Nations.
India has gone on to contend that the dispute,
if any, between Hyderabad and India in a domestic
matter. I presume that the representative of India
intended to invoke Article 2, paragtaph 7, of the
Charter-although, curiously enough, all that he
submitted in that connexion was emphasized by
the use of the words "today" and "now": that is
to say, today Hyderabad has been left no choice;
now, Hyderabad has become a domestic matter,
But if H yderabad w&s independent before 12 September of last year, then the mere fact. that its
independence has been destroyed does not make
the dispute a domestic matt~r for India. If that
were so, then, after every annexation by one State
of territory belonging to another State, once the
annexation had been completed as the result of
military action-I shall describe it in no harsher
terms-the State that had gained the accession
might say: "Well, this is now a domestic matter.
Today, it is a domestic matter. The territory
is part of our territory, and there is no trouble
about it."

qui pre£ereraient rester independants seraient en
droit de devenir .Membres de rOrganisation des
Nations Unies.
L'Inde a ensuite pretendu que le differend, s'il
y en a un, entre Haiderabad et l'Inde, est une
affaire d'ordre interieur. J e suppose que le representant de nnde entendait invoquer le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2 de la Charte, bien que,
fait assez etrange, toutes ses affinnations sur ce
point aient ete soulignees par les mots "a.ujourd'hui" et "maintenant", ce qui equivaut a dire:
aujourd'hui, Haiderabad n'a pas le choix; maintenant, la question de Haiderabad est devenue une
question d'ordre interieur. Toutefois, s'il est vrai
que Haiderabad etait independant avant le 12 septembre de l'annee derniere, le simple fait que son
independance lui ait ete enlevee ne transforme
pas le differcnd en une affaire relevant de la competence nationale de nnde. S'il en etait ainsi,
chaque fois qu'un Etat annexerait un territoire
appartenant a un autre Etat, des que 1'annexion
aurait ete realisee grace a des operations militaires
- et je ne veux pas employer d'expression plus
energique - l'Etat qui aurait reussi a annexer
le territoire' pourrait dire: "Desormais, cette
affaire nous concerne seuls. EUe releve maintenant de notre competence. Le territoire fait partie
•de notre propre territoire, il est inutile de s'en
preoccuper."

Le representant de l'Inde a declare qu'on ne
The representative of India has said that one
cannot draw upon the analogy of Indonesia ,peut faire de rapprocL~ment avec la question
because Indonesia had been given de facto recog- indonesienne, etant donrie que l'Indonesie a ete
nition by certain States and therefore, in some reconnue de facto par certains Etats et qu'elle est
manner or other, had become a State. Out of the done devenue, d'une maniere ou d'une autre, un
major problems that have come before the United Etat. Parmi les problemes iroportants qui ont ete
Na~ions in which Article ,2, paragraph 7, has been soumis a l'Organisation des Nations. Unies et au
invoked by the State against which the complaint sujet desqueIs 1'Etat contre lequel on avait porte
was made, the two outstanding ones-if not the plainte a invoque le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2,
only two-were the question of the treatment of les deux prillcipaux - sinon les seuls - sont la
Indians in South Africa and the problem of Indo- question du traitement des Hindous etablis dans
nesia. It is somewhat of an it:ony' that, in each I'Union Sud-Africaine et la question indonesienne.
of those cases, India was the complainant or a On peut constater avec quelque ironie que, dan~
co-complainant.
les deux cas, l'Inde a ete la partie plaignante ou
1'une des parties plaignantes.
Exa~inons un instant 'la question du traitement
Let us consider the question of the treatment
of Indians in South Africa. Indians in South des Hindous etablis dans 1'Union Sud-Africaine.
Africa, although unjustly and unfairly deprived Les Hindous etablis dans ce pays, bienqu'ils soient
of the most valuable rights of citizenship and injustement prives des droits civiques les 'pltts
subjected to severe forms of racial discrimination, precieux et victimes. de discriminations raciales
are nevertheless subjectsef the Union of South severes, sont neanmoins des ressortissants de
Africa. There is no question there of any State, l'Union Sud-Africaine. It n'est· pas question ici
much less of any independent State-no ques- d'Etat, encore moins d'Etat independant, nide
tion of political fre~dom or liberty in. the liberte politiqueau sens ou l'implique la creation
sense of .the setting up of an independent State. d'un Etat independant. Neanmoins, 1'Inde a reussi,
Nevertheless, India was able, rightly and success- a bon droit, a soutenir devant les Commissions
fully, .to plead before the Committees. of' the de l'Assemblee . generale etdevant l'Assemblee
General Assembly and before the General Assem-' generale elle-meme,quecette questionavait un
bly itself that the~question was one of international caractere international, qti'eUe pouvait,a juste
character, tl:tat it could validly be taken note of titre, etre prise en consideration et. discutee' par
and discussed by the General Assembly, and that. l'Assemblee 15enerale, et que cette derniere pourecommendations in regard to it could be made . vait presenter des recommandations a ce sujet. .
by the General Assembly. .
Quant a fIndonesie, qui lutte maintenant pour
Again, Indonesia, although' struggling ·for its.
independence and certainly, in our view, entitled l'independance, independance .a laquelle j'estime
qu'ellea certainement droit, et qui a heureusement
toindependen~e, and now nappily assured of. its
independence-at least, so we hORe, after the . maintenant l'assurance de l'obtenir -Je 1'espere
recent agreement between the Netherlands and-the du moins apres 1'accordintervenu recemment entre
Republic of Indonesia-was, when the war with les Pays-Baset la Republique d'IndonesieJapan broke out, a colony of the Netherlands, and. c'etait unecoionie needandaise, lo:t:"sque la guerre
the Netherlands could perhaps with some plasi- avec.le Japona eclate, et.Jes Pays-Bas pouvaient
bility, Hnot with some justi~cation, argue that the ; peut,.etre, pour des. motifs pla~sibles, ,sinonavect"'fl
.
Q. .- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - " , . , -

15
dispute between itself and the Republic of Indo- quelque raison, pretendre que le differend entre
nesia was of a domestic nature. Nevertheless, les Pays-Bas et la Republique d'Indonesie relevait
India, along with other States, was able to per- de leur competence llationale. Or l'Inde, avec
suade the Security Council that the dispute was ·d'autres Etats, a reussi a. persuader le Conseil
of an international character which ought to be de se<:urite que le differend avait un caractere
entertained by the Security Council and upon international, que le Conseil de securite devait
which the Security Council should concentrate l'examiner et deployer tous ses efforts pour arriver
a une solution pacifique.
every effort to secure a peaceful solution.
Examinons maintenant le cas de Haiderabad.
Compare Hyderabad. Here is a State having a
ruler and all the machinery of a State: a legisla- Void un Etat ayant a sa tete un souverain et qui
ture, an executive, a ministry-all the normal possede tous les rouages d'un Etat, pouvoir legisfunctions: judiciary, political existence, full in- latH, pouvoir executif,ministere, qui exer<:e toutes
ternal sovereignty, a sovereignty which had, as les fonctions normales de l'Etat, notamment la
the result of a treaty, surrendered to the para- · fonction judiciaire, qui existe poiitiquement, qui
mount Power-as the British were described-the detient la souverainete nationale' cotrtplete mais
right to conduct its foreign affairs. Those treatie.:. qui, a. la suite d'un traite, avait cede a la Puishave now been abrogated by a solemn act of Par- sance souveraine (c'est ainsi que la Grandeliament. Those who were responsible for that Bretagne etait designee) le droit de diriger ses
legislation have announced that ,after the date affaires exterieures. Ce traite a maintenant ete
set out in that Act, namely, 15 August 1947, there abroge par un acte solennel du Parlement, Les
would be no paramountcy, which constituted the responsables de cette mesure legislative ont de..
only restriction upon the sovereignty of the State. clare qu'apres la date mentionnee dans la loi, c'estThat State was independent. The independence a-dire le 15 aout 1947, it n'y aurait plus aucune
of that State, whatever the justifications that may restriction a la souverainete de l'Etat. Cet Etat
be offered in respect of that action, has been de- ·etait iI:\dependant. Or, son independance, quels
stroyed by military action, and it is contended que soient les motifs que l'on puisse invoquer
that the matter i~ a domestic one.
pour justifier cette intervention, lui a ete ravie
par une intervention militaire et l' on pretend
maintenant qu'il s'agit d'une affaire d'ordre interieur.
Je me permets de declarer, pour ma part, que
I submit, will all respect, that the matter is
ce n'est pas une affaire d'ordre interieur.
not domestic.
La question du traitement des Hindous etablis
The question of the treatment of Indians in
South Africa, though it has a political aspect, is dans I'Union Sud-Africaine, si elle presente un
essentially a humanitarian problem. The problem aspect politique, est essentiellement d'ordre humaof Indonesia, without going into technical terms, nitaire. La question indonesienne, sans faire de
is both political and humanitarian. The problem distinctions techniques, est a la fois politique
of Hyderabad is, in the first place, a matter of et humanitaire. Le problem.e de Haiderabad intethe securing of international and· regional peace; resse au premier chef le maintien de la paix sur
next, it is a politi~al question; and finally, it is le plan international et regional; ensuite il a un
a humanitarian question. It is a matter of peace aspect politique et, enfin, un caract1~re humanitaire.
because the military action of India constitutes- La paix est en jeu puisque -les operations militaires
and I. mean no offence, but I have been at a loss entreprises par l'Inde - je ne voudrais pas emto sdect any other expression for its description ployer une expressio~ offensante, mais j'ai de la
-an aggression against an independent State, and peine a en· choisir une autre - constituent une
therefore a breach of international peace. It also ·agression contre un Etat independant et par conconstitutes a grave threat to the maintenance of sequent .une rupture de la paix intema#onale.·
·Elles menacent aussi gravement la paix entre
peace between India and Pakistan.
l'Inde et le Pakistan.
Le representant de l'Inde a encore attire ·l'atThe representative of India has again invited
the attention of the Security Council to the fact tention· du Conseil de securite sur le. fait qu'il y a
that there are in India today over 30 million Mus- aujourd'hui dans· l'Inde plus de. 30 millions de.
iims, .which is true. He has also said that no Musulmans. C'est exact. I1 a egalement •declare
government could afford to ill-treat so large a qu'aucun gouvernement ne pouvait se permettre
minority. Let us hope that is so. But in the de maltraiter une minorite aussi importante. Espast occurrences and incidents have taken place peronsqu'ilen estainsi. Toutdois, des evenements"
which have created grave doubts in the minds of et des incidents qui ont eu lieu· dans le passe ont
Muslims both in India and in Pakistan, not with fait. naitre des. doutes serieux dans I'esprit des
regard to "the intentions of the Government· of Musulmans, tant dans l'Inde. qu'au Pakistan, en
India in this respect, but certainly sometimes with ce qui concerne non pas les intentions du Gouverregard to the ability of that Governtrtent to safe- nement de l'Inde a ce sujet, mais plutat, dans
guard the minorities. But it ,is the hope !lOW. that ·certains cas, son aptitude a proteger les minorites.
the major difficulties, which ,:ertainly arose after On espere maintenant que les plus graves des
15 August 1947, have been overcome, so far as difficultes qui av~ient bel et· bien surgi· apres le
the treatniento£ Musl:"'Lls in India is concerned 15 aout 1947 ont ete resoltles ence quiconcerne
and, indeed,· of other minorities, that their treat- le traitement des Musulmans et, egalernent, des
trtent will in fact be as desirable, as fair and as autres'elements minoritaires etablis sur le terrijust as not only the Government of India may toire indien, et que· ces minoritesseront traitees
desire, but as· the· GoVernment of Pakistan may avec autantde justice et d'equite que.le desirent
desire.. I concede .that: But this is not a question non seulement le Gouvernement. de .l'Inde mais
of the treatnient within India lof a minority. It aussi le Gouvernement. du Pakistan.. Je ve~x ·bien

nz.................

_

i 4

Iq

-

is the problem of Hyderabad, which I have p~o- l'admettre. Mais it ne s'agit pas du traitement
ceeded to unfold before the Security Council,. the d'une minorite dans l'Inde. I1 s'agit de la question
continuation of which constantly acts as a disturb- de Haiderabad que j'ai commence a. exposer deing factor. with regard to the relations between vant le Conseil de secur~te. La prolongation de la
India and Pakistan, which relationship causes situation actuelle est une cause continuelle de fdcfriction and subjects the Government of Pakistan tion entre l'Inde et le Pakistan, elle est unesource
to preSsure from itfi own people, pressure which, de desaccords et expose le Gouvemement du
on occasion, 17!ounts sharply fo]." active interven- Pakistan a. une pression de la part de son propre
tion. The Government of Pakistan has had to peuple, qui parfois ex.igerait presque ~ne interexercise a gr~at deal ofrestraillt, both inside the vention armee. Penqan,t que se deroulaient les
Government and with ~egard to the people them- evenements de Haiderabad, le Gouvernement du
selves at ~ertain stages during the developm~nt of Paldstan a du, a. .certains moments, se contenir
affairs in Hyderabad, to prevent action which et cahn.er ie peuple pour~mpe~er tout~ ~ctiori·qui
might destroy the possibility of the c«;>ntinuatjQn eu.t pu ~et~re fin aU:K; r~lations pacifiques entre
of peaceful relations between the two St~tes; and les deux Eta~s. L~ peuple continue a. exercer cette
it is continuously under that pressur«:r. That is pl,"essio.n.C'est la raison principale pour l~quelle,
t~e principle rea,son why, onbe~al£ of P~stan, a.u nom dti Pakistan, i'ai eteman.de a\1 Consei1lors
I reque&teq tlIe Security Council at th~ 3~2nd de sa $82eme sel:\nce d~ w'accorder une audience.
meeting to grant me a hear-in~ on this probleJ:ll. ,
J'aidit que ce probleme .presentait aus.si un
Secondly, this problem is of a political character.
It affects the independence and sovereignty aspect po.1itique. n concerne, en effet, l'indepenof a State: On that I have already made my dance et la souverainete d'un Etat. J'ai deja. expose
mes vues a. ce sujet.
submission.
. Le probF~me a ega,lemeJ;1t un' aspect humanitaire.
It .is also a humanitarian problem. It h:;l.s involved, as I shall presently show, large masses of Je '\l'ail? montrer qu'il est une cause de souffrances,
people in .suffering, in misery and inP«:rrsecution, de miseres et de persecutions pour une partie
and the passing of their lives in fear. There is considerable de la population, qu'it oblige a. vivre
persecution of the minority in Hyderabad, w~ch dans la crainte. La minorite continue a. etre perseis continuing. There is persecution of members cut<~e en Haiderabad. On continue egalement a. y
of the Government of Hyc1erabad as it existed at persecuter les membres du Gouvernement de
the time India took its military. action. They are Haiderabad qui etaient au pouvoir au moment
still being persecuted. There is persecution of ou l'Inde a entrepris son action militaire, ainsi
highly-placed' indiv~duals. For all these reasons, que de bauts fonctionnaires ou des notables. Pour
it is a proplem which it is fitting for th~ Security toutes ces raisons, il convient qUe le Conseil de
Council to en~ertain~ to look into, and to devise: securite examiIle le probleme, et trouve le moyen
some m~ans of solv4tg.
de le resoudre.
I now invite the attention of the Security
J'attire maintenant l'attention des membres du
·Cbuncil.to the development of the dispute. ·What Conseil sur I'evolution. du differe.nd. Que s'est-il
ha~~ happened? I am afraid it will hav~ to be a passe? Je crains de devoir faire un recit quelque
somewllat deta.Ued narr1;\tiv<:, but I shaU try t9 peu det~ilIe, j'essaierai pou,rtant d'etre aussi bref
cond~!le .it as· t:l1uch as I can•. If the membel.'s que. possible. Si les membres du ConseiI ,veulent
. of the'Se~urity Council ~l,"eto ha~e ~ity aet~ei1;tli!e a,voir une idee exacte de la: fa,cson dont le copflit
idea, of hoW tl;J.~ trouQ)~ aros~ ~nd; ~h~t i~s im- a commence et de ses el~me~ts importants, je suis
.portaJ:it ~~ments qr~" I ~u~t they wiJl,. be p.1iep~x~d persuade. qu'ils me perUlettrgnt de leur si~aler.
., to bear with me wlliIe 1 draw their attention les evenements qui ont eu lieu, en me fqndant
to wli~t h.a,st~~n. pl~c~,l>~seq' on liitthodtative sur des dOcuments dignes de foi ~chang~s entrele
. dO~1,11~wn~$. w~ich passedbetwe~n fhe Government Gouyernement de Haiderabad et le Gouvernement
of Ryd~r~badan,d.the Governm.eIit of India.. Inci- de l'Inde. Incidemment, certai~s des extraits que
dentally, some. of those pass1;lgt;ls from ~e very je choisiraidans unecorrespondance tres volu~
voluminous correspondence which J shall select mineuse pour les presenter au ConseiI de securite
.for pl?-cing before the Security Council will also ont egalement. quelque rapport avec la question
bear upon the· question of competence. which the de conipet~nce. que· le representant de l'Inde a
r~pres.$tative of :fndia has raised.
soulevee.
:pes qUe le Premier Ministre eut annonce, le
As· soon as the atwouncem~nt of 3 J1¥le .t947
wasm~de 'by. the:sritish Prime 1v.[inister, which 3 juin 1947, comment le probleme constitutionnel
indicat~d.how thecons.titutiollal pr<?ble~ ()f .~l1diCl . q.,e nnde aJ4it etre resolu, 110tamment pa~ la
was to ·he.resolved77I;,ythesetting u,P.o£ the tWQ cr~a:tion, de deux Etatsind~pendants, le Nizam
ind.epend~t· States., and so on77tI1e :Nizam tp.a.de a fait la declaration suivante. Ye vais vous donn,er
thcr •foUowipg q,ec1qrati()n.. I s1J.a,lI n()w' r~ad pa!:"a- 'lectur~ d.u plragraphe 2 de cette 4ecla~ation Ott
graph 20f th~declar~ti.()n, ()~ d~<;ree· of "t?~ dMret d~l N'iz~, qUe, da.nsla 13,~gu.edu pays,.
Nizam : what is, called)
the :Vernacul~r, a, Flr- Q}1 appelle un. firinan... Voici le paragraphe ~ du
man. Tlli~ is p -agraph 2 ()ftheFirma~ of His. finnan de Son Altesse le Niz~, publie 1<: 11 juin
. .
.
~x\!J.lted .Highllt
the Nizam) issu«:r<;! on H. Juil,e 1947.

m.

1947.

.

"Le parmge de 1'Inde britannique t:epose s.ur le
"The basis .of the· division of ,British India:·.is
cOmmunal. In my State, 'however, .the tvv0 major prindpe de la separation des com.~unautes relic01l1Wutiities live side by iide. and I· ilavesought, gieuses. Bans. n1pn Etat, cependant, les .q,eux prinsince lbecamel'uler, to prOIn.Ote by' every meallS. cipales cot:l1munautesvivent cote ~ cote et je me·
good
friendly relationspetweenthem.~y s.uis effpt:ce, depuis> que j'aipri~ la etirection des
ancestors and I have always-regarded the Muslims affaires publiques, cle maintenir par ~ous les moyens
des reiations ~ cordiales et arnicales.
entre .. eUes
and the Hindus as the two eyeso£theS~~e a,nq..: ...
.....

and

~

17
the State itself to be the indivisible asset of all
the communities inhabiting it. I am happy to say
that there has not been in my State the same
acute cleavage as has led to the recent events in
British India. The subjects of my State have
affinities and common interest with both the contemplated ,new Unions. (This means India and
Pakistan.) By sending representatives to either
of the Constituent Assemblies, Hyderabad would
seem to be taking one side or the other. I am
sure I am c(;msulting the best interests o~ my
subjects by del;liping to take sudl a cours~. I
have, therefore, decided not t9 senq. represeIlta.,.
tives to either of the Constituent Assemblies."

Mes ancetres et moi avons toujoursconsidere
les Musulmans et les Hindous comme les deux
yeux de l'Etat, 1'Etat lui-mem.e etant le bien
indivisible de toutes les communautes qui l'habitent. J e suis heureux de dire que mO;l Etat n~a
jamais connu une scission aussi rigoureuse que
celle qui a cause les receqts even~ments dans
l'Inde bpiU\.nnique. Les sujets de mon Etat ont des
affinites et une communaute d'interets· avec 1'une
et l'autre des deux futures Unions. ·(C'est-a.-dire
l'Inde et le Pakistan~) En envoyant des representants it l'une ou a. 1'autre des Assemblees consti..
tuantes, Haiderabad paraitrait prendre p<lrt~. J ~
suis c~rtain (r~ir conf<?rme~~nt ~ux v~rita.J:l1es
interets de mes s~jetsen :-efus-nt de m'engager:,
dans un~ telle voi~. J'ai done decid~ de n'envoy~
de representant a. allcune des Assemblees cons-,
tituaIltes."

Thus, almost within a' week of the announcement of the plan of 3 June, the Nizam, who was
then, I suppose----,.presutUllbly ~venin the view'
of the Go~lernment of India and of Sir Benegal
N. Rau-.,..,.acting freely, announced his decision
fhat he was not going to participate in the Constituent Assembly either of Pakistmt or of India,
as he wanted to keep aloof. Then on 9 July he
wrote a letter to the Crown Representative, that
is, the Goverpor-General; who then occupied two
positions: the Viceroy of Ip.dia was the Goyernor.,.
General of British India and was Crown Representative vis-a-vis the States, so' that any relationship between the States and British India was
conducted by him not as Governor.,.General of
India 'but as the representative of His Majesty
the King. I shall read from a letter addressed to
the Crown Representative on 9 July 1947:

Ainsi, guere plus d'une sem~ine avant la publication duplan du 3 juin, le Nizam qui,a rnpn
avis; et vraisemblablement meme cle l'avis du'
~ouvernement de l'lnde et de ~ir Belleg~l N. E:a\1~'
agissait en toute liberte, a fait connaitre sa decision de ne pas participer aux. travaux d'auctlne
des AssembIees constituantes, .que ce fUt celle
du Pakistan ou celle de l'Inde, et de se temr a.
l'ecart. Le 9 juillet 194'1, le Nizam'a envoye une
lettre au representant de la .Couronne, c'est.,.a.-dire
au Gouverneur general, qui occ~pait ~lors 'HI1-c:l
double position; le Vice-Ro~ etait, en effet~ Gouverneur general de 1'Inde britannique et representant de la Couronne aupres des Etats,' de sorte'
qu'il dirigeait les relations entre les Etats d'une part
et l'Inde britannique de 1'autre, non pas en tant'que
Gouverneur general de l'Inde, mais en qmilite de
repres.entant de Sa Majeste, Voic~ <:lonc un passage d'une lettre ~dressee, au .representant de la
Couro,nne, a. la date du -9 juin 1947:

"CQmme Votre Ellf.:cellen~e le sait;avant mem..e
"As Your Excell~ncy knows, both befo.re you
'·went to England and while you were there, ~ askeq. 'q~e yous ne vous r~die2; en AngLeterre et, de
thatmy State shou.1q. be accorded DOIIlinionstaw,s pouve~u, alors quevous vous trouyi~z da~,s ce
when the ,British should leave India. r have pays; j'FJ,i demande q1.1,e mon Etat rec;oive le statut
always 4jtherto felt' assured' that after 'more de Domimpn, au momep.toules Britanniques quit:than a ,century of £.a.~t4ful alliaIlce, during whic;h teront 1'Inde. Jusqu'ici, j'ai toujours ete persuade
I have repos~d all my confi<ience iJf the' British, que, apres plus d'un siec1e d'ailiance loyale avec
I.should certaip.ly be able to remain without la Grande-Br~tagne - periode au cmirs de laqu~lle
question within the .family of the British ~om­ mon pays a' pl~ce t04te sa confi,ance dans Jes
inonwealth. Clause '1 appea.rs to deny me even Br~tati1;J.i.q~es - je pourrais, sans.conteste, det1\e:u.,.
that. I still hope that IlO, <iifficulty will'be allowed r~r .dans la grande familIedu Commonwealth
to impede direct relations between me and His ,Jlritannique. LacIause 7 .semble me refuser jus;'
Majesty's Goyernment. I was rf.~ently infor~ed qu'a. c,ela. J'espere,cependant,' qu'aucunediffi,.,.
that Your Excellency had undertq.ken to en(S1,1r~ culte ne viendrafaire obstacle a. retablissement
~ pronoum;emnt in ,Pa.rliament to establish that de rela.tions directes'entre le :Gouvernemeiit de5a.
such relations can be entertained.. My'hope is Majeste et moi-inem.e~ J'a.itece~entapprisqu~
that, once esta1;>lished, these relations will q.evelop Votre ,Excellence §'effor<;ait d'obtemr qu'un~ de~to clos~r union betweep. !py Stat~ 'arid 'the claration fut faite' auPadement, autorisant l'etaBtitis,h Crown to which for so many years I have hlissement de telles relations. J'espere sincerement
been tied in faithful alliance. Meantime, I 's;hall que ces re1ations,une fois etablies, se transfor":
undertake and continue active negotiations with 'meront en une union plus etroite encore entre mon
th,e ,new Dominion~'jn order to ,;reach ,sensible ~t~t et ~~ Coqronpe brit~nnique, a.laq~el1e je suis
practkal arran,g~en,ts for the transition period, l~ed~puis tant 4'anne,espar l'alliance la plus
so; that the, futllre at lridj<l1l. ~ta~es and:rn<:lia Jgy~e. pans l'intervalle, j'engagerai et jepour'generally can be assured, sof,ar ~s 'possiple,in ~mh1'ra.i des Regociatiop.s activesavec lesnouveaux '
an orderly fashion.
.
Dominions, en vued'arrivera. un arrangement
r~iso1J.J-1~lee.t ,.pn~tiquepo:t,1r·laperiode·de tran~itio,p,per#lettantde regIeI', 4ans lecalme, autant
q\t.epqssible, 1'~vell!rdes Etatsin4ien~ et de l'Ind~
~ll- ~~J].~,ral.

'fJesuis contraint de protester,atip1'es q.e Votre
Excellence,
contre la facson. dont mon Etat se
~xcelleri~y ,ag~in~t the way .in which my· s.t~te
beingabandoneq. by its' old ally, the BrItish wit abaRdonnepar son 'allie traditionnel•. le

,r

"1 fe~l bound' to titake thi~ protest to Your

I
18

Government, and the ties which have lmund me Gouvernement
in loyal devotion to the King-Emperor art; being liens de profondbtitannique, et dont on brise les,
severccC T'hope that Your Excellency will plac:e Emperetir. Tesper10yaJisme, qui l'unissent au Roie quevo treExc ellenc e commu~
my letter before H~s Majesty's GoY~rnment. I niquer ama lettre au
shall, for the present, refrain from ptlblishing it Je m'abstiendrai Gouvernement de Sa Majeste.
de publicr cette lettre pour le
lest I should in any way embarrass my oid friends moment, de crainte
and allies in the eyes of the world. I must, never- monde mes amis et d'embarrasser aux yeux du
allies de longue date. J e dois,
theless, retain my right to publish it at a later cependant, me reserve
r le droit de publier cette
stage, if it should become necessary in the int€::,ests lettre par la suite,
si
les interets de mon Etat
ofmy State."
l'exigent.'"
On 8 August 1947 he wrote again to the Crown
Le 8 aotit 1947, le Nizam a envoye une nonRepresentative, and in the course of his letter .elle lettre au represe
ntant de la Couronne, dans
he observed· as follows;
laqueIle ii ecrivait:
\ '~'As YourE xceilen cy knows, while Hyderabad
"Comme Votre
is necessarily closely connected in various ways rabad s'interesse Excellence le sait bien, si Haidewith what will now become the Dominion of a ,bien des egards,necessairement de tres pres, et
India, there are also mar.y ties-between my State l'Inde, i1 e~t egalemau sort du futur Dominion de
ent uni par de nombreux liens
~d the future Pakistan Dominion. It will be au futur
Dominion du Pakistan. Votre Excellence
within Your Excellency's knowledge also that in n'ignore pas non plus
que d~s cet Etat, que mes
this ~tate, which my ancestors and I have ruled ancetres et moi-me
me
gouvernons depuis plus de
for more than two centuries, there has been little deux siecles, les
communal disturbance, and the cleavage on ete, ;rares et que troubles religieux ont toujours
religious grounds has always been much less acute differentes confessla division entre membres des
than in British India. It is my earnest wish to fQnde que dans ions a toujours ete moins prol'Inde britannique. Je desire
pursue a policy which will enable this freedom vivement poursuivre
une pOlitique telle que l'harfrom discord and disorder to continue, and formo nie et l'ordre
continu
ent de regner dans le
this purpose I must take into account the import- pays et, a cette fin,
je dois tenir compte de rimance of maintaining good relations with both L~e portan cequi s'attach
e au maintien de bonnes relanew Dominions.
tions avec l'unet l'autre des nouveaux Dominions.
"It is not yet clear how far and in what manner
"Nous ne
the Indian Dominion and the Pakistan Dominion queUe mesuresavons pas encore nettement dans
will consult and eo-operate on matters of com- de l'Inde et et de queUe maniere le Dominion
mon concern or how closely their policies can be coopereroritecelui du Pakistan se consulteront et
integrated on the essential subje-:ts of ex,ternal teret commu n ce qui concerne les questions d'inaffairs and defence. I understand that this is coordonner n, ni jusqu'a quel point ils pourront
leur politique dans les domaines essena matter which,', it is 'recognized, cannot be re- tiels
des
affaires
etrangeres et de ladefeFlse.
solved before 15 Augus t It is not possible for ]'enten que
c'est la une question qui, de l'avis
me to contemplate an organic union with either "- commuds
this was his firm declaration of policy -"of the I1 m'estn, ne peut etre resolue avant le 15 aout.
Dominions until I am more fully informed on fertnem impossible" et cette declaration definit
ent la politique du Nizam "d'envisager
these matters. I am bound at this stage to wait une
union
complete avec l'un oU: l'autre des Doand see hQW the relations between the two Do- minion
s avant d'obtenir des renseignements plus
minio nsare regulated and developed.
complets. Pour le moment, je, suis oblige d'attendre
et de voir comment s'etabliront et se deveIopperont
les relations entre les deux Dominions.
'''I was happy to observe that in the recent
"]'ai remarque avec satisfac
debates in Parliament on the Indian Independence des derniers. debats qui ont, eu tion qu'au cours
lieu, au Parlement
Bill the difficulties of the in-mediate position for au sujet de l'Indian Indepe
ndence
Bill, on n'a pas
such States as Hyderabad did not pass unnoticed. passe sous silence les
I need only remind Your Excellency, by way of situation actuelle pour difficultes que presente la
illustration, of three speeches for the Govern- rabad. A titre d'exem des Etats tels que Haidement which recognized that the States ought npt a Votre Excellence, ple, il me suffitd e rappeler
trois discours prononces, au
fobe asked for hurried decisions at this- Nnctur e nom du Gouvernement
, ou it est reconnit qu'il
and that a treaty rather than a federal'relationship ne faut pas inviter
les Etats, a prendre des decimight be, the solution .in. present ,circum')taD.c~l)." siOns hatives
en ce p.1oment critique" et qu'un
traite, plutot que l'etablissetnent de relations fMerales,p ourrai t constituer une solution adaptee
aux circonstances."
Then the Nizam goes on to quote from" the
Le Nizam cite ensuite' des declarations faites
declaratior:rs. made in Parliament, some of which I au Parlement, dont j'aidej
have already read out to the' Security Council. lecture au ConseH de securitea donne partiellement
. n declare plus loin,
Latero~l in the' course of the same letter he goes dans la meme
lettre;'
'on to say:
"I have naturally and necessarily taken into
"NatureIlement, j'ai
account the fact that the Dominion of India is du fait que le Domin ete 'oblige de tenir compte
ion de l'Inde est mon voisin
my neighbour and I am fully.prepared' ... to enter et' je suis' entiere
ment
into a treaty with them whereby a suitable luiun. traite conten pret .•. acoucl ure avec
ant des dispositions' approarr~ng~~ellt .is, made in respec t, of land com- priees,
en ce qui 'ccincerne les communications
munic ation,s o that all-In.dia standards are recog- terrestres, de'maniere
.a. faire observer ltismemes
nized, and' through· communications .and ',mutual regtes dans toutle'
territo irede 1'Inde, et a as:surer

19

ipterchange facilities are assured, and Hyderabad lIes possibilites d'echa."1ges reciproques et la circucontributes an agreed number of troops to the lation d'un pays it l'autre, Haiderabad affe(;tant it
defence of the Dominion. Moreover, I should be la de£ense dll Dorninioll-desforcesarmees--dont
willing to agree in this treaty to conduct the l'importance serait fixee par un accord mutueI.
external affairs of my State in general con- De plus, je serais pret it accepter, dans ce traite,
formity with the foreign policy of the Dominion de conduire les affaires etrangeres de mon Etat
of India. But it would be necessary for me to suivant les grandes !ignes de la politique etranprovide against the possibiHty, which I earnestly gere de l'Inde. Mais j'estimerais necessaire 'de
hope will never arise in fact, that !lle two new prevoir l'eventua1i.te - qui, 1e l'espere sincereDominions might pursue a mutuaHy hostile policy. ment, ne se produira jamais - de relations hosIn that case, it would be unthinkable for my tiles entre les aeux nouveaux Dominions.. Dans
State to pursue a hostile policy towards the Do- ce cas, il serait inconcevable que mon Etat put
minion of Pakistan and it would have to be pro- poursuivre une politique hostile au Dominion du
vided that Hyderabad in such an event would Pakistan; it conviendrait done d'etablir que l'Etat
remainneutraI."
de Haiderabad, en pareil cas, resterait neutre."
I omit one sentence and continue:
{'It is a matter of deep satisfaction to me that
both the new Dominions wil1 be within the family
of the British Commonwealth of Nations. I
should want a provision inserted in the. treaty
where.by if, unhappily, either party should at some
future date decide to secede from the Commonwealth the other party should be free. to review
the provisions of the treaty. For,' in spite of the
provisions of section 70f the Indian Independence
Act, I cannot believe that after more than a
century of faithful alliance,' it is the intention of
the British Government to throw my State out of
the Empire against my will."
.
Then he goes on to say:
"Before I turn to other provisions which would
need to be included in such a treaty, I must record
my astonishment and regret that, though Hyderabad's Negotiating Committee was available in
Delhi for a fortnight until 5 August, those who
will be responsible for the Dominion of India
refused to negotiate with them on any subject,
even including standstill agreements and Berar,
unless as an essential preliminary Hyderabad was
prepared to agree to accede. It was made absolutely plain by my Committee that, short of
accession, Hyderabad was ready and willing to
enter into treaty relationship."
.

Then, a sentence or two lat~r, he says:

Je saute une phrase et je poursuis:
"Je suis tres heureux que les deux !louveaux
Dominions soient ~ompris dans la famille du
Commonwealth britannique. J e voudrais que le
traite ·colJ.tienne une clause selon laquelle si, par
malheur, l'une des deux parties decidait, a l'aven~,
de quitter le Commonwealth, l'autre partie devrait
etre Iibre de reviser les dispositions du traite.
Car, malgre les termes de la section 7 de I'lndian
Independence Act, je ne peux croire que, apres
plus d'un siecle d'aIIiance fidele, le Gouvernement
britanniqL~ a1t l'intenHon d'exclure mon Etat
de I'Empire, contre ma volonte."
Le Nizam declare encore dans cette lettre:
"Avant de passer aux autres dispositions qu'il
serait necessaire d'inclure dans un tel traite, it me
faut constater avec surprise et regret que les autorites du futur Dominion de l'Inde ont refuse d'entrer en relations avec .la Commission de negociations de Haiderabad (bien. que ceIJ.e-ci se £tit tenue
it leur disposition a Delhi pendant deux semaines,
jusqu'au 5 aout) et de negocier avec eIIe sur
aUCUl1 sujet, y compris les accords de statu quo et
la question de Berar, a moins que Haiderabad
ne se declare pret,comme condition prealable,
a accepter son rattachement a l'Inde. La Commis-sion a fait savoir tres clairement que Haiderabad
etait pret et dispose it entamer des negociations
en vue de I'elaboration d'un traite, sous la seule
reservequ'il ne soit pas question de rattachement."
On peut lire un peu plus loin:

"It is recognized that section 7 of the Indian
Independence Act does not cover the whole
gro~nd. For this very reason H y(i<:~rabad was
a1lX1OUS to negotia:t~ a standstill agreement, but
those. responsible for the Dominion of India decl!ned to take part in such negotiations. My State
WIll nevertheless do its best, even without such
an agreement, to avoid any administrative deadlock which is bound to cause inconvenience to
both. If any such deadlock or inconvenience
should occur, the fault
rest squarely on the
Dominion of India." .

"I! est admis que la section 7 de I'Indian Independence At. ne regIe pas tous les problemesqui
se posent. C'est precise.ment pour~~tte raison ,
que Haiderabad etait·vivement desireux de conclure un accord de statu quo, mais les autorites du
futl'''' Dominion de I'Inde se sont absolument
refusees it prendre part it de telIes negociations.
Mon pays fera neanmoins de son mieux, meme
en I'absence d'un accord;pour eviter toute obstruc..
tion administrative qui ne saurait. manquer de
nuire aux deux pays. Si des difficultes de Cette
nature seproduisaient, le Dominion de l'Inde en
serait entierement· responsable."

At tI1atvery early date it was quite clear what
the position taken up by both sides was.· The
Nizam said, "I recognize the fact that India is my
ne.ighbour,that I have to have close treaty and
frIendly relationships with them, and that that
t:eaty will cover all the subjects of .communicahons, of defence and of extemal affairs, but those
must be regulated by treaty and not by accession."

La position des deux' parties etait deja tres
claire a cette date. Le Nizama declare: "Je reconnais que l'Inde est notre voisine, qu'il nous faut
conclure un traite et entretenir d'etroitesrelations
amicalesavec ce pays, et quece traite doit viser
ledomaine des con11!lwications.clelade£ense.et
des a{faires etrangeres, tnais c'est par voie de
traite~etl;lon <ie rattacbementqti'il faut proceder."

will

IIIiIIII.UlltIJiJJilj"UltfIJ.'.IJMSM.I,. . .JJJ _ _I!!l!lIiIJ.LIMI:_ll[. ·111

• • •UI

.

India at that very date was insistent that they' Au mettle moment, l'Inde faisait savoir sa fenne
intention de ne rien cottsiderer d'autre que le
would look at nothing except accession.
rattachement.
In the course of the Sa111e letter, a little later,
Le Nizam dit encore plus loin, dans la meme
he says:
lettre:
"J'apprends, et cela me parait inconcevable,
. "I 1('!2irn (though I find it hard to believe) that
in 'defiance of my admitted rights, the new Do- qu'au defi Je :lOS droits reconnus, le nouveau
minion of India mean to start their career by Dominion de l'lnde a l'intention de commencer
seizing my territory. I cannot but regard this na carriere d'Etat en s'emparant de notre terrirefusal to negotiate, except on terms that Hydera- toire. Je ne peux cqnsider~r l'attitude de I'lnde,
bad first agrees to accede, as coercion and pres.:. qui refuse de negocier, a moins que Haiderabad
sure to join and a compulsion to a hurried de- ne consente d'abord a Uti etre rattachC, que cotntne
cision. And I hope that even at this late hour, tendant a contraindre Haiderabad a. prendre la
through the good offices of Your Excellency as decision precipitee de se rattacher a I'lilde. J'es;.
Crown Representative with special responsibilities pere qu'il n'est pas trc.'i' tal'd pour que cate polito see that His Majesty's Government pledges to tique change radicalement, grace aux bons offices
the States are honourably fulfilled, this policy de Votre Excellence, tout specialement chargee,
may be reversed. ~or it is utterly. }nconsisteI!t en tant qUe representatit de la Couroilne, de veiller
w~th th~ declared pledges and pohcy of HIS a ce qut. le Gouvemement de Sa Majeste respecte
Majesty's Government."
les e..'1gagements qu'll a contractes envers les
Etats. En effet, la ligne de conduite actuellement
suivie est absolument incompatible avec les enga..;
gements officiels et la poiitique du Gouvernement
de Sa Majeste."
.
Then, the Crown Representative wrote back
on 12 August 1947, and I quote an extract from
that letter: .

Le 12 aotit 1947. le representant de la Cauronne a repondu par une lettre dont je citerai les
passages suivants:

"As you know, ~e anxiety of the Dominion
"Comme vous le savez, le Dominion est viveis to achieve stability which they feel cannot be ment desireux d'etablir "ne situation stable, ce
adequately secured tmless all the States which are qui, a son avis, ne peut se faire que si tous les
situated within their borders are prepared to come Etats enclaves dans ses frontieres sont disposes
into organic union with theri1. I myself, as I a s'umr organiquement avec lui. Ainsi que je l'ai
have told your Negotiating Committee. and your declare a votre Commission de negoci~tions et
Adviser, believe that accession to the Union a votre Conseiller, je suis personnellement conwouid be to the mutual advantage of the Do- vaineu que le rattachement de Haiderabad a
minion and your Stat~. But I fully understand l'Union serait profitable aux deux Etats. Je n'en
your difficulties and I have no wish to hurry you comprends pas moins la situation difficile dans
to a decision. In the circumstances, although I laquelle vous vous trouvez et je n'ai pas .l'inten,shall cease to be Crown'Representative On 15 Aug- tion de vous presser de prendre une decision;
tist, I have secured the assent of those who will Daiis ces conditions, et bien que je doive cesser
be' responsible, for the Govetnment of the Do- le 15 aotit d'etre representant de la Couronne;
minion· to my continuing negotiations. with ,Your j'ai obtenu .de ceux qui assumeront legouverExalted. Highness for .a further p-eriod of two nement du Dominion l'autorisatioll de continuer
months, during which I hope we shall be able to les negClciations avec Votre Altesse Serenissime
reconcile our views. During this period the offer pendant une nouvelle periode de deux mois, au
to· accede on the terms which. I have already pro- cours'de laquellenous pourrons, je l'espere, nous
posed will (as a special ~"l:ceptiof1) r~main open mettre d'accord. A titre tout a fait exceptionnel,
in the case of Hyderabad."
la proposition de rattachement que j'ai faite a.
Haiderabad, sera 'maintenue pendant ce temps
aux conditions que j'ai deja exposees."
Then a little later on:
"I learn that your Exalted Highriess is cdrt.;,
c!ern~dIest a deCision not in present Circum.;,
starleesto accede would be freated as a hostile
act by ffleDominioil, and your. State mig1it .be
suJ;Jjetited.toblockade, brit I am satisfied that the
'l~adets of tllenew Dominion haveilo intention
of applying' suclfpressure/'

Plus loin:
"Votre Altesse .Serenissirile craint, me 'semb1et-il, que 3i eUe decide dans les Circo~st::lttces actue1Ies:. de ne pas se rattacheral'Inde; le Dominion
ne cOJisidereceUe deCision coIrime une mani£cistation d'hostilite et que votre Etat ne soit
soumis aun blocus; pounant; je suis convaincu
que le~. dirigeaJits<lti· nouveau Dominion ,n'ont
pas l'inteiltidn d'ex.ercer une pression de ce
genre."
,

Nous .. ~llons 'Voir .cequi, en. fait, est. sUrvenu'
plus fard. ]'appelle votreatt.eJition sut deux'
of a speedima8e by theN~zaih orl14 August 1947 phrasesd'un discours ptoilonce par le. Nizam,
(jii the occasion· of afai"ewell .banquetfo the le 14aotit 1947, a l'occasiori d'unbanquet d'adieJ,t
BtItishResidenf, wnosesuzeramtY was to end. 9ffettau Residentbtitannique, dont lasuzerai,The.British Resident was to depattr from Hydera.:. netevemiitde cesser. Le Resident btitanniq4e
. bad; rea-vittg:the State enHre1yftee ta~6iiducStits dev1iit quitter Haidefabad .et lais~er cetEt~tentie­
mtetn~l a'11d aternalaffairs, wlikll it was y~fy remeJif •libre .de dirigerses affaires. interieures
capable of doing. In respect tq it~ iriternalaifairs, et exterieures, ce qu'il etait parfaitenient capable
We shall. presentiysee .what actually. happened

litter .6iJ~ .• I invit~ .aWiriticiil. to tWo sentences out

_

..

21

on the occasion of that farewell banquet to him, de faire. A,)ropC's des affaires interieures, le
Nizam a declare, a ce banquet:
the Nizam stated:
"En attendant, je veillerai tout specialement a
"Meantime, it will be my anxious care to maintain within my dominions that peace and security main'cenir sur mon territoire la paix et la l;&urite
without whu< there can be no stable prosperity sans lesquelles il ne peut y a" "ir de prosperite
and to encourage my subjects, whatever their permanente, et a encourager mes sujets, queUes
religious beliefs, to· live amicably together as que soient leurs croyances religieuses, a vivre
they have for so many generations in Hyderabad. ensemble en bonne intelligenc~ comme its 1'ont
I earnestly appeal to all my people net to be fait depuis de si nombreuses generations. Je
led into the course of communal discord and conjure tous mes sujets de ne pas se laisser enexcesses, but to rally loyally to my support while trainer a des exces et a la discorde intestine, mais
I seek to achieve for th~m an t.'te benefits which au contraire de :-;'unir pour me soutenir loyale.flow from such secure and orderly Go<.. .ernment..' ment, alors que je cherche a leur assurer tous
les avantages d'un GOl1vemement stable et oi-donne."
Ensuite, dans un telegramme adresse le 14 aout
Then, in a telegram to the Crt>wn Representative, on 14 August, while sending his greetings au representant de la Couronne, auquel il ento him on his pending assumption of the Governor- voyait ses felici~ations pour sa nomination au
Generalship of a free India, the Nizam went on poste de Gouvernetir general de t'Inde libre, le
Nizam ecrivait:
to say:
"Mon desir le plus sincere et le vceu de mon
"It is my earnest desire and the wish of my
Government and people that we should live on Gouvemement et de mon peuple est que nous
terms of the closest amity with Y01,1. I trust that entretenions les relations amicales les plus
the greatest cordiality and friendship will exist etroites. J e suis persuade que ces relations seront
in our relations in the pursuit of common aims empreintes de la plus grande cordialite, du fait
and objectives. and that these relations will be que .nous visons des objectifs communs,et
strengthened by the freedom which has been won que nos liens d'amitie seront renforces· par la
for the whole of this great sub-continent."
liberte que vient de conquerir l'ensemble de la
peninsule."
Apparemment, il s'agissait de liberte pour i'lnde
But apparently that was freedom for Iridia
and not for the States. The Governor-General, et non pou£, les Etats. Le Gouverneur general,
as he then had become on 15 August, speaking in entre en fonction le 15 aout, dedara a l'Assem~
the Constituent Assembly of the Dominicn of blee constituante du Dominion de l'Inde, apropos
"
Ip.dia, made the following observation with regard du Nizam:
to the Nizam:
liThe only State of the first importance that
"Le seul Etat d'i!nportance qui n'ait pas encore
has not yet ·acceded is the premier State, Hydera- opte pour son rattachement a l'Inde est le grand
had. Hyderabad occupies a unique position in Etat de Haiderabad. Du fait de son etendue, de
view of its siie, population and resources, and sa popuktion et de ses ressotl1'ces, cet Etat ocit has its. special problems. The Nizam, while he cupe un rang unique et il a des problemes qui
does not propose to accede to the Dominion cif lui sont propres. Bien qu'il n'envisage pas le
Pakistan, has not up to the present felt able to rattachement de Haiderabad au Dominion du
accede to the Dominion of India. His Exalted Pakistan, le Nizam n'a pas, .jusqu'a ~resent, ern
Highness has, however, assured me of his wish pouvoir accepter le rattacheinent an Dominion
to co-operate in the three essential subjects of de l'Inde. Son Altesse Serenissime m'a toutefois
extern..1 affairs, defence and communications assure de soh desir de cooperer·avec ce Dominion
with that Dominion whose territories surround dans les trois domaines priinordiaux des affaires
his State. With the assent of the Government, etrangeres, de la de£ense et des cohmiunications;
negotiations will be continued with the Nizam and 50n Etat est. en effet enclave dans les territoires
I am hopeful of feac.1ting a solution satisfactory . du Dominion de l'Inde.Avec le consentement du
to all."
.
Gouvemement, les negociations continueront avec
. le Nizam et j'espere que nous parviendrons a
une solution quidonnera satisfactiol'l a. tous'"
Lea negotiations se poursuivirent done. 'L-es
Then the negotiations went on. Represent~tives
went back and forth between Hyderabad and representants firent de constantes ailees d venues
Delhi. .All sorts of proposals were made, but entre Haiderabad et Delhi. pe. multiples propoIndia· st90d .firm on. accession .(l;ndnotlling . else, sitions furent faites, mais ·l'Inue. maintint cateso that the Nizam in his telegram dated, 23 August goriquementsa position: le rattacheipent et rien
d'autr~; atissi,dans un telegraniriie eh date du
to the Governor-General of India, said this:
23 aout,adresse au. Obtiverneur general de l'lride,
-le Nizam deciarait-il:
"Comme vous le savez par ma lettre du 8 aoiit,
"As you know from my letter of 8 August,
Hyderabad is ready to try. to i'eachagreetnent Hil.idetabad s'effotcei'a deparvetiir a. uriaccord
WIth you on the basis explained in that letter, avec. vous stir lesbases dposees dahs cette lettre,
but short of accession. I am therefore not pte- saft£ eft cequi c6ficerne le rattachement. Je. ne
pared to negotiate for aCCession thtlUgh very ~;uis pas dispose a.·· eiitrer.eh poutparlers elJ. vue
ready to negotiate on the linesdesttibed in my du tattachement, mais. jele stiis to~t. it fait a.
letter."
negocier dati~ le sens indiqtll~ . dans ma lettre."
.ThisW'astlnder no ptessurefrom "a body of . Ce fuessag~ n.'iL pas efe. redige'sous la ,pression
~gsters". as responsible administrators were d'itrie "bande de gangsters". -.-- nom donne plus
I

_

n

mm

$"7

22
tard par le Gouvernement de l'Inde a des fonetionnaires responsables - mais hien avant les
evenements auxquels le representant de l'Inde
a fait allusion. Dans une lettre, qu'il adressa le
18 septembre au Gouverneur general, le Nizam
declare de nouveau:
ccAux termes de ma lettre du 8 aout 1947 (~
\ "But mv letter of 8 August 1947 (to which I
would refer for its full terms), I offered to enter laquelIe je me rCfere parce qu'elle contient 'Cl,,~
into a treaty with the Dominion of India of·which dispositk1ns detaillees) , j'ai o1tert de devenir
important features were: (a) that I would under- partie a un traite avec le Dominion de l'Inde.
take that th~ foreign policy of Hyderabad would traite dont les points essentiels seraient les suibe conducted in general conformity with that of vants: a) je m'engagerais a ce que la politique
the Dominion of India; (b) that Hyderabad exterieure de Haiderabad suivl::, dans ses grandes
would contribute an agreed number of troops for lignes, ce1le du Dominion de l'Inde; b) Ha'idethe defence of the Dominion of India (though it rabad fournirait des troupes, d'un effectif fixe
was stipulated that if the Dominion of India and d'un conimun accord pour la def. .se du Dominion
the Dominion of Pakistan pursued mutually de l'Inde (H serait prevu toutefois qu'au cas
hostile policies, Hyderabad would remain ou le Dominion de l'Inde et le Dominion du Paneutral); (c) that reasonable provisions should kistan poursuivraient a l'~gard l'un de l'autre une
be included as to communications so as to ensure politique hostile, Haiclerabad resterait neutre);
the maintenance of all-India standards of safety, c) des dispositions raisonnables seraient inserees
the provision of interchange and through traffic dans le traite en ce qui concerne les communifacilities."
cations, de maniere a assurer l'observation de
regles de securite applicables a tout le territoire
de l'Inde, la possiJilite d'echanges et la circu. lation d'un pays a l'autre."

subsequently described by the Government of
India, long before any events occurred to which
the representative of India has alluded. Then, in
his letter of 18 September to the GovernorGeneral, the Nizam says:

Le Nizam declare plus loin, dans la meme
lettre:
"L'etendue de Haiderabad est la moitie de
"Hyderabad is half the size of France and has
a population of 17 million, more than twice as celle de la France et sa population atteint 17 m:Hmany as any other Indian State and considerably lions d'habitants, soit plus du double de celle
more than Canada or any other ;British Dominion de tout autre Etat indien; elIe depasse de beauoutside India. It has been under Moslem rule for coup ~elle du Canada ou celIe de tout autre Domiseven centuries and under the Asafia dynasty for nion britannique, en dehors de l'Inde. Depuis
more than two. But there has been little com- sept siecles, sa reli~ion officielle est l'islamisme
munal strife, indeed what there has been is et depuis plus de deux siecles regne la dynastie
negligible compared with communal discord in Asafia. Il y a eu peu d'antagonisme religieux
British India. Where it has occurred in the entre les diverses communautes; en fait. les disState, it has not been indigenous but an in- sensions ont ete negligeables si on les compare
fection from outside. All communities here aux dissensions religieuses de l'Inde britannique.
have been loyal to me and my forefathers and Lorsqu'elIes se sont manifestees dans notre Etat,
have been proud to be Hyderabadis, whatever elies n'ont pas ete d'origine locale, mais fomentees
their creed. . In these circumstances, H yderabad de l'exterieur. Toutes les communautes de notre
is fully entitled to maintain its separate identity. Etat ont ete loyales enversmes ancetres et moiBut, short of accession, it is ready and willing to meme et sont fieres d'appartenir a Haiderabad,
make such a treaty of association with the Do- quelle que soit leur croyance. Dans ces conditions,
minion as will not only secure friendly relations Haiderabad est pleinement fonde a conserver
but will lead to the fullest· co-operation. More- son identite propre. Mais, -exception faite du ratover, we shall welcome suggestions from the tachement, it est pret a conclure un traite d'assoDominion of terms calculated to make our asso- ciation avec le Domini.on, non seulement pour
ciation more real and binding."
s'assurcr avec lui des rapports cordiaux, mais
pour favoriser la cooperation la plus complete
possible entre les deux pays. D'ailleurs, nous
acc~leillerons favorablement toutes les dispositions
que pourra suggerer le Dominion pour rendre
notre associati?n plus etroite et plus solide."
. Le Nizam fait observer plus loin:
Later on he observes:
"Je redoute que le rattachement a l'Inde ne.
"lam •apprehensive· that accession would introduce the same ruinous disturbance and blood- provoque dans notre Etat lesmemes troubles
shed in. my State, and I am satisfied that it is my desastreux et sanglants et j'estime qu'il est de
duty in the interests of my subjects to avoid this. mon devoir de les eviter dans l'interet de mes
sujets."
Ainsi, l'attitude adoptee par le Nizam etait
Therefore, the stand taken· by the Nizam was
made quite dear. There is no .question of his tres nette; Il n'agissait aucunement sous la presbeing under pressure from any cabinet or body sion d'un cabinet ou d'un groupe de ministres;
of ministers,though when we come to that we d'ailleuf£, conime nous le verrons plus tard, aushall find that ther.e was actually no question of cunepression ne fut exercee de quelque cote
any kind.of pressure at all from anybody. In a que ce flit. Le Gouvernement du Nizam presenta .
letter. dated 24 September from the Governor- par la suite des propositions potivant devenir les
General ·of India to the Nizam the Governor,. clauses d'un traite, mais, dans unelettre du
He goes on to say further in the letter:

-----------_.......

---~~------~.~

.

-_

.....~.. ..~_._ .....- ."~'

A

ps

23
General observed as follows-and let me indicate 24 septembre, le Gouverncur general de l'Inde
that in the meantime the Nizam's Government repondit:
had offered the heads of an agreement for the
purpose of being translated into a treaty:
"But the heads of agreement do not afford a
"Mais r )ropositions ne fournissent pas une
satisfactory solution. My Government observes solution satisfaisante. Mon Gouvernement fait
that these give no legislative power to the Do- ' observer qU'elles ne conferent aucun pouvoir
. . ..."
l6gislatif au Dominion ..."
mInion
Bien entendu, un tel pouvoir ne pouvait etre
Of course, that could only cOJ1].e by accession.
garanti que par le rattachement. Plus loin le
Later on the Governor-General said:
Gouverneur general ecrivait encore:
"C'est la une disposition que mon Gouverne"This is an arrangement which they cannot
accept. . . . Indeed, if Your Exalted Highness is ment ne peut accepter . . . En effet, si Votre
prepared to .accede, you will receive the fullest Altesse Serenissime est prete a opter pour le
co-operation from the Dominion in obtaining for ratta.chement, eUe beneficiera de la cooperation
your State any arrangements which you may la plus entiere du Dominion en obtenant pour
reasonably suggest for the advantage :tnd pros- son Etat tous les avantages qU,elle pottrra
perity of Hyderabad. Nor need Your Exalted raisonnablement demander en vue d'en assurer
Highness apprehend any interference with your la prosperite. Votre Altesse Serenissime n'a pas
internal sovereignty and autonomy with Hydera- non plus a craindre que son independance souveraine ait a souffrir." '
bad."
Again, therefore" internal sovereignty and
Done, la souverainere nationale et l'autonomie
autonomy are admitted. There is no question sont admises. It n'y a aucun doute a ce sujet, et
with regard to that, and India itSelf has. offered l'Inde elle-meme s'est offerte ales garantir. Tous
to guarantee it. The whole effort to obtain acces- les efforts deployes potir obtenir le rattachement
sion means only one thing-that the Nizam was de Haiderabad n'indiquent qu'une chose; c'est
not prepared to submit his external sovereignty que le Nizam n'etait pas dispose a tolerer que,
to any restraint from India, whatever he may have dans ses relations avec l'exterieur, sa souverainete
been prepared to do by way of treaty. There- fut soumise a une contrainte de la part de l'Inde,
fore, if he was not independent, what else was quels que soient d'ailleurs les sacrifices qu'il fut
he? He is completely sovereign inside his State, pret a consentir par voie de traite. Si, dans ces
and the Governor-General says that India will conditions, le Nizam n'est pas independant, qu'estguarantee that sovereignty, if only he will accede it done? Il eat souverain absolu a l'interieur. de son
to India on foreign affairs, defence and communi- Etat, et le Gouverne\.tr general declare que l'Inde
cations, and give up his legislative authority, garantira cette souverainete s'il consent au rattawhich India does not possess. If India does not chement en matiere d'affaires etrangeres, de depossess it and he does, then he is completely fense et de communications et s'il abandonne a
independent. The very insistence upon a.ccession l'Inde son pouvoir legislatif, que l'Inde ne possede
predicates that the Nizam was independent. Why pas. Si l'Inde ne possede pas ce pouvoir et que
else the . insistence upon accession, if he was Haiderabad le possede, c'est done que Haideraalready subordinate? In reply to this the Nizam bad est completement independant. Le fait meme
again sets out a IQng reply dated 26 September d'insister pour obtenir le rattachement presuppose
in which he reiterates in the -last sentence:
que le Nizam est independant. Si le Nizam etait
deja subordonne, pourquoi une telle insistance?
En reponse, le Nizam envoie encore une longue
lettre, en date dti26 septembte, clans la derniere
phrase de laquelle it repete :
"Permettez-moi enfin d'assurer une fois de plus
. "Finally, let me assure Your Excellency once
more, as I. have assured you in previous letters, a Votre Excellence, comme je l'ai. fait dans des
that, short of accession, I am ready now, and shall lettres precMentes, que, exception faite du rattaremain ready at any future time when the cheinent, je suis et resterai pret dans l'avenir, au
Dominion of India wishes to re-open negotiations, moment ou le Dominion de l'Inde desirera reto enter into a treaty or agreement about the three prendre les negociations, a conc1ure avec h~! '1n
subjects of external affairs, defence and communi- traite ou un accord sur les trois points suivants:
cations:"
affaires etrangeres,de£ense et communications."
Le probleme tout entier est tout a fait clair.
The whole dispute is per.fectly clear. On the
one side there is a desperate effort on the part D'une part, des efforts desesperes de la part du
of the Nizam to maintain his. juridical indepen- Nizam pour maintenir son independance juridique,
dence, though he is prepared .to come into any bien qu'il soit dispose a conclure un accord arnical
amicable, friendly arrangement which would be en tenant compte, sur .les trois points susmentionin accordance with India's desires and needs in' nes, des desirs et des besoins de l'Inde. Plus tard,
respect of these. three subjects. Later oh, bn le 29 novembre, un Accord de statu quo intervint
29 November, a Standstill Agreement was entered entre.l'Inde et le Nizam. Cet Accord etait indisinto between bdia and the Nizam. The Stand- pensable parce. que, sous le regime de la suzeraistill Agreement was essential because, during the nete britanniqpe sur les Etats et de la souverainete
British regime with its suzerainty over the States totale sur l'Inde britannique, de multiples accor.rls
and full sovereignty over British India, a.ll sorts Haient le Gouvernement de l'Inde et les Gouof working arrangements were in operation be- vernements des Etats, et la rupture ou l'abrogation
tween the Government of India and the Govern-·· soudaines de ces accords auraient cause de grandes
ments of the States~. and thesu'dden disruption difficultes, sinon des troubles plUG graves, pour
I.ll\I!hll~.ia!lflI_.tLlIIIiIIl!I
illJ
......
...
K
---------

1IItt••••

.

or termination of those arrallgements would
cause extreme embarrassment, if not more, to
both sides. 1+ was necessary therefore that, pending some settlement which was acceptable to both
sides, some modus vivendi should be agreed upon,
and this was the Standstill Agreement of 29 November. After a preamble to which I need not
refer-it is not a long document, but it was very
important in the course of the history of these
negotiations-the articles provided as follows:

...

24

les deux parties. I1 etait don~ necessaire, en atten..
dant un reglement acceptable pour les cie~x par..
ties, de trouver un modus vivendi; tel a ete le role
de l'Accord de statu quo du 29 novembre. Apres
un preambule dont je n'ai pas besoin de parter
(le document est d'ailleurs assez brei, mais il a
une grande importance dans l'histoire de ces negociations), les articles disposent de ce CJ,ui suit:

ltArticle 1. Until new agreements in this behalf
"Article premier. jusqu'a ce que de nouveaux
are made, all agreements and administrative accords soient conclus a cet egard, tous les accords
arrangements as to the matters of common con- et arrangements administratifs ayant trait aux
cern, including external affairs, defence and com- questions d'interet commun, y ~ompris les affaires
munications, which are existing between the etrangeres, la de£ense et les communications, inCrown and, the Nizam immediately before tervenus entre la Couronne et le Nizam avant le
15 August 1947, shall, in so far as may be ...ppro- 15 aout 1947, seront proroges, clans toute la
priate, continue as between the Dominion of mesure necessaire, entre le Dominion de l'Inde
India (or any part 'thereof) and $e Nizam. (ou toute partie dudit Etat) et le Nizam. Aucune
Nothing herein cont~ined shall impose any obliga- des cl..ases du present Accord n'impose au Do..
minioIl l'obligation ni ne lui confere le droit:
tion or confer any right on the Dominion: '
"i) D'envoyer des troupes pour aider le Nizam
"(i) To send troops to assist the Nizam in t!te
a maintenir rordre a l'interieur.de son Etat;
maintenance of internal order.
"ii) De faire stationner des troupes dans le
" (ii) To station troops in H yderabad territory
except in tillle of war and with the consent of the territoire de Haiderabad sauf en temps de guerre
Nizam, which will not be unreasonably withheld, et avec le consentement du Nizam qui ne devra,
any troops so stationed to be withdrawn from pas le refuser sans raison valable, toutes les
Hyderabad territory within six months of the troupes stationnees devant etre retirees du territoire de Haiderabad dans les six mois qui suivront
termination of hostilities."
la cessation des hostilites."
Il est evident que la guerre a laquelle i1 est fait
Obvi0ttsly, the war here referr~d to would be
allusion ici serait une guerre avec une troisieme
~ ,war with a third Power. The Agreement conPuissance. L'Accord continue en ces termes:
tinues:
"Article 2. The Government of India and the
N~zam agree for the better execution of the pur-

poses of this Agreement to appoint Agents in
Hyderabad and Delhi respectively," and to give
every fa~ility to them for the discharge of their
ftL"l~J{)ns.

"Article 2. Le Gouvernement de l'Inde et le
Nizanl conviennent, pour assurer l'execution la
plus satisfaisante des clauses d,u present Accord,
de nommer des representants a, Haiderabad et
Delhi respectivement, et de leur facUiter l'exercice
de leurs fonctions.

a

"Article 3. (i) NQthing herein contained shall
or introduce paramountcy functions or
,~reate any paramountcy relationship.

"Article 3, i) Aucu,ne des dispositi.ons du present Accord ne vise a accorder d'attributions de
suzerainete ni a creer de relations de suzerain 'a
vassal.
' .

"(ii) Nothing herein contained and nothing
done in pursuance hereof shall be deemed to
create in favour of .either party any' right con~inuing after, the date' of termination of this
i,\greement, and nothing herein contained and
~othing done in pursuance,her~ofshall be deemed
to derogate from any J;'ight 'which, qut for 'i:his
Agreement, would have been exercised by either
party to it after the date of ~ermination hereof.

"ii) Aucune des clauses clu present Accord hi
aucune mesure prise en exec~tion de ses dispositions ne seront considerees comme creant en
faveur de l'une ou de l'autre des parties un droit
encore valableapres expiration du present Accord,
nicomm.e portant atteinte aux droits qui, en l'ab-'
sence du present Accord, auraient pu etre exerces
par l'une ou I'autre des parties apres expiration
du presen,t Ac::cord.

ltArticle 4. Any dispute' arising out of this
Agreement or .out of agreements or arrangements.hereby continued shall he referred to the
~rbitration of two arbitrators, one appointed by
e,ach of the parties" and an qmpireappointed' by
those arbitrators.
.

"Article 4. Tout differend issu de l'appljc~~ioll
du present Accord.ou d'accords ou arrangel.11etlts
maintenus en vigueur par le present act~ sera
soumis a l'arbit-liage de deux juges-ar~itres, de~i­
gnes respectivement parchacune des parties, et
d'un arbitre designepar ces juges.
'

(tArticle 5. Thii:Agreement shailcome into
force at once and shall remain in force for a
.'
period of one year."
Whatever the articles of this Agreement might
provide,the last two articles had this effect. The
,standstill Agreement. was to continue for a year
and. if any dispute arose between the' two with
regard to the interpretation. ofthe·l\.gx;eement or
~e carrying of it into effect, it was to be referrtd
to arbitration, oneaf1)itrCl,tQrto ,be.J:'J.awefi.byeach

"Article 5. Le presep.t Accord entre en vigueur
immediatement et reste. valide pour une perioqe'

~nclude

d'u,t1a.~."

Quelle quesoit la teneur des. ~rticles' decet
Accord, les deux derniers 'contenaient" des stipu"
lation~ precis'es. L'Accordde statu quo qevalt
rester .en vigueur pendant un an et, an cas oU:
des litiges s'eleveraiententre les deuxpartiesau
sujet de ViRterpretation de l'Accord ou desa mise
en ceuvre~ its devaient etresoumisaI'arbitl'age

.

~

...

25

party with an umpire nominated by the two. We
. shall also see how the Agreement was carried out
by India. They have complained that the Nizam
and his Government committed '.'Dntraventions of
it . this will also come to the notice of the Security
C~uncil, as will the complaints of either side,
. but how India carried out its side of the Agree'
ment will be extremely interesting.

de deux juges designes par chaeune de~ parties
et d'un arbitre designe par les deux juges. Nous
allons voir comment eet Accord a ete applique
par l'Inde. Cette derniere s'est plainte que
le Nizam et son Gou.vernement aientcontrevenu
~ cet Accord; 'le Conseil de securite prendra connaissance de cette plainte, comme des revendications de l'une et l'autre partie, mais la maniere
dont l'Inde a applique, pour sa part, les cl~uses
de l'Accord merite de retenir l'<lttention.

On 29 November, the same date, the Governor,.
General wrote to the Nizam anq. again tried to
persuade h:im to accede. In the course of this
letter he said:
"Placed as Hyderabad is, its interest~ are inextricably bound up with those of ~ndia, ; and
my Government hope that 1>efore the present
agreement e~pires, it will be possible for Hyderabad to accede to the Dom~on of Incli~."

Le 29 novembre, c'est-a-dire le jour meme ou
intervenait l'Accord, le Gouverneu,r geneJ;9-1 ecrivait au Nizam et essaya,it encpre de le persuader
d'accepter le rattachement. Dans sa le~re, il disait
notamment:
"Place comme l'est Haiderabad, sea interets
sont illdissolublement' lies a ceux de l'Inde et
mon Gouvernement espere que, ayant l'expiratioIl,
de l'accord. aetuellement en vigueur, Haiderabad
. sera meme de se r,eunir au Dominion'de l'Inde."

Later on, and this is extremly impOltant, ~e
says:

Plus loin - et ceci est fort important Gouverneur general declare:

"As regards the supply of a~s and equiP'"
moot, the Dominion Government will be able to
~upply your legitimate requirements.

"En ce qui concerne la foumiture d'armes et
de' materiel, le Gouvernement du pominion sera
en mesure de pourvoir a vos besoins legit~es.

"My Government have no objection to your
1.llaintaining :pI Agent-General in London an,d
~ppointing similar representatives elsewhere if
~ecessary. In this connexion they are very glad
to' have your assurance, to which you will appre~iate that the Government of India attach, grea,t
iplportance, that the activities of such represent~­
tives will b.e fully co-ordinated with those of the
~epresentatlves of the Dominion of India and
Will ~e. confined to matters properly relating ~o
trade and commerce.
.'

"Mon Gouvem,ement n'a aueune objection 'a ce
que vouscontinuiez a avoir un agent general a
Londres ni a ce que vous nommiez ailleurs des
representants Charges de fonctions analogues, si
vous le jugez necessaire. A eet egard, il est tres
heureuX d'avoir l'assurance de votre Gouver-:
nement, assurance a laquelle vous n'ignorez pas
que le Gouvernement de l'rnde attache une grande
importance,que l'activite de ees representants
s'exen:el,Cl en, parfait ac~qrd avec cel,le' des representants du Dominion de l'Inde et se lirn,itera aux
questions ayant proprement trait aux echanges
commerciaux."

a

le

As I have submitted to the Council, this' referComme je l'ai declare au Conseil, la mention
ence to the supply of arms and equipment by the faite de la fourniture d'armes et d'equipement par
Dominion of India to the Nizam's Government to ·le Gouvernement de l'Inde au GOl1Yern~J,nent clu:
~eet his legitimate requirements is extremely
Nizam, pour satiGfaire a~ legitimes besoins, de
nnporta,nt. In spite of this Standstill Agreement, ce dernier, est extremement importante. En depit
India failed. to supply anything for the equipment de l'Accord de sta.tuq1£OJ l'Inde amanque a ses
ofthe police or Of the arttly of the Nizam for his engagements en ne fournissartt den qui' .eut pu
l~gitimate requirements. When the Government permettFe aU Nizam d'equipcr sa pp-lice ou,son
of Hyderabad became convinced that there was 'armee selon ses besoins legitimes., Des lors.· que
no hope of, obtaining any supplies from India, le Gouvernemen,t de Haiderabad eut· perqu tout
when 'it found that it wasbei.l1g ~ubjected' to a.' ~spoir d'obtelJ.ir des fournit1,1res dennde, ~t cons- '
~locl\ade and that the Government of India ha<.:1; tate qu'iletait soumi,s, a unblocus et que le Gou.,.
eyery intention of using' force,· if' it b:ecame neces- vernement de ·l'Inde .tnontrait touteintention .de
sary,·to cOD;lpel~e, Nizatn to' accede, the~, if the faite usage de la force, si necessaire,p01.lr con":
NJz~m P.ad. recourse to obtaining arms from the traindre le Nizam ,3. accepter le rattachement a
outSide, Can 4.e.reasonably be bla~ed for' that? i'Inde, peut':"on raisonnablement blatner Hll.ide~.
rabadd'avoir voulu obtenir des artnes ,de l'exte.,
'rieur?
,'.

.

,-

,

!he rep,resentative of :fu,dia has placed bl;for~
~e Counc1ll11atter showing thatgun-runt,lingwas
~~J;'anged. by Hyderabad and WllS il.'l<1ulged in by
It. . In the first place, one of the items to which
he specifi<;ally drew attention, arid which
describe,d as "cheese", was' anti-;'l1rcraft ~!1S~' why
~oes 'any, g?vernl,l1ent try to g~t ~~i,.aircraft
guns? Tha,t .1S a very signific~p:t itet,n~ lIydetabad

was'

, ~e rept:esen,tapt. de l'Inde a, entrepris de ~emon­

~Ier aU ' Conseil que la c.ontrebande' d'armes ava,it

et"; encoura,gee et qrgiAnisee Par Haidera1:>ad.
~'une des- £Ol1r.:nitl1!eS sur .lesquelles il ~. pa:rtiel1li~rement aij:lre l'attentioll ~ournitureqq..i se

camo~~la.it, .par.ait-il, ell.livrai.son de ~+omage -

eta-it co~stittt~e par de l'a:J;tillerieantiaerienn~.
D~ni>ql1el1>~tl,1~ Gollvernement. essaie-t-i~' d'obte-

~a~. 1!4?,W1t~~~~.ai~c.r!1ft J)l' ~~ll11~ 0.£ 1;l.o~bi:gg pir ce genre de 1tJ:atedt::1? Voilaqt.!i est signi(icatif. '
.~nyb~dy. 111e .!1t~empt to. obt.lin anti.-ajr~ra£t ij:a.i4er{lb~d ne posseclClit pas d'avionsmilitaires.
~tWs 1~ an e19qq~ntC;0n.un~nt!1tyon wh!1t Hy<;lc;lr~~ . l.'l'~'\!:ai.t l~s ~Oyel,1~ de j;}op.1barder peFsolWe. ~e

Iltm

.

26
bad feared and what it was trying to provide
against.
Discussion continued, in spite of this Standstill Agreement. As I have ~aid, the Standstill
Agreement was designed to afford time for the
solution of the problem, if it could be resolved
by negotia,tiom~. As I have said, there were delegations which visited Delhi, and discussions took
place.
On 9 March 1948, the Nizam wrote to the
Governor-General, and, in the course of the letter,
he said the following:
"I have read the minutes of the discussion between my delegation and yourself and Mr. Menon
on 2 and 4 March. I see that Your Excellency
said that the greatest service which my Prime
Minister could do on his visit to Karachi"-that
is, the capital of Pakistan-"would be to arrange
for the so-called Rs. 20 crores loan not be realized
during the term of the present Standstill Agreement. I learn that you were of the opinion that
to dispose of this matter would do much to allay
the suspicion whkh exists in the minds of the
Government of India about Hyderabad. My
Prime Minister, in undertaking to ask the Government of Pakistan not to put the securities
in question on the market during the currency
of the agreement, certainly went beyond any e.'Cpress authority which he had. You would no
doubt appreciate that to make such a proposition
to Pakistan long after the transfer of securities
-is an embarrassing matter for the State, but I
well understand that he took this course in· his
enthusiasm to do all he could to remove a ground
for suspicion, whif:h, in Your Excellency's opinion,
was interfering .with ·the proper working of the
Standstill Agreement.

"1 see also that with the same purpose he
agreed to amend the recent Currency Ordinance
in order to take the sting out of it, as he expressed
it, by permitting, as a matter of concession,
travellers to use Indian currency for their bon3
fide requirements."
Both these matters require a little expla.nation.
"Hyderabad had, as it had every right to do,
advanced a loan of 20. crores-a crore behlg 10
million-of rupees to Pakistan and had transferred to Pakistan securities in that amount. India
raiaed an objection, saying that Hydera1?ad, in
doing that, had been guilty of, shall we say, an
unfriendly act, or, at any rate, had acted against
'the spirit of the Standstill Agreement, and that
it would be a gesture of friendliness towards India
and a proof of their good will if they would
request Pakistan not to put the securities on the
market; that is to say, not to realize them, during
the period of the Standstill Agreement. At that
time; the Prime Minister was Mr..Laik Ali, who
has subsequently.been described as the head of
a gangster government. While in Delhi, he
promised to make this request of Pakistan; ~nd.
he did so. The ruler, the Nizam, says he had no
authority to do that. It was a v~ry embarrassing
thing to request the Government of Pakistan, after
the loan had heen advanced to .it, .to freeze this
loan; as· it were, and not to put the securities·· on

fait qu'il ait cherche a obtenir de rartillerie antiaerienne souHgne avec eloquence ce que redoutait
Haiderabad, c'~ contre qtloi i1 essaYl\it de se premunir.
Les pourparlers continuerent en depit de l'Accord de statu quo. Ainsi que je l'ai dit, cet Accord
etait destine a favoriser, en menageant un delai
suppIementaire, la solution du problerne, si celui-ci
pouvait etre resolu par la voie de negociations.
Des delegations se rendirent aNew-Delhi et des
discussions eurent lieu, je le repete.
Le 9 mars 1948, le Nizam ecrivit au Gouverneur general une lettre dans laquelle it disait: .
"J'ai lu le proces-verbal de la discussion qui
a eu lieu les 2 et 4 mars, entre ma delegation,
vous-meme et M. Menon. Je constate que, au
dire de Votre Excellence, le plus grand service
que pourrait rendre mon Premier Ministre, a
l'occasion de sa visite a Karachi" - c'est, je le
rappelle, la capitale du Pakistan - "serait de faire
en sorte que ce qu'on est convenu d'appeler le
pret de 200 millions de roupies ne soit pas realise pendant la duree de l'Accord de statu qttD.
J'apprends que, a votre avis, le reglement de
cette question contribuerait a apaiser les soupc;ons
que le Gouvernement de l'Inde entretient a l'egard
de Haiderabad. Mon Premier Ministre, en prenant sur lui de demander au Gouvernement du
Pakistan de· ne pas mettre sur le mal'che les valeurs en question pendant la duree de validite
de l'accord, a certainement outrepasse les pouvoirs qui lui sont expressement conferes. Vous
ne manquerez pas d'eL" "mer qu'une telle proposition, faite au Pakistan longtemps apres le
transfert des valeurs, pose pour I'Etat un probleme embarrassant ;mais je comprends qU'il se
soit engage dans cette voie, emporte par son
zele a faire tout en son pouvoir pour eliminer
un sujet de suspicion qui, dans l'esprit de Votre
Excellence, etait prejudiciable a l'efficaeite de
l'Accord de statu quo.
"Je vois aussi que, dans la meme intention, it
a consenti a amender le recent decret monetaire,
y apportant, comme il l'a explique, des adoucissements et permettant aux voyageurs, a titre de
concession, d'utiliser la monnaie indienne pour
leurs legitimes besoins."
Ces deux sujets appellent une breve explication,
Haiderabad, comme il etait parfaitement fonde
a le faire, avait consenti au Pakistan un pret de
20 crores de rou~ies (le crore equivaut a 10 millions) et transfere aU P?kistan des valeurs a
concu:rrence de ce montant. L'Inde a objecte que,
ce faisant, Haiderabad s'etait rendu coupable d'un
ade, dirons-nous, inamical, avait agi a tout· le
-mains contre l'esprit de l'Accord de statuqttD;
eUe a fait valoir qu'il y aurait un geste de bienveillance . . envers l'Ind~, en merne temps. qu'une
marque de bonne. volonte, a prier le Pakistan de
ne pas mettre les valeurs sur le marche, en d'autres termes de ne pas les reaIiser, pendant la
duree de l'Accord de statu qu.o. A l'epoque, le
Premier Ministre etait M. taik Ali, ulterieurement depeint comme le chef d'un gouvernement
de gangster~. Il promit, pendant son sejour a
Delhi, d'adresser cette requete au Pakistan, ce
qu'il fit effectivement. Le Nizam declare que le i
Premier M:inistre n'avait pas anlorite i ur
de la sorte. Il etait extremement genant, une fois
le pret octroye, de prier en quelque sorte le Gau-

agir....J

ps

27

the market. He says, however, that his Prime I Vel'nement du Pakistan de bloquer ce pret et de
Minister did it in order to take away any cause pas mettre les valeurs sur le marche. Le Nizam
for complaint with regard to this matter on the indique cependant que son Premier Ministre a
part of India. That, again, is a significant com- agi ainsi afin d'eliminer toute cause de doleance.
mentary on the attitude of that particular Prime sur ce point, de la part de l'Ind~. Voila. qui souMinister towards the Dominion of India.
ligne une fois de plus de fa'iSon significative
l'attitude dudit Premier Ministre a l'egard du
Dominion de l'Inde.
W.l-len I come to deal specifically with this
case I shall be able to show that he was no
politician at all; he was a businessman, who was
requested by the Nizam, in the midst of a so:t
of emergency, to come and undertake the responSlbilities of the Prime Minister of the State. The
picture absolutely is the reverse of that which
the representative of India has tried to paint.
Here is one of his acts. It is not a case of the
ruler wanting to comply and the Prime Minister
saying, "No, we must not." The ruler says he
had no authority to do this. He has done it, but
he has done it in order to remove a likely cause
of friction.

Quand j'entrerai dans le detail de son cas, je
demontrerai qu'il n'avait rien d'un politicien;
c'etait un homme d'affaires, auquel le Nizam, se
trouvant dans l'embarras, avait fait appel pour
occuper le poste de Premier Ministre. La realite
est exactement l'inverse du tableau que le representant de l'Inde s'est attache a en brosser. Nous
venons de rappeler un des actes de ce Premier
Ministre. Or, nous ne yoyons pas, en l'occu,rrence,
un souverain desireux d'agir dans un certain
sens, auquelle Premier Ministre dit categoriquement: "Non, it ne le faut pas." Le souverain
declare au contraire que le Ministre n'avait pas
qualite pour agir comme il l'a fait. It n'en a pas
moins agi, mais dans l'intention expresse d'ecarter
une cause <le·desaccord eventueL

I

I would say this with regard 'to the second
Prenons l'autre question, celle du decret monematter: the Nizam has currency of his own; taire: le Nizam a une monnaie a. lui; l'Inde briBritish India has a currency of its own; th~ tannique egalement; la monnaie du Nizam n,a
Nizam's currency is not legal tender in British . pas cours legal dans l'Inde britannique. Le GouIndia. Apparently, the Nizam's Government had vernement du Nizam avait,semble-t-il, edicte un
passed a currency ordinance saying- that Indian decret proclamant que la monnaie de l'Inde n'aucurrency would not be legal tender in Hyderabad. rait pas cours legal en Haiderabad. Le Dominion
The Dominion of India took objection to that. de l'Inde a proteste contre cette mesure, Notez
It is all one-sided: "Your currency is not legal le procede unilateral: "Votre monnaie n'a pas
tender within our Dominion, but our currency cours legal dans notre Dominion, mais. notre
should be accepted· within yours." On this, the monnaie a nous devrait etre acceptee dans votre
Nizam says: "I see also that, with the same pays." Or, a ce propos, le Nizam dedare: "Je
purpose, he agreed"-that is to say, the Prime vois aussi que dans la meme intention, il "c'est-aMinister-"to amend the recent currency ordi- dire le Premier Ministre" a consenti a. amender
nance in order to take the sting out of it, as he le recent decret monetaire, y apportant, comme
expressed it, by permitting, as a matter of conces- it l'a explique, des adoucissements, et permettant
sion, trav'ellers to use Indian currency for their . aux voyageurs, a. titre de concession, d'utiliser la
bona fide tequirements"-that is to say, within' monnaie indienne pour leurs legitimes besoins"Hyderabad. That, again, shows the attitude of that a. l'interieur de Haiderabad, s'entend. Voila. done
particular Prime Minister towards getting these une nouvelle preuve de la maniere dont ledit
matters settled amicably, if it was possible so Premier Ministre entendait, si possible, regler les
to do.
qUestions a l'amiabl~.
On 5 April 1948, the·Nizam again wrote to the
Le 5 avrit 1948, le Nizam a adresse au GouGovernor-General, as follows:
verneur general une nouveIle lettre, disant:
- "Information, which has reached me in Hy"Des renseignements qui me sont parvenus a.
derabad, gives me reason to think that the letter 'Haiderabad me portent a croire que la lettre que
addressed to my Prime Minister by your States votre Ministere des Etats a adressee a monPreMinistry was in the nature of an ultimatum to be mier Ministre etait une· sorte d'ultimatum qu'il
regarded as a'prelude to an open breach of y aurait lieu de considerer comme un prelude a
friendly· relations. lam therefore making a .final une rupture ouverte des .relations amicales. En
appeal to you to exercise your good offices to consequence, j~ vous conjure une derniere ~ciis de
prevent such a contingency.
bien vouloir vaus entremettre pour prevenir une
telle ev~ntualite.
"I was glad when, at th~ end of November
"rai ete heureux quand, a. la fin de novembre
1947, the Standstill Agreement was finally ~e­ 1947, l'Accord de statu quo. est finalement entre
cuted, because I thought that, if a working en vigueur; je pensais en efIet que, si un modus
arrangement continued fora year or so with good vivendi pouvaits'etablir pour un an au· moins"
will on both sides, suspicion would diminish, and avec un peu de bonne volonte de part etd'autre,
that, in. the light of experience, the Dominion la mefiance diminuerait et que l'experience acquise
would discover that some form of association, amenerait le Dominion a se rendre· compte· qu'une
other than accession, was after all practicable . formed'association autre que le rattachement
and satisfactory.
etait; apres tout, possible· et satisfaisante.
"Unhappily hitherto the Standstill Agreement
"Malheureusement, l'Acl:ord de statu quon'a
has not worked smoothly. But thesituatiCln. can pas jusqu'iciete observe sans heurts. Toutefois,
be remedied and our original hopes revived. la situation n'est pas irremediable et nos premiers
There are difficulties in interpreting the obljga- . espoirs· peuvent .encore tenaitre. L'interpretation

••r _....

-..~

28
tio~s imposed by the Agreem ent and in ascetfaining the obligations which are continued by it.
Moreover, the fact that the Agreement specifica1l~
eXdUdes p~famquntcy, so that whatever followeCl
"'litectly and exclusively £tom the relationship and
-as not covered by any agreemeht or adniini stiative arrangement; is no longer in forcl'!, invelves
further complication. But these difficulties can
be solved, as W.llS contemplated in the Agreement
itself, by arbitration.

des obligations qu'impose l'Accord souleve des
difficultes, de meme que la determination des
obligations dont it stipule la prolongation. D'autre
part, un sutcfoi t de complications resulte du fait
que rAccor d exclut formellement toute idee de
suzerainete, de sorte que tout ce qui d~.;oulait
directement et ~xclusivement de ces rapports de
suzerain a vassal et ne faisait l'objet d'aucun
accord ni arrangement administratif particuIier
n'est plus valable. Mais ces difficultes-Ia peuvent
etre resolues, comme le prevoyait l'Accord luimeme, par 1'arbitrage.
"The ietter to which I have r~fetfedi from yOur . "La lettre que
votre Ministere des Etats a
States Ministry to my PHine Minister, sets out a adressee a mon
Premie
summa ry list of alleged breaches of vafyiri girii- sommaire de pretend r Ministre dorlhe' pn releve
ues violations d'irlegale im~
pott~uite, some.o f them iritroduced for the first .portailC
e" clont certaines sont Itientionnees pour la
time. Btit in the discussions whiCh you had willi premiere fois. Mais
my delegation in Delhi at th~ begitming of Marcn deIega tiona Delhi, dans vos ,entretiens avec ma
au
you sai~ th~t the. so-called rakista ri loan and. the dit que .ce qui faisait debut de mars, vous aviez
currency -regulation confinmg cash fransactlOns cales c'etait ~urtout obstacle a~ relations ami,;
r~prunt dIt "emprt int d1,1
in my State to my own currency were tlie princi- Pakista n" et le
dedet ri10netaire qui he tolerait,
~al o~st.ades. t<?, good-~ill •. I~. tli.eca~e..o~ e I' dans mon Etat, pour
l~s transacti0!1s au comp!ant,
loan; my GovemmeIlt hav~taken the acti~n. whtch que ma
propre monnate. En ce 9U1 conceme I emyou yourself suggested and I have every hope prunt, mon Gouvem
ement, a prIs les mesures que
that ,it .will pe effective., So f~ras: the <;~~r~~cy vous avez suggere
regulatto;Il. tS consemed, ~y Prtme M;t~Ist~r d'esperer qu'eUes es vous:,m~1l!e et rai tout lieu
agreed atthe De1hi.Conference.to ~end .tt, tp qui concerne le seront SUIVIes d'effe t.En ce
• order to take. the sting o1,1t o~ tt, by makl1~g tt, Miilistre a consendecr;t monetaJre; mon Pre~ie~
ti a la Conference de DelhI; a
i~~pp~ca~le ~().~raveU~rs.for tliei~ b~na fid~. re- le modifier, en vue'de
lui apport er des adoucis.:
q,;urements.. Tli~ ne7essli~f amendment has SInce . sen'1tnts, et it a
~dmis ~e.s aeroga tionsen ' ce qui
been made and pubbshed.
concerne les besoms legttim esdes voyageurs. Les
modifications riecessaires ant ete appiJrtees au
texte et puoliees depuis lors."
THe letter goes on j:oread :
La letire continue eomme suit:
"Wha thas concerned me nas been that, whereas,
,iCe qui m'a inquiete, C'esf que, alots qu'aupathe. British regula rlysup pIied me with arms aria ravant
equipment, I have had no arms, equipment or liereme les Britanniques me foumissaient regu:
nt des armes et du materiel, je n'airec ;u
ammunition whatever fot my Forces or. Police ni afmes,
ni materiel, ni munitions d'aucune sorte
since July 1947; That inspit ebf the express pour tnonar
mee ni pour ma police, depuis juillet
promise of the Governot.;General that regular sup- 1947.
Et
cela,
bien que le Gouvemeur general eut
plies will be continued for legitimate purposes; .I
formeUement profnis que les livraisoris regulieres .
have constantly pressed your Government· and se
poursuivraient tartt qu'i1 s'agirait. de besoins
YburE xceUen cy. on this .subject but·wh ile youI' ·legitiin
Government have objected to my getting my re:; Gouveres; Je n'ait:es~e .d'insIster aupres. de votre
riement et de Votte Excellence ace sujet.
quirements from either sources" Jhey have supplied mais, tout
me. with . nothing the1t1s~lves, with the result that d'autre s en s'opposant a 'ce que je m'adresse a
sources pour satisfa ire a mes l1esoins,
I have been. gravely emban;<lssed both in train~ng votre
Gouve
tnetnent ne ni'a rien fourni lui-meme,
my troops and in maintaining law and order."
par suite de quoi J'ai ete. extre:me:ment embar~s§e,
fant pour instrui re mi:s ttoupes que pout faire
respett~r la loi et mairttehit l'Ordre."
What is the Nizam to do? The Govt!rnment . Que doitfa ite le Nizam
? ;Le GOJ;ivernement de
of India agrees that it win continue to sl-lpply the ,1;Im:le prorilet-de continu
er,
a
satisfaire aux besoins
Niiam with arms and equipmeI\t for l~gitimate 'legitimes dti Nizani
enarm<
lS
et en inateri el,tailt
tjeeds, both forhispoIi~e ~nd h~s arme<:Lforces! pour. sa police que
!t adually does not. supply him.witha.ilything and .fait, it ne lui-fournit pour ses forces armees. En
rien dl1 tout et s'oppose meme
it objects to his obtaining anythi ng frotnli Il out- ace qu'i1 s'appro
visl0nn
e a d'autres sources. Com-,
side '. source. What was the position .to, b.e ?,., It ment qualifie
r
cette
situatio
n? Si ce n'est .pas la
tliis was ndtcoe fcion; wnat else was it,? The de lacobt
rainte,
qu'estcedbnc
? Je poursu isma
letter continues:
lecture :
.'
etAn •equall ytense 'sitttation"ha sbeen cteat~d
"Le .Gouvernemenf
By the Government of Indiai Ji relation to the tion t6ufau ssi aifficii de l'Inde a cree une' situa- .
epbtir Ieconithert;e et la vie
t,rade,. c01l11l1erc~ .and ·(:!conom~clife of. Hyd~raba4. econ6mique de Haider
abad. Je vous ai fait part,
On iitany. occasions· I' exp.ressed to yo,U,. throug h amaih tes reprise
s, par le. canal de Sit Waiter
Sir' .WaIte r .• Moncktpnall.d others, my .appreben:, Monckton et
sionth at, if lchm;e , as I had b~en assured I j'eprou vais, .sia'autre s' personne,s,. de la crainte que
je choisissais de "rester indepencould, to remail1 . independent, the Governrilent 'pf dant' (c<;lJ,n
meon
w'avait. assure .llue. je pouv~is le
Iilailiw oitld seek to coerce riieiitt oatces sion' by faife),
de voir .le Gb\1vemement de.. 1'Inde chercher
ail economic boycott or even, bynpd itig sOI1le~.. a.rile
. cOiithl indte.a demander Jeratta cheme ht,
ctiS~. toinva deihy tHiitq ries.1f t patag liph2 solf ~il
recour antau boycottageeconoti1i<iue~soit
ofyau t letter 'tome datM 12 AugUst '1947, you nt~e en itiveilta
tIt·qttelqtie pret~xte' potir envahit

.tli

f

-

...

.....
used these words: '1 learn that Your Exalted mes territoires. Au paragraphe 2 de la lettre que
Highness' is concerned lest a decision not in vous m'avez adressee le 12 ~out '1947, vous ~e
present circumstances to accede would be treated disiez: "Votre Altesse Serenissime craint, me
as a hostile act by the Dominion and your State semble-t-i1, que, si eIle decide dans les drconsmight be subjected to b~ockade, but ~ am satisfied tances actuelles de ne pas se rattacher it l'Inde,
that the leaders of ~e new Dominion have no le Dominion'ne, considere cette decision comme
intention of applying ~uch pressure.' You ~ent une manifestation d'hostilite et que votre, Etat
me assurances on several later occasi9Iis that ne soit soumis au blocus; pourtant, j 'ai la certiyou would never be a party to any improper p~es­ tude que les dirigeants 9-U nouve~u Dominion
sure on the State and that you had rec~ived the n'ont pas l'inteIition d'exercer upe pression de
necessary assurances' from your Ministers. I m.ust ce genre." Plusieur:s fois, par la suite, vous m'avez
tell Your Excellency frankly that, in spite of these certifie que vqus n~ tolereriez jamais qu'uPe pres"assurances and in spite of the Standstill Agree- sion ~busive soit ~ercee sur mon Etat et' que
ment, economic pressure has in fact been applied vous avi~z rec;u les assur;m~es nece!,!saires de vps
on Hyderahad with growing intensity from the ministres it cet egard. Or, je dois dire, franl:he~
time when the British left. There is no manner; ment ~ Votre Excellence que, malgre ces assuof doubt that it is in .full force today. Even r:ances et en depit de l'Accord de statu quo, une
medicines, medicq.l stores and hospital requisites pression a ete exercee, en, fait, sur Haiderabad,
are being held up and chlorine for the· water dans le domaine economique, etce, avec 1!t1e. inte~­
supply of my peopl~. <)f all this my Government site croissante, depuis le depart des Britanniques.
have' in their' possession documentary evidence. Ii ,est hors de doute que cette pression s' ex"~rce
There are many Britishers ?-nd other foreigners: au maximum a l'heure actuelle. On va jusqu'a.
who have been in the State m r~cent months and" su~p~ndre,le ravitaillement en medicaments, four~an confirm,. what I say of their' own kIiowledge. p.itqres medicales et produits necessaires ~tL~
.Nor' hall it· been s~riously chall~pg-ed by the offi- hOpitatp!:, ainsi qu'en .chlore d~stine it la des~p.­
~ers of your Goyernment. I have hitherto made feftion des reserves d'eau de ~OIl peuple. :Mon
no public protest.' But if it is now i!1tended to Go~verneJ11ent"a en mflins des preqves formeIJes
create an open breach of friendly relations, I can 4e t0l.lt ce que j'ava.p.~e. B.eaucoup de Britan:no lonier r~aiti silent. Whateve~ differen~es pf Hiques et d'au~es etrilI1-g~rsquiont sejourne clans
opiniop there ~ay be on the questIon of Hydera- mon Etat au c0l.lrs, 4e ces derniers mois peuyent
bad's decision in pres~nt circutnstances. hot to confirmer, en toute co~naissance de cause, ce que
acced~, th~ wprld must know the way in whi~h je dis. D'ailleurs, les fonctionnaires de votre
HYd~rabad hasbe~n treated.
.
Gouvernement ne l'ont passerieusement conteste.
Je me suis abstenu jusqu'ici de toute protestation
publique, mais .si 1'0n v~ut ma,intenant ro~pr~
ouvertem~nt nos re1a~ions ~icales, je ~e saurais
garder plus 10ngtemp~ le sih~n<;e. QueUes qUe
,sgieJ:lt les divergence~ ge vues quaJlt a la qecis~qq.
9-~ Haiderabad. <le ne pas se tattacl1er it l'Inde
dans ~es cir~on!>tatlc~s. actuelles, il faut que le
nwn.c!e s;lch,e de quelte maI1-iere Haiderabad a ~te
tmite.
'
I

."~n. 1947 the Bri~ish Gov~rnment unilaterally
"En 1947, leGQ1.1ve~ement britanniqu~ a d~'l'
the Treaties between the1l1.and my, nORce unilateralement les Traites conclus entre
State. I wonder if Your Exc~llel1!=Y rem~mbers : lui etmon Etat. Je me demande si Votre Excelmy letter to you as Crown Representative dated lence se rappelle la lettreque je lui ai adresseeen
"9 J]11y 1947. I attach a copy together with a sa qualite de reprisentant de la Couronne, le
copyqf the 'only reply I ever received to it."
9 juillet 1947. J'en joins une copiea la. preserite,
en meme temps· qu1une copie de la seule reponse
a cette lettre qui me soit jamais parvenue."
den~:m!1~ed

The only reply he paq received was that the
L,;tdite r~ponseinfoI11laitle Nizam qu~ le repreCrqwn Representative. wpulji .place'the letter· pe- sentant de la Couronne transniettrait sa lettr~ au
fore His Maje$ty's GoverQniel1t. But later all he .. Gouveme1l1ent de Sa. Majeste. Mais, par la suite,
explained that, owing to thepres£ure of business, le representant de la Couronne expliquait. que la
by some· f.\1istak~ in *eoffi!=e, that h~d. !1()tb~en tr.~smis~ioq.n'~vaitpas ep liet;, "dt1 'fl!:itg'yne
'
d, one.
el1rellf desonsecretari3:~, alors deborde de ~rava!l~
Tpe NizaIIl ~oqtinues:
. J;..e. N.i~~ continue ~nsi:

"1 .havehitherto-refrained' from publishing these
documents .but now. I must release, them: Will
history say that the British were content to sacrifice their tried friends because they had too little
nuisance value?

~~Je me suis ab!'!tenu jusqu'ici de publierces
documents, mais ilme £aut, maintenatlt enper:mettie. lapublication.L'histoirr. dir~-t":"elle que
les Britanniquesne se sont pas faitfaute de sacri.,
fier ·leurs amis eprouves, parce que·· "ces amis
n'etaient .pas a meme .de leur causer. de· serieux
ennuis?

"The world must knli,whow,between them,the
f'll fautque le monde sache qu'a eux deux,
British Government and theNewGovernment of le Got~vernement britafmiqueet le Gouver-.
Ind~a.,-I do not seek .to 3:pportion blame.:.-have nement de l'Inde je ne cherche pas it
demed fulfilment of the promise that I.shouldbe preciseI' la part de responsabilite qui .revienta.

hi' "

.•.. ~

30
free to choose either whether to accede or to
remain independent.

run et a l'autre - ont refuse de tenir la promesse selon laqueIle je pouvais choisir en toute
liberte entre le rattachement a l'Inde et l'inde~
pendance.
"I appeal to Your Excellency, after the assur"Je rappelle i Votre Excelle
ances you. have given me, not to be a party to the qu'elle m'a prodiguees et la nce les assurances
conjure de ne pas
imp.osition of economic pressure on me and my tolerer qu'une pression econom
State. I even hear in Hyderabad that forces of. SUr moi et sur mon Etat. J' ique soit exercee
entends mem.e dire
the Indian Army are being moved and stationed a Haiderabad que 1'0n deplace
actuellement des
round the borders of my State, and I cannot but unites de l'armee de
l'Inde
POUL" les cantonner
ask for what purpose these troop concentratious le long des frontie
res de mon Etat et je suis
\ are taking place. Your Excellency's Government bien force de deman
der dans quel but on pro~
must know that there can be no intention of (;ede a ces concentrations
de troupes. Le Gouveroffensive action by Hyderabad against the Indian nement de Votre
Excelle
nce
doit savoir que HaideUnion. I must warn Your Excellency that, if the rabad n'a nullem
ent
l'intent
ion de passer a une
policy of attempted coercion is persisted in, I action offensiv
e
contre
I'Union
indienne. Je dois
gravely fear that ultimately the peace not only avertir Votre
of Hyderabad but of the whole of South India cette poIitiqu Excelle~lceque, si l'on persiste dans
e d'intimidation, je crains fort que
will b~ endangered.
la paix ne finisse par etre comproreise, non seulement en Haiderabad, mais dans tout le sud de
l'Inde.
"Last year the British, without consulting me,
"L'ahriee derniere, les Britanniques ont tran~
severed all the ties which bound my State to the che, sans me consulter, tous
King-Emperor. Will Your Excellency not keep mon Etat au Roi-Empereur. les liens qui reliaient
Votre Excellence en
faith with me now? To break faith with the tend-elle aujourd'hui ne
pas
tenir
ses engagements
weak causes perhaps less immediate disadvantage envers moi? Manquer de
parole
aux faibles enthan to break faith with the strong, but assuredly traine peut-etre des
inconvenients moins immediats
in the end it brings its retribution. I hope Your que de manquer de
Excellency will forgh-e me for this frank and manquement re<;oit, parole a.ux forts, mais ce
honest expression of my feelings and sentiments." retribution. J'esper en fin de compte, sa juste
e que Votre Excellence me
pardonnera d'exprimer ainsi en toute franchise
et sincerite, mes impressions et mes sentiments."
Now what is the position? India has comOu' en somme-nous donc maintenant? L'Inde
plained that there were breaches on the side of s'est plainte des violatio
ns dont Haiderabad
Hyderabad, that there was disorder, that there se serait rendu coupab
was this and that. Here is the Nizam's own eclate dans cet Etat; le, de troubles qui auraient
elle s'est constamment plainte
. personal letter to the Governor-General setting out d'une chose
ou d'unea utre. Or, la lettre ci-dessus,
the position on his own side, and it is eloquent que le Nizam
en personne a adressee. au Gouvertestimony to what was actually happening. In neur general pour
definir son propre point de vue,
reply, on 8 April" 1948, the Governor-General temoigne
observed as follows, in the course of his letter. tivement. eloquemment de cequi se passait effetDans sa reponse, datee du 8 avril 1948,
It is a long letter but I shall read out only. two le. Gouverneur
genen,l a fait observer ce qui §uit.
or three short extracts. He said:
Sa lettre est longue, mais je ne donnerai lecture
que de deux ou trois courts passages. Il a donc dit;
entre autres, ceci:
. "I feel that it is my duty to set Your Exalted
"J'esti mede mon devoir de rassurer sur un
Highness's mind at rest on one point. You refer point Votre Altesse Serenissime.
to assurances, which I have given to you in the que je vous ai certifie autrefois Vous rappe1ez
past, that I would never be a party to improper preterais jamais a ce qu'une pressioque je ne me
n abusive' fUt
pressure on your State. These assurances remain exercee sur vbtre Etat. Ces
assuran
ces restent
as good today as when they were given. Neve,r aussi. valables aujour d'hui
will I,. the constitutional Gove:mor..;General of ai donnftes. J amais, en tant que quand je vous les
que Gouvernetir geneIndia, be a party to any such proce": "re."
ral constitutionnel de l'Inde, je ne preterai la
maIn a des procedes de ce genre;"
" r shall stop here for the moment to' reflectthat, J'interromps uti' instant ma lecture
as constitutional Governor-General of India he ler qu'en tant que Gouverneur generapour signal constituwas a party to nothing at all; and therefore this tionnel de l'Inde, it ne pretait la
main
a rien du
is an as~urance without any meaning. He was tout, et que cette assurance
de
sa
part
n'a done
ndtput ting the pressure. He had no authorIty. aucun sens. Ce n'etait pas lui
qui
faisait
pression
Therefore, he was not a party to the pressure that sur· Haider abad; il. n'avait
was being put, and the assurance "1 would never faire. II ne pretait donc pas pas qualite pour ce
la main a la pressiori
be a party" was. really meaningless. Later, he exercee sur· cet Etat, et
1'assur
ance "je ne pregoes on to say:
terai jamais la main" etait reellement denuee
de sens.P lusloin , ildit encore ceci :
"But this I must make clear to you. These
"Je dois toutefois precise
assurances were given at a time when both my rances vous 'ont ete donner un point. Ces assuesa
Government and yours were united inthe resolve mon Gouvernement et le votre un moment ou
etaient nnis dans
to make the Standstill Agree~ent work. .I can une me111e resolution de mettre
en application
assure yoU tha.t such a resolve still holds the field, l'Accord de statu quo.. J e puis
vous
so f;J.r as the Government of India are concerned. en ce qui concerne le Gouverriemencertifier que,
t del'Iud e,
Q

,

.

.....

0).1.

cette resolution est toujours valable. Mais il est
survenu certains evenements en raison desquels
il est beaucoup plus difficile, aujourd'hui, de nourrir les memes sentiments de bon voisinage
qu'alors."
C'etait la un avertissement de mauvais augure.
It was a sinister warning. Later on, he said:
Un peu plus loin, le Gouverneur general ecrit:
"Si vous pouviez vous resoudre maintenant a
"If you could now see your way to introducing
uer un Gouvernemellt vraiment represena Government truly representative of the desires constitdes desirs et des aspirations de l'ensemble
and aspirations of your people as a whole, I tatif
peuple, je crois que vous serviriez granbelieve that you will do a great service to the de votre l'avenir de l'ensemble cle la peninsule."
dement
."
ntinent
future of the whole of this sub-co
Cela constitue une mise en demeure. L'Inde a
Here is a demand. India has been tal.ldng of parle de discordre intestine et de souverainete
domestic disputes and internal sovereignty. Here is
le. Void maintenant le Gouverneur genea demand by the constitutional Governor-General nationa
tionne1 de l'Inde qui met le Nizam
of India asking the Nizam to carry out constitu- ral constitu
de realiser, a des fins determinees, des
e
denleur
en
tional changes inside his Dominions, towards a
constitutionnelles a l'interi eur' de son
particular end. And as I shall show, the Nizam re£ormes
comme je me fais fort de le dere.
was not unresponsive to that suggestion, though territoi leEt,Nizam n'est pas reste sourd acette
r,
montre
right
the Governor-General had no authority or
suggestion, bien que le Gouverneur general n'eut
to make it. The final sentence -is this:
pas qualite pour la faire. Void la derniere phrase
de la lettre.
"Pour finir, permettez-moi de vous dire que,
''Finally, let me tell you that, in'the same way
que Haiderabad n'a, vous 1'affirmez,
as you say that there is no intention of offensive pas plus
d'engager une action offensive contre
action by Hyderabad against the Indian Union, l'intention
e, l'Inde n'a la moindre intention
indienn
l'Union
there is no intention of offensive action by the
e une telle action contre HaideIndian Union against Hyderabad. I will end with d'entreprendr
erai par cette cOtlsideration:.
termin
e
J
this thought. Let us not believe that, however rabad.
que, quelque graveq u'une
croire
de
s-nous
gardon
serious a situation may become, there is nothing
devenir, il n'y ait rien a faire
that can be done to retrieve it, and that all we situation puisse
que tout ce que nous puissions
et
er,
remedi
y
can do is fatalistically to await the worst. I will pour
es et de nous attendre
fatalist
d'etre
c'est
faire,
I
I
how
continue to do my best. I have told you
a
au pire. Je continuerai faire de mon mieux. Je
think you could help."
vous ai expose comment vous pourriez, a mon
avis, contribuer a la solution du probleme."
Ceci etait ecrit le 8 avriL Si je voulais, imitant
This was said on 8 April. If i'were to· follow
methode de mon docte ami, comparez les dates,
la
my learned friend's method of comparing dates,
rappellerais que cela se passait un mois avant
je
action
y
this was within five months of the militar
qui a eu pour resultat l'occupation
which occur;ied the State of H yderabad by force. le coup de l.urce de Haiderabad. Nous venons de
1'Etat
de
re
militai
~ere is the constitutional Governor-General givgeneral constitutionnel donner
mg assurance that, however bad the situation voir le Gouverneur
e grave que la situation
quelqu
que,
might become, it would never be irretrievable; l'assurance
serait jamais desesperee,
.ne
eUe
r,
deveni
puisse
ng
and urging him, therefore, not to go on believi
ne pas s'attendre au pire
the worst, and assuring. him nobody was going conjurer le Nizam de songe a entreprendre une
ne
nul
que
et l'assur er
to take any offensive action against the State.
action offensive co~tre l'Etat de Haiderabad.
Le 22 avril, le Nizam ecrivit au Gouverneu:c
On 22'April, the Nizam wrote to th~ Governorl; voiciu n extrait de sa lettre:
genera
.
said:
he
General, and in the course· of his letter
"Vous pensez, m'a.-t-on dit, que, si le rattache"It. has been conveyed to me that you believe
se fait pas, le GOtlvernement de l'Inde
that, In the absence of accession, the Government ment ne era pas en mesure de resister a hi
s'estim
o~ .India feel that they would not be able to ne
n publique, laquelle a sans
WIthstand the pressure of public opinion which, pression de l'opinio
par la campae,one de propagande
I daresay, has been arous edasa result of the . doute ete soulevee quelque temps, a ete menee
depuis
adv~rse propa~anda which has been persistently hostile. qui,
Haiderabad. 1..'on a
carrIed onagam st Hyderabad for some time. As d'une fa~on suivie contre
rattachement, l'onpo uran alternative to accession, the announcement of suggere que, a dHaut du a l'opinion publique de
ction
satisfa
responsible government as an immediate aim and rait donner
ant qu'tin gouvernecertain .other measures, have been suggested'with l'Union indienne en annon~
etre constitue en Haidethe. object of satisfying public opinion in the ment responsable allait
autres mesures seraient
es
certain
Indian Union, and a hint has been dropped that rabad et que
qu'il serait bon que
insinue
meme
a
L'on
prises.
the
of
an announcement from me on the eve
dans ce sens la veille
meeting of the All-India Congress Committee, to je fasse une declaration
Congres pour l'en.
be held on the 24th of this month would be de- de' l' ouverture du Comite du
reunir le 24 de ce
se
doit
leque1
sirable. . It is difficult for me t; consider any semble de i'Inde,
une suggestion
iner
d'exam
difficile
m'est
ty
I1
authori
mois.
sug~~st1on emanating from an outside
alors qu'll
ure,
exterie
e
autorit
n
d'une
betwee
nt
ship
emana
relation
bearmg on the constitutional
un chef
entre
les
the. ruler and the people of this State~ which s'agit de relations constitutionnel
affaire
d'une
dire
c'est-apeuple,
:OUld be" viewed purely as an internal affair. d'Etat ets( n

But certain events have supervened which make
it very much more difficult for the same neighbourly feelings, as then existed, to exist today."

b"

32
d'ordre purement int€rieur. D'ailleurs, i'ai deja
decide de prendre certaines mesures et Je les annonce par un firman. Je vous adresse d-jointt
pour que vous puissiez en prendre connaissance,
une traduction de ce firman, et j'espere que les
mesures que j'annonce auront egalem~nt pour
effet d'airteliorer la situation de votre cote."
Le GCluverneur general avait suggere que,. pour
The Goyemor-General had suggested that, in
order to satisfy public opinion in India, the satisfaire l'opinion publique indienne, le Nizam
N'izam should take steps to introduee a responsible prenne des mesures en vue de constituer dans son
gpvetim1ent in his dominion, and I say that the Etat un gouvemement responsable. Je vais mon~
Nizanl has not heen unresponsive, although he trer que le Nizam a tenu compte de cette sugpoints 'out that that is no bUsiness of the Govern- gestion, -bien qu'il 'ait fait observer que cette
ment or the people of India.
question ne concernait ni le Got '''emement, ni le
peuple de l'Ihde.
Je vais lire un passage du firman dont le Ni~
. From the Firman to which the Nizam ,refers
zam fait mention dans sa lettre :
I quote the following:
uApres avoir examine avec,soin ces idees, j'ai
t'Having given special cohsiderationto these
ideas, I had ordered the formation of a com- . deCide la constitution d'un Comite en vue d'ac;
ipiftee with a view to increasing the powers of croitre sensiblement les pouvoirs de I'Assemblee.
the Assembly toaD. appreciable extent. H:.\ving Dans les circoristances actuelles, il convient que
regard, however; to the present circumstances, it les representants du peuple prennent la part qui
is desirable that the repJ:'esent:.uv(~s of the people leur revient a. l'etablissement de la· nouvelle consshould have a due share in framing the new con- titution. It convient eg:dement que les represenstitution~ It is also desirable that the representa- tants desgrandes regions du pays se reunissent sUr
tives of the important sections.of the country be un pied d'egalite pour ~tablir ~es proposi~ons~ et
associated equally to work out the proposals, with qu'ils tiennent compte, a cet effe~, ~e .la sltua;t1~~
due and full regard to the general' conditions and generale du pays, des courants ?ptnlOnS qUi s ~
trends of thought in the country, and -after taking manifestent et notamment du deslT que le peuple
into account the present aspirations of the people eprouve aujourd'hui cl'assumer des responsabilites
to shoulder greater responsibilities. Until such plus etendues. Dans la periode qui s'ecoulera avant
time as these proposals are formulated and a new que ces. propositions aient ete formulees et qu'un
government. based on these proposals is formed, nouveau gouvemement ait. ete constitue sur la
I trust that these political part;~, which are not base de ces propositions, je suis convaincu que les
represented in the present interim Government, partis politiques qui ne sont pas representes dans
will join and take prcper share in shouldering le Gouvemement interimaire actuel participeront
the responsibilities of govemment."
a raction entreprise et prendront leur part des
responsabilites gouvernementales."
Je vais citer maintenant un extrait du discours
Next, I quote from a ,speech of the Prime
Minister of lfyderabad to the Hyderabad Legis- que le Premier Ministre de Haiderabad a prolativ:~ .Assembly,. which was •already in existence, nonce, le 2'1 avril1948. devant I'Assemblee l~gis­
on 27 April 1948. Let him also speak for lilin~ lative,.qui, deja, siegeait a. cette date. Ce discours
self; it will show what the character of the man montre bienquelle sorte d'homme etait ce Premier Ministre. Void cequ'il a dit:
was. In th~course oHhis sp,eech, he observed:
~'It semble que l'Unit>n ilidienne juge que Hai~
"'l'helndiaii .·Union·appears .fo. teel'that Hy..
derab~<1" must accede to it and that, if accession derabaddoit se rattachera elleet que, sUe ratta~
does not come abolitj there woUld be frouble.·They chement ne se fait pas, des ~roubles se produiront.
clf,i1ot like" to think of Hyderal:>ad in any other L'Union indienne n'envisagepas d'a~tre solution
possibie'pour Haiderabad.Et si Haiderabad con:
te~s.. If Hyderabadpersists ,in tliihking on. differentlines.. she is to be for:r;ed to accept the lines tinue a. etred'uri avis different, il faut l'obliger
on whic1l the InJian Union wishes her to t'iink. a. adopter 'la position que 'I'Union indienne veut
ffave. w~not, a. right to ,ask why . we should be' Juivoir prendre. N'avons.:nous pa;s le droit de
forced to .think only in. termsspedfied by the nous demander pourquoi nous senons tenus de
'Union if we can offer tnemP!1rgootl wiJ1:'friend.. 11'envisager .que la. solution 'preconisee par·I'Union
sh.ipj and co-oPeration ina dillerevt manIit:.(? And ixrdienne,alors que nous pouyons offrir a. l'Union
·\vhy,. if we ask this simple question,shouldit be Uheautre solution qui lui· assurera:itno~re bonne
~egarc1ed, ,as .' anu~friel1qlyact?A,fter .all, wh.at volonte, notre amitie. et notre cooperation? Et
ha~ the'Indian",Union, ··.with. aU·.as·.. ·might, its pourquoi le simple fait de poser une. tell~ question
.r~sources ~nd its great future, to worry about if serait..ilconsidere· cbmme un aete inamiCal ? Apres
Hyderabad .prefers·· ,t() tnaintain an honCl!lrable tout, .en quO! le fait que Haiderabad pre£ere
pO:;iti0n for itself.?
. conserver la situation honorablequ'il occupe
peut-ilinqnieter l'Unionindienne, qui dispose de
tantde puissance et de tant de ressources et qui
_a unsrg~and avenir devant elle?
.
"Depuisle.moisce juillet 194-7environ, Haide~
·.. ('From aMufJuly '1947 onwards. Hyderabad
bas/been experiencinganeconomk blockade, on l'abad 'asubi utiblpcus economique. quia .• inflige
a,ccount?fwltichtlie{)opulatioilisbeingniade to . de grandessouffran,ces a. une population qui lutte
sUtJ:ergreat h~~dsliipsinsecuringthe dire!l~ces .. pburassurer son existen.ce.materieHe. Les fr(".;'~
·Sities (?iY1if~., Her borders'~avebeenturned' into tieres du paysontservide terrain de chasse adeS
,·.l1utiting'skt'ounds for' raiders, communists; or pillards, a. des~ol11~_~~istes et a. d'autres individUstIIIM
However, since there are certain measures which
I have already decided to take, I am announcing them through. a Firman. I am, enclosing a
translation of t' Firman for your perusal. I
hope my' annOU~lcement will also be of some
help in improving the ..ituation on your side."

?

. .

. . ' ''': . . '
...............

~

~_

': ',.

. I'

_ _-"",-":,-

- , - , ; _ ~

,,,;,,,,;

,

~..e..--

-

33
agimn t a l'instigation de l'litranger. L'impor..
tatV;e e~eree que l'ona •...ouIu donner aux quelques incidents qui se sont praduits ne pouvait
provoquer que de la malveillance et de la haine
contre Haiderabad. Von a refuse d'ecouter le
Gouvernement de Haiderabad 10rsqu'i1 reclamait
a. juste titre le maintien de la paix et de la secu..
rite, et, de jour en jonr, on a mis davantage sa
patience a. l'epreuve. C'est cette attitude, je le
crains, qu~ a irrite le peuple et qui a cree de la
mefiance et de la malveillance entre les differentes
communaut~s. C'est a. mon avis une fort mauvaise
politique que de pousser des gens au desespoir,
surtout quand cela est parfaitement inuti1e.
"Les dirigeants de l'Inde ne peuvent..i1s envi"Must the Indian leaders always think in terms
s'agit de Haiderabad, l'emploi
of using force against Hyderabad, and, if so, for sager, qaand si1que
la violence? Et pourquoi done
moyen
s
d'atitre
t
suspec
always
bad
what purpose? Must Hydera
e? Faudra-t-il done que
violenc
the Indian Union of aggressive designs, and can vou1bil' user de la
a. l'Union indienne
preter
a.
e
continu
abad
Haider
keep
that apprehension not be a1~ayed? If we all
que cette crainte
est-ce
et
fs,
agressi
s
is
dessein
it
des
terms
e
bellicos
in
g
on talking and thinkin
nous continuons,
Si
?
apaisee
etre
sure to lead to disaster and no one knows where ne pourrait pas
qu'a. la guerre,
penser
ne
a.
·
autres,
so
1es
et
go
to
uns
1es
things
it will end. It is no use allowing
certain que
est
il
guerre,
la
de
que
to
easy
par1er
ne
not
a.
is
it
started
is
ration
far. Once conflag
ne ne
person
dont
e
desastr
'Un
nous alions vel'S
control.
1aisser
de
rien
a.
sert
ne
11
e.
l'etendu
r
mesure
peut
la situati onemp irer. Lorsqu'un conflit a eclate
it n'est pas facile de s'en rendre maitre.
"Nous ferons, j'QRqu'au dernier moment, 1es
"It will be our earnest endeavour to maintain
grands efforts pour maintenir et etablir des
plus
and promote peace and friendship to the last
amicales et pacifiques. Mais si, en depit
moment. But if, in spite of all our efforts, we relations nos
efforts, on use a. notre egard de la
are compelled and force is used against us and de tous
de la force et si, fata1ement, l'on
et
nte
conti"ai
is
seeking
art unavoidable situation not of our
n qui n'est pas celle q!1e
created, then there will be no course left for us cree ainsi une situatio
it ne nous restera plus
alors,.
ns,
voudrio
e
nO,iS
other than to face it honourably with courag
situation avec hbnneur,
cette
a
face
fa:ire
qu'a
and
ability,
otir
of
arid determination, to. the bp.st
autant que. nouS
,
leave the end in the hands (1f Providence. We courage et determination pour nt aux decisions
remetta
en
nous
en
et
ns,
just
is
poul'ro
le
Dlay be weak and helpless but our cause
de la Providence. Peut-etre sommes-nous faibles
and out faith in the Almighty is unshakable.
et sans ressources, mais notre cause est juste et
nacre foi en le Tout-Puissant demeure inebranlable.
"Je suis de ceux qui croient que, si la question
"I am on.:: of those who believe that a happy
reg!ee d'Urie fat;on satissettlement with Hyderabad in the very early stages de Haiderabad avait ete
relations entre COIl1!1lU"
1es
debut,
le
des
e
faisant
interupop.
would have had a very sobering effect
que dans le PakisI'lnde
dans
communal relations both in India and Pakist an; nautes, aussi bien
es. Je suis
d~tendu
ent
nettem
t
seraien
se
n
tan,
in fact, I believe that its psychological reactio
tel regIed'un
logique
psycho
l'effet
que
cu
her
convain
altoget
not
if
zed,
would have greatly minimi
1'ament
rablem
conside
reduire
eliminated, the stark tragedy that was enacted in ment ent ete de
lieu
~u
ont
qui
es
tragiqu
ents
the
evenem
that
des
pleur
East and West Punjab. I ~ti11 believe
meme
re
peut-et
et
b
Pendja
du
be.
l'ouest
c~n
et
India
i'est
rn
dans
southe
out·
through
great tension
1'on pent
ceased and we can all start On the rQad of mutual d'y mettre fin. Je .coutinuede croire quef}ui existe
tendue
si
n,
situatio
la
a
remMe
rity.
porter
regard, peace and prospe
dans tout le sud de l'Inde, et· que rious pouvons
totis prendr e,dans un sentiment de confiance
mutuelle, la voie qui mene a la paix et a. la
. .
prosperite.
l'Inde,
de
sage
grand
ce
i,
Gandh
a
"Le Mahatm
"Mahatma .Gandhi, that. great sage; of India"
tragifut
oili1
jour
du
meme
a-'
veille
la
assassin
disait,
the
told me only the day before his· tragic
plus
le
biens
les
tails
de
que,
1
g
ne,
anythin
assassi
nt
than
s
queme
preciou
more
was
tion that shanti
a.
eait
m~engag
i1
et
\
shanti
la
els.e a~.<l, advised me to, work for peace at any plus precieux est
coriseil
noble
Ce
paix.
la
prix
tout
a
nqb1e
her
that
in
recherc
Ph~~. On my part, I fully. believe
aradvIce· and shall spare no effort to follow tnf.ct: a pour moi la plus· grande valeur et jen'ep
applien
mettre
de
vue
some
en
gnerai aucun effort
golden principle, eV6.tl though, unfortunately,
of the Mahatma's close and more ardent followers ,cation ce haut prmcipe, .quand bien meme,
might, choose. to talk: of 'aggression, force and malheureusement, 'certains de ceux qui. ont 'ete
blockade.
les disciples 1es plus proches du Mahat m.a,et les
plus ardents, pa,rletaient de b!oct1~, d'agression,
de violence.

others im'pired from outside. Simple incidents
have been exaggerated in a manner that cannot
but create hatred and ill will against Hyderabad.
The legitimate demands of the Go~er:1:.nent for
the maintenance of peace and securIty have been
denied and day after day her patience is being
tried. 'I am afraid it is this attitude which has
aroused the feelings of the people; it has created
mistrust and ill-will among the communities. It
is indeed a bad po1ky, in my view, to drive any
set of people to desperation, particularly when
it is totally unnecessary.

.

1

La. pai.."C.

34
"The world is passing through a great turmoil.
China, the Arab countries, Russial Europe and
most countries of the American Continent are in
a state of grave uncertainty. Who knows where
the fire may start that would lead to the mass
destruction of the human race?

"Le monde traverse une epoque fort troublee.
La Chinel les pays arabes, la Russ~e, l'Europe et
de nombreux pays du continent americain se
trouvent dans une situation tres instable. Qui sait
s'il ne jaillira pas de quelque part, une etincelle
qui mettra le feu au monde et detruira la race
humaine tout entiere?
"Both the peoples of India and Pakistan have
"Les populations
already undergone great hardship and privation. deja. subi de grandede nnde et du Pakistan ont
In the face of these events, any narrow-minded souffrances. Dans cess privations et de grandes
outlook or aggressive tendency could never be donnable d'envisager conditions, it serait imparla situation d'un point de
forgiven.
vue etroit ou avec un esprit agressif.
"I would like to assure the Indian Union that
"Je voudrais
our efforts will be fuU}· concentrated on main- surance que nousdonner a. I'Union indienne l'asconsacrerons tous nos efforts
taining law and order along the borders, and we au maintie
are ever ready to offer and seek co-operation. I tieres, et n de la paix et de 1'0rdre sur nos fronwould also like to make it clear that it is not our offrir et declarer que nc:"ts demeurons prets a.
a. reChercher une cooperation. J e tiens
objective to enter into any alliance with outside aussi a precise
r que nous n'avons pas l'intention
Powers directed against the Indian Union. I de former
avec
des Puissances etrangeres aucune
would once again appeal to the Union authorities 'allianc
e
dirigee
contre I'Union indienne. Je fais
to remove all suspicion and build up an atmosappel une fois encore au Gouvernement de I'Union
phere of mutual confidence and friendship."
et lui demande d'ecarter toute suspicion et d'etablir un climat de confiance mutuelle et d'amitie."
That is the man who is alleged to have imposed
Et voila.l'homme que l'on accuse d'avoir impose
his will upon a reluctant Nizam, and to have ses volont<~s au .Nizam qui refusai
t de s'y soukept him from accession.
mettre, et d'avoir empeche le Nizam d'accepter
le rattachement.
When these differences arose over the working
Lorsque des divergences de vues sont apparues
of the Standstill Agreement, the Nizam's Govern- a propos de l'applic
ment offered to have them resolved by arbitration. le Gouvernement ation de l'Accord de statu quo,
iltat was, I believe, on 5 April 1948. The reply a l'a!'bitrage. Celadu Nizam a propose de recourir
came on 15 May 1948, from the Secretary to the 1948. Le Secretairese passait, je crois, le 5 awil
Government of India, Minister of States, to the Ministre des Etats, du Gouvernement de l'Inde,
Prime Minist ernfHy deraha d. In the course of nistre de Haiderabada repondu au Premier Mi..,
par une lettre en date du
that letter, this was said:
15 mai 1948, dont je vais citer un passage:
"The Government of His Exalted Highness
"Le Gouvernementde Son Altesse Serenissime
have suggested that the points in d.ispute should a propose que les
en litige soient soumis a
be referred to arhitration, and it is no doubt t..-ue un arbitrage et it points
est
bien
exact que l'Accord·de
that the Standstill Agreement provides for such statu quo prevoit
un
td
recours. Mais, etant
reference. But, considering the large number of donne que les points
en litige sont deja tres nompoints on which differences have already emerged, breux, it est clair
it is clear that arbitration on these points would risquerait d'absor que la procedure d'arbitrage
take up all that remains of the period of one year periode d'un an ber tout ce qui, reste de ·la
for which the,Agreement is to run, leaving little etre 'en vigueur, pendan t laquelle l'accord doit
scope for the implementation of the award of the trap peu de temps et qu'on disposerait ainsi de
pour mettre en application la
arbitrator.
'
sentence arbitrale.
"Reference to arbitration, moreover, coulcl be
"Le recours l'arbitrage ne pourrait d\.1 reste
regarded, as a practical solution, only if the constituer une a.solutio
Hyderabad, Government ,were agreeable,',to taking vernement de Haider n pratique que si le Gouabad envisageait de prendre
cenain steps immediately which could be regarded immediatement certain
as a genuine token of that Government's desire to vraiment demC!ntrer es "mesures qui puissent
maintain cordial and friendly' re!atio nswith the eutretenir avec le que ce, Gouvemement desire
Gouvernement de' rInde des
Government of India."
relations cordiales et anllcales!'
Then they set aut the steps which they think'
La lettre enonc;a
"are necessary ,as.s,uch tokens. That amounts to I Gouvernement de it ensuite les mesures que le
l'Inde considerait comme' ne..,
practically running the Government ofHyd erabad c~ssaires pour qu'une
for themselves and giving that GovernIllent, orders' faite : c'etait, en realite, telle demonlltration soit
' vouloir prendre, en mains
and directions.as to how it should arrange its' le Gouvernement
de Haiderabad, en donnant ace
interna l affairs.
Gouvernement des ordres et des dir~ctives relativement a. la conduite des affaires interieures du.
pays.
But 'the point is •this : ,here was this Agreement,
Void done comment se posait la question :un
concluded, on 29 November 1947. It" provided accord llvait ete
'conclu le 29, novembre 1947.
that, if there ,'were any differences with regard ,Cet accord
prevoy
to interpretation or implementation, those differ.. , produisaient quant ait que, si des, diverg-ences se
ences were to be settle(iby arIJitration. Differences tion. 1'0n aurait a l'interpretatio~ OU l' execurecours a l'arbitrage. Chacune
are alleged on both sides. , TIle Nizam's Govern- des deux
parties av~_i4.geclare, que desdivergenc~s ,• '"
ment says: "All right, let ~usresolve theIllb y existaient., Le, Gouvernement
du Nizam a dlt-~~
, ... arbitration in' accordance with the agreement." alors: t<Tresbien,
soumettDn~a l'a~bitrage leg

cd

35
The Government of India says: "Well, yes, th~re
is such a reference in the agreement. But there
arf' so many points that all the time that is now
left would be consumed and, unless you are wi!ling to carry out changes inside Hyderabad which
would be a token of your good will towards us,
we are not willing to go to arbitration."

Now, let me cite one or two instances with
regard to the economic blockade.
There is a telegram dated 18 May 1948 from
the Secretary to the Nizam's Government, Ex':'
temal Affairs Department, to the Secretary to the
Government of India, Ministry of States, which
reads as follows:
"One hundred and forty wagons of salt booked
to Hyderabad have been stopped by railway
authorities at Manmad under orders of Bombay
police. Apart from the fact that this is an infringement of the Standstill Agreement, salt is
a commodity most essential for maintenance of
life of community. Kindly take necessary action
to remove restrictions and let me have a telegraphic reply."
Then the actual orders and decrees, and so on,
are quoted. This is just one example of what was
being stopped. As a matter of fact, the list of
the other commodities which were stopped from
entering, Hyderabad included, as the Nizam has
said, medicines and stores, the ordinary necessities
of life, but most of all, chlorine, which is 'used
for the purification of water. As a result of this
privation, cholera broke out in Hyderabad. "
In a letter of 23 May from the Prime Minister
of Hyderabad to the Prime Minister of India,
this matter is again referred to, and he says:
, "In paragraph 4 of the letter it is stated that,
'considering the large number of points on which
differences have already emerged, it is clear that
arbitration on these points would take up all
that remains c)f the Period of one year for which
the Agreement is to run, lea"<!ing little sC,ope for
the implementation of the award of the arbitrators. Reference to arbitration,moreover,cbuld
be regarded as a practical solution' only if the'
Hyderabad Government were agreeable to taking
certain steps immediately which could be regarded
as a genuine token of, the Government's desire
to maintain cordial ahdfriendlyrelations with
the Government of India: The Nizam's Government have, 'from the very' outset~ used all their
efforts and endeavours to resolve differences by
negotiation and friendly interchange of views.
They, succeeded, in bridging ·the ',gulf .to a large
extent at the conferences held between the Hyderabad delegation, and the Governor~General as
late as2 and 4 March 1948. But while the Nizam's
9<>vernment'havetaken all the steps 'agreed upon
tntI:e Conferences, it isa matter of. great disappomtmentto them that the Government of
India have, nobtaken any steps whatever tf,lwards
the implementation of the Agreetnent or of the
specific promises made by the representatives of
the Government of India on 2 and 4 March. In
these circumstances it, appeared- to' the Nizam's
v.e.rnm.,,_en_t_ _th_at no other way was left but to

b.,.GO
•.•

points en litige, conformement a. l'accord." Le
Gouvernement de l'Inde a repordu: (On est bien
exact que l'accord prevoit le recours a. l'arbitrage. Mais les points en litige sont si nombreux
que nous ne disposons plus d'assez de temps et,
si vous n'acceptez pas d'apporter certa.ines re£ormes d'ordre interieur en Haiderabad, reformes
qui constitueraient une preuve de votre benne
volonte a' notre egard, nous ne sommes pas disposes a recounr a. l'arbitrage,"
Je vais maintenant exposer quelques faits re1atifs au blocus economique.
Voici un telegramme, en date du 18 mai 1948,
du Secretaire du Gouvernement du Nizam, Departement des affaires etrangeres, au Secretaire du
Gouvernement de l'Inde, Ministere des E,tats:
"Cent quarante wagons de sel a destination de
Haiderabad ont ete retenus a. Manmad par les
autorites ferroviaires, sur l'ordre de la police
de Bombay. Cette mesure a ete prise en violation
de l'Accord de stat1{ quo. D'autre part. le sel est
un produit absQlument essentiel ala vie de la population. Veuillez, je vous prie, faire le necessaire
pour lever ces restrictions et me donner votre
reponse par telegramme."
.
Suit la mention des ordres, decrets, .etc., pris
a l'occasion de cette mesure. C'est la un simple
exemple de cas (I'U des expeditions ont ete arretees.
En realite, la liste des produits dont l'entree en
Haiderabad a ete empechee comprend, ainsi que
le Nizam l'a declare, des medicaments, des p~o­
duits necessaires a la vie et surtout le chlore,
utilise pour purifier l'eau. Par suite du manque
de ce produit, le cholera s'est declare en Haiderabad.
"Dans une lettre du 23 mai au Premier Ministre
de Haiderabad 'au Premier Ministre de l'Inde,
it est fait de nouveau allusion a cette question dans
les termes suivants:
"Le paragraphe 4,·' de votre lettre specifie:
"Etant donne que les .points en litige sont deja.
tres nombreux, i1 est clair que la procedure d'arbitrage risquerait. d'absorbet, tout .cequi reste de la
p:;riode d'tin an pendant -laq~elle l'.A;cco~d .doit
rester en vigueur~et qU'on, dtsposera~r7aU1s1 de
trop,peu de. temps pour mettre en application la
sentence arbitrale. Le re~ours a l'arbitrage ne
pourraitdu reste constituer une solution pratique
que si le C:rauvernement de Haiderabad envisageait
de prendre immediatement certaines mesures qui
puisscnt vraiment de1l1ontrer que ce Gouvemement
desire entretenir avec le Gouvememetit de l'Inde
des relations cordiales et amicales." Le Gouverriement du Nizama, des le debut, ·,faittous les
efforts et tente de taus les moyens pour. aplanir,
par des negociations 'et echa!!ge, •~e'vues ".amicaux, les. divergencesexistat:tt~s. 11 a, dans:,J.1ne
large mesure, reussi a combler le fbsse, auX.
conferences., qui ont encore eti 'lieu entre la delegation de Haiderabad et le Gouverneurgeneral,
les 2et 4 mars, 1948. Mais,alors q1j.'ila pris
tOlltes les dispositionsconvenues aces conferences, le Gouvernement duNizam doit,a son
grand regret, constater que le Gouvemement
de l'Inde n'a, lui, ", pris aucune mesure e:rI' vue
de l'application de l'Acc9rdou, de l'execution des promessesprecises 'faites par ses repre;.
santants, les 2 et 4 mars. Dans ces circonstances,
il apparait all Gouvernement du Nizam qu'il,

.... ~

36

refe1: tb.~ pOints

ne reste pas d'autre possibilite que de
mdispute t~ arbit1'~tion, as spe~ mettre
a l'arbitrage, conformement l'article 4

c#i<taU.Y provi~~d fqr ~ ;lJ;tic1e 4 of the l\&fee~

sou~

~

=~ rh~~ i.s .~o. r.~..~~n. Why.. a. ~bitratiOil should

de I'Accord, les' ql1~stions en litige. Il Il'Y ~
aucune r~son pour que rarbitr~e prenne un
temps exagere, les poin~s litigieux citant fort pets.
Le G01,lvernement dit Ni1;am ne peut p~s davatl.~
tage accepter l'opinion selon.. laqu~lle rarbit~~
"ne pourrait constituer une solution pratique que
si le Gouvernement de Haiderabad envisageait de
prendre immediatement certaines mesures qui
puissent vrai~ent demontrer que ce Gouvemement
desire entretenir avec le Gouvememep,t de l'Inde
des relations cordiales et amicales." VAccord de
statu quo contient des dispositions claires concernant l'arbitrage et c'est en vertu de cet Accord
lui-~eme que ledit arbitrage est demande. Le
Gouvernenient du Nizam ne peut se rallier a
l'idee que le Gouvernement de l'Inde subordonne
racceptation de l'arbitrage a l'engage~eQt de
Haiderabad ,de prendre des mesures,. queUes
qu'elIes soient, desirees par le Gouvernement qj.l
l'lnde. Une telle attitude n'est pas conforme a~
termes de l'Accord, Accord que Haider~bad est
desireux de respecter en sa totalite."
Towards the end of this long letter, he sums
Vel's la fin de cette longue lettre, le Premier
up the position as foUt"Ws:
Ministre resume la situation commesuit:
"1 shall now sum up my principal points:
"Je vais maintenant resumer mes principales
remarques:
"1. Haiderabad. desire sincerement maintenir
ttl. Hyderabad earnestly desires to niaintain
the most friendly and cordial relations with the ies rell1tions les plus amicales et les plus cordiales
Indian Union.
av~c rUnion indienne.
"2. Haiderabad souhaite ardemment regler tou"2. Hyderabad has been anxious to settle
poi~ts of difference by friendly negotiations but, tes les divergences par des negociations amicales
failing that, Hyderabad must demand arbitration mais, si cela se revelait impossible,. Haiderabad
se verrait oblige de demander l'arbitrage, tel qu'il
as provided for in the Standstill Agreement.
est prevu dans l'Acc;ord de statu quo.
"3. ,Le probleme des Rasakars ne peut etre
"3. Th~ problem of the Ra?akars cannot be
co~sidered in isolation but can be dealt with examine 'isolement, mais peut etre regIe d'un~
saHs,factorily as'~ p~rt ofa general security s~ttle-. fa~on satisfaisante dans 1.Ul accord general de
ment."
securite."
.
. .. . \tt.l~\1e time wll~ thelssu~s are clea~-cut.
N'Clth~r ~ ~e :N"~~'~ G9venIment accept the
view that r~f~ence to ~rbitr~tion 'could be regarded ¥ So Pt'Sletic~ ~olution only if the Hydera6a~ Govern~~t w~e a.gre~able ~o taldng c~ain
~S immediately W~ch could be rcgaJ,"ded as a
~ token of th~t GQvernment's desire to
mamtain corcllial and. friendly relations with the
GQ~ent of IndLq..' The provision for arbitration is clearly set out in the Standstill Agree~t and r~Qurse to it is sought under the terms
of the Agreement itselt The Nizam's Govern~t cannot agree that ~e Government of India
can. ~e that recourse conditiQnal on Hyderabad's agreeing to any steps desired by the Government of India. Such an attitude is not in
GlmSonance With the terms of the Agreement-an
.eemeJ.Wt which Hydenbad is desirous of hon@ng hi. full/'
.

.

'r.{le :j?C!zq~(Jrs a.lle th,e volunt;;try organization
wl1i~4 tl1e, Governmept ef lndia had asked to

Les Razakars sont 1'0rganisation de vo1ont;Fres
dont le Gouvernement de l'lnde avaitdeman~~
la dissolution.

t:4. ~yq~rablld is pr~p~req ~o. enter in~o a
r~PPlQcral arr~gewent with India for. the .re.,.
s~r~jqing of 'pr9P'~ganda ag~iqst either Govern~
m~d. jfl!2U.g:1} ·I.'ress,t1J,diQ anQQther Ille~ill- of

N. II~ide1"abadest dispos~ a conc1ure aveG

be·di~sqlved Rnd Qisb~nQed.

P.H."St'"~'

,

11;1 c-onolusion he expresses the hope that everything will 1;,e amicably settled.

.

-

-

'~

l'Inde un ~rrangement engageant reciproqllem~nt
le.sde~ parties a restreindre·. toutecamp~gpe
c~ntre l'autre partie, par la presse, la,.radio (.Ill
par ~ciut alltre moyen de· publidte."
En conclusion, .leMinistre exprime l'espoil' que
tout sera regIe de falion amicale.·
.
,.

LePRtsIDENT: Etarit donne. l'hettre avancec,
l'.{l~ :rtmSIPE]iT (t1it;lns{atgd from Fren~Jt,):·
I~v~ew of the lateness of thehol.1r, I should like j e .demandeau representant dti Pakistan de.conitq aslf the t:eprese~tativ~"9f .Pakistan how. much bien' de temps il a enC'.orebesoinpour completer
~~ tlCE sJil1 ne~ds to cowpMehisstatement.

,Sin ¥9h~Jl1mea ,Z~F~ULl: ..t\ir·:KI14tl (Pakistan):
'I.'h~v~ ~JPlos.t' cOt}cluded the· factual presentation.

son expose. '

Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAHKhan. (Pakistan)
(traduit .de .i'angIitis) ~ ren ai pl'esque. termine
Extra~s ~~9.P1.~bout, six O1O.1"e· documents remain avec la presentation .des faits. I1 :me teste encore
~q ~.e ~it~Q. A£t~r the facts hjwe been brought it citet des C:8:traits d'environ six documents. Mon
toAh~ ~o~i.~eof t1W Security Council, my. con.:: expose final; apres' que lesfaits auront eteportes.
clq~~~g,J:~li..I!1i$siQn Wou.ld take ahQut as much a laconnaissance . du .Conseil, prendra environ
tiP.!e?s, i.\t"'9~ ,i.n ()p~J;!ing; the ~caeebefore I cited autant de temps qu'il m'en a fallu pour presenter
'~~.,gQ~u.~~t~, Jp. t9t~l, it would ce~tainJy'be over' l'affaire avant de citer les documents. Au total,
.,a!1'4cmr, f Q1' which .1. beg. the indulgence of the faurais ·it demander au Conseil de securite de .
S:e~rity Oou*H,'1;lefor;e laould conclude. It tn'accotder plus. d'une heure pour me germettre.
11:iig}itpossiply be an hour and a half. I sh;;tll try de conclure. It se peut que ce soit une heute et
demie. Je m'efforcerai. de condenser mon expose
~Q;l;on4ense my submission asmttch as lean. I
'<Fan. re~lize t4at the members of the .Security le plus possible. Je me rends compte queles.

-

37

membres du Conseil de securite doivent eprouver
Council must be weary by this time, cu,d if the une certaine lassitude; si le Conseil peut sieger
Council could sit some time tomorrow, either in
, soit le matin soit l'apres-rnidi, je m'efforthe morning or the a.£ternooll, I should try to demain
cerai de terminer mon expose le plus rapidement
conclude my submission as quickly as possible.
possible.
Le PRESIDENT: Je sais que les differents memThe PRESIDENT (translated From French):
du Conseil n'ont la possibilite de sieger ni
bres
I know that the members of the Council will he demain ni lundi. Le representant du Pakistan
unable to meet either tomorrow or on Monday.
de reprendre' SOn expose mardi apresWill the representative of Pakistan agree to con- accepte-t-il
midi?
tinue his statement on Tuesday afternoon?
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakis tan)
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakis tan):
(traduit de l'anglais): En ce cas, peut-etre le
In that event, perhaps it would be convenient to
l ne verra-t-il pas d'inconvement - etant
the CCluncil-as I do not insist if the Council Consei que je n'insiste pas pour qu'il se reunisse
donne
cannot meet on Friday or Mond ay-to continue
ou lundi - a poursuivre maintenant la
now so that I could condense my statement still vendredi
is condenser davantage enfurther and concluded it in the course of the next discussion; je pourra
et terminer celui-ci d'ici une
expose
mon
core
hour or less.
heure ou meme dap.s un temps moindre.
.Le PRESIDENT: Y a-t-il quelques observations a.
The PRESIDENT (translated From French):
propos de cette suggestion?
Are there any comments on this suggestion?
M. TSIANG (Chine) (traduit de l'anglais):
Mr. TSIANG (China) : I do not know why the
oi le Conseil ne pourrai~ pas
Council could not meet tomorrow afternoon in ,Je ne vois pas pourqu
idi afin de permettre
apres-m
demain
r~unir
se
to
n
order to enable the r~presentative of Pakista
n de terminer son exfinish his statement. After that, we could. adjourn au representant du Pakista
ns nous ajourner
pourrio
nous
cela
to enable the members of the Council to read the pose. Apres
Conseil de lire
du
es
membr
aux
tre
the
permet
over
pour
think
statements in the record and
et de re£lerendu
problem. The Council could then meet again on les declarations dans le compte pourrait~alors se
l
Consei
Le
n.
questio
chir a la
.
Tuesday.
reunir de nouveau niardi.
M. GUTIERREZ (Cuba) (traduit de l'espagnol) :
Mr. GUTIERREZ (Cuba) (translated from
reunion a lieu. immediatement apres la doCette
the
Spanish): We have met immediately after
de l'Assemblee generale, dont
end of the General Assembly, in the closing days ture de la session
se sont prolongees jusqu'a.
seances
es
of which' we had to work extremely hard, with les dernier
du matin, nous astreignant
heures
trois
ou
morndeux
the
meetings lasting until two and three in
me semble que l'etat de
11
.
intense
the
travail
is
aun
fatigue
of
state
this
think
ing. I do not
nous. trouvons n'est pas
nous
lequel
best one in which to achieve the clarity of mind fatigue dans
serenite qu'exige l'exala
a
et
ant
lucidite
la
a
import
very
propice
the
and the calmness witli which
n que nous devqns
questio
tante
and
,
l'impor
de
treated
be
men
should
ration
conside
matter under
croit qu'il serait
Cuba
de
ion
more
be
delegat
aborder ; la
the Cuban delegation considers it would
de la question
en
l'exam
r
Tuesdiffere
next
de
until
ble
item
prefera
this
e
appropriate to postpon
in.
jusqu'a la seance de mardi procha
day's meeting.
En ce qui me concerne,. jene me sens pas en
Personally, I do not feel in the best of health
nte sante et je ne serai peut-etre pas' a.
excelle
meet·
a
~nd should probably not be able to attend
meme d'assis tera. une seance demain.
mg tomorrow.
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Fakis tan)
Sir Mohammed ZAFRULLAH Khan (Pakis tan) :
paroles que
In view of the words of the representative of (traduit de l'anglais) : Etant donnelesde Cuba, je
ntant
represe
le
y
cer
Securit
prop.on
viertt de
Cuba. I would not even suggest that the
le Conseil de securite
~o~nci1 might be pleased either to continue the . ne suggererai meme pas que
slttmg hoW or that a further m.eeting should. be continue a sieger mainte nant,o u tienne une autre
held any earlier than Tuesday, if that is the seance a quelque mom.ent que ce soit avant mardi,
earliest day which is convenient to the Council. si ce jour est le jour le plus proche qui convienne
I shall therefore be ready to conclude my state- au Conseil. En consequence, je serai pret a terminer mon expose devant le Conseil, le mardi
ment to the Council on Tuesday, 24 May.
24 mai.
Le PRESIDENT: le suispe rsuade que les memThe PRESIDENT (translated ,'From French):
will
l
Counci
the
of
,du Conseil appreci~ront la courtoisie du
rs
bres
membe
the
I ,a~ ,sure that
appr,eciate the cotirte~y of the representative of representant du Pakistan.
.
Pakistan.
N ous nQJ1s reunirons donc ·le mardi 24,ma i,a
We shall meet; then, on -Tuesday, 24 May, at
de son expose.
3 p·m. to hear the continuation of his statement. 1.5 heures,' pour entendre la suite,
La seance est levee a18 h. 05.
The meeting r~se at.6.05 p.m.

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATI
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNI
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500

B~OSAmEs

AUSTRALIA-AUSTRALlE
B. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a Goorge Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGIQUE
Agence et Messageries de !a
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Persi!
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientffica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de JuIio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHILI
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Bonan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
Libreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado Aereo 4011
BOGOTA.
COSTA RICA-COSTA·RICA
Trejos Bermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE
CUBA
La Caaa Be1ga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA. BABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

DENMARK-DANEMARIC
Eip.ar Munksgalird
N~rregade6

K~BENiIAVN

DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUE DOMINICAINE
I..ihreria Dolninicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado656. .
CnmAD TRUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Bermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre 703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL
EGYPT..."EGYPTE
Lihl'airie "La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAIR<>h... ·
ETHIOPiA-ETHIOPIE
Agenceethiopienne de publicite
P.O. Box 8
ADDIS·ABEBA
. Pri~ted..;l1the .{f.S.A.

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskat~
BELSWda
FRANe'E
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SouHlot
PARIS, V·
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la C<lDstitution
ATHENES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
G-oubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 Y 98 C. P.
GUATEMALA
HAITI
Mu Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111-B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYlCJAVDC:

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scmdia House
NEW DELHI
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LIBAN
Librairie universelle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
Lihrairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLAND5-PAYS·BAS
N. V. MarOOus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhaut 9
'S-GRAVENHAGE
NEW ZEALANDNOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch,Ltd.
Warmg Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. 0.1011, G.P.O.
WELI.INGTO~

NJCARAGUA
RamiroRamirez V.
Agenda .de Puhlicaciones
.MANAGUA, D.l'l.
NORWAY~OR\fEGE

Johan Grundt TanumForlca8
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO
Pdcein U.S.A.: .40 cents

PElU-PEROU
Libreria inte.."'nacional del
S.A.
Casilla 1417

LIMA

PHILIPPINES
D. P. Pcrez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIzAL
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzie1na Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"

38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA

SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. ~. E. Fritzes KungL
Hofhokhandel
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
!.AUSANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTR:£UX, NEUCHATEL,
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
. Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIJ,; .
LihrBirie' uni'ierlieIle:
DAMAS··
.
TURKEY-TURQUI,E .
Lihrai.,ie Hachette
46~· Isilldal Caddelli
BEYOGLU.IsTANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD.AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at CAPETO
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME·UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
.
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBUilGH, MANCHES
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMINGHA10l
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE::;':'~
International Documents Service
Coliunbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y•.
URUGUAY
Oficina de Representllcionde
Editoriales
Av. IS de lulio 1333 Esc. 1
MONTEVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
CQnde a Pifiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
przavno Preduzece ..
'.
lugoslovenska J{njiga
Moskovska U1.36

B:OOCR4D

August 1949-2,90
