v.

Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund
for Agricultural Development to bring to the attention
of their governing bodies, for their consideration, the
special needs of Sao Tome and Principe and to report
the decisions of those bodies to the Secretary-General
by 15 August 1980;
10. Requests .the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system
to report periodically to the Secretary-General on the
steps they have taken and the resources they have made
available to assist Sao Tome and Principe; 11. Draws· the attention of the international cornmunity to the special account which was established by
the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 32/96, for the purpose of facilitating
the channelling of contributions to Sao Tome and
Principe;
12. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to consider, as a matter
of priority, the assigning to Sao Tome and Principe of a
full-time representative of the United Nations Development Programme;
13. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
(b) To pursue with the Government of Sao Tome
and Principe the question of organizing a meeting of
donors and, in this respect, to co-ordinate efforts with
the United Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commission for Africa and the World Bank;
(c) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of
the international programme of assistance to Sao Tome
and Principe and the mobilization of assistance;
(d) To keep the situation in Sao Tome and Principe
under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and international
financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session
of 1980, of the current status of the special economic
assistance programme for Sao Tome and Principe;
(e) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Sao Tome and Principe and the progress made
in organizing and implementing the special economic
assistance programme for that country in time for the
matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its
thirty-fifth session.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/132.

Assistance to Tonga

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8 December
1975 concerning the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations system to extend assistance to the newly independent and
emerging States,

123

Recalling also its resolutions 31/156 of 21 December
1976 in which it urged all Governments, in particular
those' of the developed countries, to lend their support,
in the context of their assistance programmes, for the
implementation of the specific action envisaged in favour
of developing island countries, and 32/185 of 19 December 1977, in which it urged all organizations in the
United Nations system to implement, within their respective spheres of competence, appropriate specific action
in favour of developing island countries,
Recalling further its resolution 32/94 of 13 December 1977 on assistance to Tonga,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/58 of 3 August 1978,
Recalling further resolutions 111 (V) on specific
action related to the particular needs and problems of
island developing countries and 117 (V) on the economic situation of Tonga, adopted by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development at its fifth session, held at Manila from 7 May to 3 June 1979, 10 •
Taking into account the fact that the Committee for
Development Planning has recommended that the
present list of the least developed countries should stand
until the end of the Second United Nations Development
Decade and that the international development strategy
for the third United Nations development decade has
not yet been agreed upon,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Committee
for Development Planning at its fourteenth session, in
response to the application of Tonga for inclusion in the
list of the least developed countries, that Tonga should
be assisted during the remainder of the current decade
and that the special difficulties and upheavals experienced by Tonga required special measures, 105
Concerned at the continued structural imbalances in
the economy of the country, particularly its overwhelming dependence on imports,
Taking into account the disadvantageous demographic
and geographical features of Tonga-the small area and
population and the physical remoteness of the countrywhich pose special development problems,
Noting that, without good transport and communication links, any development will be difficult,
1. Draws the attention of the international community to the special problems confronting Tonga as a developing island country with a small population;

2. Calls upon Member States, in the light of the
recommendation of the Committee for Development
Planning and in accordance with the resolutions of the
Economic and Social Council and the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development noted above, to
consider granting to Tonga for the remainder of the
Second United Nations Development Decade the special
assistance and benefits accorded to least developed
countries and to give special consideration to the early
inclusion of Tonga in their programmes of development
assistance;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Committee for Development Planning to consider, in the light of up-to-date data, including Tonga
in the new list of the least developed countries which is
to be drawn up in the context of the third United Nations development decade;
104 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14),
part one, sect. A.
105 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 6 (E/1978/46 and Corr.1), para. 99.

General Allembly-Thlrty-fourth Session

124

4. Appeals to Member Sta_tes, regional and inte~egional organizations and other mtergovernmental _bodies
to provide financial, material and technical assistance
to Tonga to enable it to _establis~ the social and e~onomic infrastructure that 1s essential for the well-bemg
of its people;
5. Invites the United Nations Development Programme the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food P;ogramme, the World Health Organizati~:m, _the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention _of
their governing bodies, for their consideration, the special
needs of Touga and to report the decisions of those
bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 August 1980;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain ~nd
increase their current and future programmes of assistance to Tonga, to co-operate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him
on the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to assist that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial, technical and material assistance to Tonga;
(b) To establish a special account under the United
Nations Trust Fund for Special Economic Assistance
Programmes for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Tonga and urges Member States
to contribute generously to that account;
(c) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary
arrangements are made to continue the organization of
the international programme of assistance to Tonga and
the mobilization of assistance;
(d) To keep the situation in Tonga under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States,
regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the
specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social
Council, at its second regular session of 1980, of the
current status of the special economic assistance programme for Tonga;
(e) To arrange for a review of the economic situation of Tonga and the progress made in organizing and
implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the matter to be
considered by the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.

104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/133.

Assistance to the Palestinian people

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3237
(XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and 33/147 of 20 December 1978,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1978 (LIX) of 31 July 1975, 2026 (LXI) of 4 August 1976 and 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Taking into consideration the report of the SecretaryGeneral on assistance to the Palestinian people, 106
100

E/1979/61 and Add.I and 2.

Taking note of the report of the Governing Council !lf
the United Nations Development Programme o~ ~ts
twenty-sixth session 107 and the response of the Admm1strator of the Programme, 108
1. N ates with satisfaction the action taken by the
Administrator and the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme in response to General Assembly resolution 33/147;
2. Endorses decision 79 / 18 of 26 June 1979 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme 109 on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 33/147;
3. Urges the relevant agencies, organizations, organs
and programmes of the United Nations system to take
the necessary steps for the full implementation of
Econ0mic...and Social Council resolutions t026 (I,Xn
and 2100 (LXIII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council and to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the progress made in
the implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/134.

World Tourism Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3 2/ 15 7 of 19 December
1977 and 33/122 of 19 December 1978, concerning
the World Tourism Organization,
Noting with satisfaction the report prepared by the
World Tourism Organization and circulated under a
note by the Secretary-General in response to General
Assembly resolution 3 3/ 122, 110
Noting the work accomplished by the World Tourism
Organization in the field of tourism and the steps it has
taken in this regard, especially the operational activities
for the promotion of tourism, in particular for the benefit
of developing countries,
Recognizing that the programmes and activities of
the World Tourism Organization in the field of tourism
contribute, in accordance with its statutes, 111 to global
economic and social development and to international
understanding, peace and progress,
Further noting that the World Tourism Organization
will convene a World Tourism Conference at Manila in
September 1980 to examine past and present trends in
tourism with a view to defining guidelines for its future
development, planning and promotion to enable States
to formu.late tourism development strategies,
1. Requests the World Tourism Organization to
continue its efforts towards the future development and
promotion of tourism, especially in the developing countries, through closer international co-operation pursuant
to its statutory objectives and having regard to its central
and decisive role in the field of tourism;
2. Urges States to give due attention and co-operation to the preparatory work of the World Tourism
Organization for the World Tourism Conference, to be
held at Manila in 198J, and to ensure representation at
1 0 7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Counci'l, 1979,
Supplement No. 10 (El 1979/40 and Corr.I).
10s l bid., para. 111.
1oe fbid., Supplement No. 10 (B/1979/40 and Corr.I), chap.
XXI, sect. D.
11o E/ 1979 /99.
111 E/4955, annex.
