SECURITY. COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2484th

MEETING:

NEW

24 OCTOBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2484)
Adoption of the agenda

... ... .. ... ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ..

1

. .... .. ... ... ... ... .. ... .... .. .. .... .. ... ... ...

1

The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2484

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2484th MEETiNG
Held in New York on Monday, 24 October
President: Mr. Abdullah

SALAH

(Jordan).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouguerra (VicePresident of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and
the other members of the delegation tookpZaces at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2484)
1. Adoption

1983, at 3 p.m.

of the agenda

-3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the .Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/15943)

At the invitaiion of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(inzerpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 2481st and
2483rd meetings, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Botswana, Canada, Cuba, Ethiopia, the German
Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany,
India, Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan. Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was Called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr.
Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Roa Koun’ (Cuba), Mr. Wolde
(Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. van
Well (Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Muiioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr.
DOS Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr.
Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. von Schimding (South Africa),
Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Rupia
(united Republic of Tanzania, Mrs. Coronel de Rodriguez
(Venezuela), Mr. GoIob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka
(Zumbia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): -In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
first speaker is the representative of Botswana, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

At the invitation of the President. Mr. Sarrt! (Senegal)
took a place at the Council table.

6. Mr. LEGWAILA
(Botswana): Sir, I should like to
begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the
1

presidency of the Council for the month of October. We are
confident that, under your enlightened leadership, the
Council’s deliberations on the question of Namibia will not
be fruitless. Your predecessor also, in no small measure,
deserves our congratulations and gratitude for the skilful
manner in which he acquitted himself as President of the
Council last month.
7. The Secretary-General has faithfully and diligently discharged his mandate pursuant to Council resolution 532
(1983). He has, as enjoined, been in consultation with all the
parties directly concerned, and, as evidenced by his report
[S/159&l, all the parties are agreed and have confiied
that all outstanding issues pertinent to Council resolution
435 (1978) and its implementation have been resolved. We
have been assured that South Africa will in due course-at
any rate, before the Security Council convenes to adopt the
enabling resolution-announce
its choice of electoral system. Even the nagging issue of United Nations impartiality
is said to have been given the quietus it has so richly
deserved for so long.

facing a very serious crisis? Does the Council need to be
persuaded to face the fact that, by its insistence on linkage,
South Africa is virtually decreeing that the birth of Namibia’s independence will be a Caesarean one rather than
one brought about by the peaceful implementation
of
Council resolution 435 (1978)? Yes, it is the very existence
and/or survival of the United Nations plan for Namibia
which is at stake. The plan’s survival and implementation
are incompatible with insistence on the linkage.
12. We have steadfastly rejected every argument that has
been advanced in support of the linking of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) to the withdrawal of Cuban
forces from Angola. No amount of cold-war slogans and
fabrication of facts pertaining to the situation as we see it in
southern Africa will convince us that there is any organic
relationship between the right of the people of Namibia.to
self-determination and the presence of foreign troops in
another country.
:
13. We have also rejected, not without contempt, the
theory or view that the independence of Namibia must of
necessity be predicated on the existence in advance in southem Africa generally of a political. and security climate specifically tailored to give comfo.rt and confidence to South
Africa, while leaving the rest of the countries of the region
destabilized into submission..We cannot accept the insinuation that the onus is on the majority-ruled countries of
southern Africa to demonstrate their peaceful intentions
towards South Africa. We reject the suggestion that it is
incumbent upon South Africa’s neighbours to make southem Africa safe and secure for South Africa if South Africa is
to be expected to cooperate in the implementation
of
Council resolution 435 (1978). The onus is on South Africa
first to abandon the violent politics of racism inside South
Africa itself and create in that country conditions in which
conflict will find no fertile ground on which to grow and
flourish. The onus rests squarely on South Africa to demonstrate to the countries of southern Africa that it seeks
nothing but peaceful relations with them.

8. In other words, five long and frustrating years since the
adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978), we are at long
last able to pride ourselves on having achieved what not
long ago could be regarded only as an impossible dream: the
creation of a workable plan for peaceful change in Namibia.
Never before have we been so close to finding a peaceful,
lasting solution to the problem of Namibia. A plan designed
to realize such a solution is in place and we have a golden
opportunity to implement it without delay.
9. And yet, sadly, we are gathered here not to effect the
implementation of the plan, but to debate the reasons why it
should be implemented. We are gathered here, as we were
four ,months ago, to debate an artificial impasse created by
those who, for reasons best known to themselves, have
sought to hold the implementation of the United Nations
plan for Namibia hostage to the resolution of issues which
have been judged to be totally extraneous to the right of the
people of Namibia to self-determination.

::.
::.-_-_
:.
_..‘.
:_-.
:.-.
::.- .
-::
-:.’

.. .
:::
:::. . .
~-::.

14. We dare not forget that we are talking here about a
country whose troopshave been ensconced,uninvited and
unwanted, in the southern part of Angola since 198 1, about
a country whichnow insists that its victim, Angola, must, in
addition to being occupied, also allow itself to be stripped
naked and exposed to the vagaries of Pretoria’s politics of
intimidation.
It is Angola which has every right to seek
redress from this Council, because it is Angola which, since
the very eve of its birth as a free and independent country,
has never ceased to be the playground of South African
troops.

10. Let us face facts. The Secretary-General’s report carries a message which can be described only as extremely
ominous. The report makes it clear, particularly in paragraph 25, that to South Africa the linkage is a permanent
reality which cannot be ignored out of existence-or can be
ignored only-with risk to Council resolution 435 (1978). The
representative of South Africa confirmed this in his statement to the Council. He stated, with all the arrogance of the
power at his country’s disposal, that “the Government of
South Africa is irrevocably committed” to linkage [2&M
meeting, para. 1493.

15. Yet we are told that before we can be allowed to
implement Security Council resolution 435 (1978) an agreement on “the fundamental- requirements of Cuban withdrawal” [ibid] will have to be reached. Nothing is said
about the fundamental requirements of -withdrawal of
South African troops from the territory of Angola.

11. So we must ask where we go from here, particularly
since neither the front-line States nor the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) are prepared to
allow themselves to be drawn into the negotiation of an
issue they not only hate but regard as totally irrelevant.
Having listened to South Africa’s statement, does the
Council need any other reason to be persuaded to accept
the fact that the United Nations plan for Namibia, which it
adopted with so much hope and promise five years ago, is

16. In any case, how long are we expected to continue
the permissiveness with which we have in the past five
years treated South Africa’s addiction to negotiation by
2

I

wisdom and ability, you will guide the Council this month
to the success for which we all hope.

’ blackmail and brinkmanship? The linkage must stand
rejected, not only because we see the issue as part of a
not-so-sophisticated plot hatched by South Africa and its
friends to reshape the political landscape of our region in
their own image, but principally because to accept that the
issue .can be part of the United Nations plan, which it
cannot, would be tantamount to extending an openended
invitation to South Africa to introduce more linkages and
enjoy the unearned liberty to dictate callously, with impunity, peace terms to the rest of the African subcontinent.

22. I should like also to express our thanks and appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair, for the wisdom
with which he conducted the work of the Council last
month.
23. At first sight, it might seem to any observer that it has
not been a long time since the last meetings of the Council to
consider the question of Namibia, after which the Council
adopted its resolution 532 (1983). But, as far as we are
concerned, this is not a question of time-whether long or
short-but rather one of a problem that, unsolved for too
long, has become exacerbated, with all the negative develop
ments which that entails. The delay has also opened the way
for the introduction of new,‘extraneous and irrelevant elements into the question. These elements stem from the
escalating conflict between the two super-Powers and from
the state of relations between them, which is approaching
that of the cold-war years.

17. Right from 25 April 1978, when Prime Minister Vorster declared South Africa’s acceptance .of the plan, Pretoria’s track record shows unmistakably a persistent penchant
for bad faith. How else can we explain acceptance of the
plan by South Africa in April 1978 and the brutal massacre
of hundreds of innocent Namibian refugees at Cassinga the
next month, in May, followed in June by a proclamation
setting the stage for the holding of provocative, nonsensical
internal elections, followed from then on by endless ftivolous arguments about the size of the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG), monitoring of SWAP0
forces in Angola and Zambia, followed by persistent casting
of aspersions on the integrity of the United Nations and its
chief executive on the question of impartiality, and insistence on the adoption of constitutional principles incontravention of the plan? And now we are told that in further
supplication for South Africa’s co-operation we should
acquiesce in the linking of Namibia’s future to the fate of
Cuban forces in Angola. Where will it end?

24. But we believe that the question of Namibia is a
question of the illegal occupation of a Territory for whose
administration
the United Nations is responsible. That
occupation by South Africa is a breach of international
law, of the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations
and a glaring act of defiance of. the international will.
25. The question of Namibia is and remains also a question of the racist regime’s insistence on pursuing a policy of
repression and terrorism against the indigenous population,
against the true owners of the land and of the power. It is,
furthermore, a question of aggression carried out against
neighbouring African States, which poses a threat to international peace and security.

18. The Council is called upon to reject the intrusion of
the linkage issue into the United Nations plan for Namibia,
for the issue poses a provocative challenge to the authority
of the Council. As the Secretary-General says, “we have
never before been so close to finality on the modalities of
implementing resolution 435 (1978)” [S/15943, para. 24.
And we agree. The plan is ready for implementation. It has
been ready since 1982.

26. It is on that basis and on that basis alone that this issue
must be considered, and it is in the context of those premises
that all efforts must be focused. It must be recognized that
this respected Council and the great majority of the States of
the world agree on the same diagnosis. But it is a source of
disappointment-nay,
of grave concern-that, despite the
clarity of its vision, the Council has been unable to take
practical steps towards the implementation
of its resolutions. That is because certain quarters, which are able to
bring effective influence to bear on the Council’s ability to
act, are insisting on the inclusion of elements that are
extraneous to the essence of the problem and insisting on
discussion of these elements as a pm-condition for the resolution of the problem of Namibia.

19. The attempt to hold the future of Namibia hostage to
South Africa’s continuous excuses, somersaults, contortions, fabrications and distortions of reality must, we have
reason to.expect, also confront our colleagues in the Westem contact group with a very frightening, if not sobering,
moment of truth. Throughout the five long years of the
existence of the United Nations plan-which originated as
the Western plan-we have never ceased to remind thi.
Western nations that within their grasp lies a golden opportunity to play a meaningful, constructive role in the decolonization of Namibia. Today, I must submit, we cannot but
expect them to watch in horror as this golden opportunity
disappears into the sunset.

27. The Secretary-General’s diagnosis of the situation we
are facing is correct and was set out clearly in his report
prepared pursuant to Council resolution 532 (1983) and
after his visits to the parties concerned. In that report the
Secretary-General stated that “the position of South
Africa regarding the issue of the withdrawal of Cuban
troops from Angola as a pre-condition for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) still makes it impossible to
launch the United Nations plan.” [ibid, para. 25.1 Elsewhere in his report the Secretary-General added that he

20. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Kuwait. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
21. Mr. ABULHASSAN
(Kuwait) (interpretation from
Arabic): The delegation of Kuwait is pleased and proud, Sir,
to seeyou presiding over the Council this month, for in that
high post you do honour to sisterly Jordan and to the entire
Arab world. We are confident that, with your well-known
3

the start of imnlementation
of resolution 435 (1978),
and the cease-fire comes into force. I have no doubt that
further disastrous consequences will result if we do not
reach this stage quickly.” [ibid, para. 28.1

had repeatedly made it clear that he did not accept the
so-called linkage.
28. Kuwait believes that the time has come to face this
reality and to concentrate on it, because it is neither just
nor fair to impose a new extraneous element that stems
from the escalating struggle between the super-Powers on
this issue. We believe that the illegal linkage advocated, by
the United States, which is being used by the Government
of South Africa as a pretext for it to continue its occupation of Namibia and to go on bleeding it of its wealth, is
actually aimed at serving American strategic interests in
the long term.
29. The United States must realize that forcing this new
element into its strategic equations runs counter to the
responsibilities it has assumed together with other Western
States to resolve the problem in accordance with Council
resolution 435 (1978).

34. Kuwait avails itself of this opportunity to renew its
full support for SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, in its, legitimate and just
struggle to achieve independence. Kuwait supports the
front-line States in their stand v&&is
the problem.
Kuwait condemns all acts of aggression against them by
the Pretoria racist r&ime.
.
35. Kuwait calls upon the Council to confront the challenges to its efforts to defend the principles and achieve the
objectives set by the international community.
36. The PRESIDENT
(in&rcrazion from Arabicj The
next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him:
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
_ -_
.-

30. The price of that strategy is great indeed. It is being
paid by the Namibian people because they are being subjected to racist policies of oppression and inhuman measures of repression. They are deprived of the most
fundamental human rights. All this is taking place because
of the competition between the super-Powers for zones of
influence, as though the destinies of peoples, in the opinion
of those States, were not worth a grain of salt.
.
31. My delegation believes that linking Namibian independence with the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola is in contravention with the letter and spirit of
Council resolution 435 (1978). In our opinion, such lin‘kage is an intervention in the internal affairs of a sovereign
State, a State that has of its own free will decided how to
defend its territorial integrity against South Africa’s
repeated attacks. It is therefore necessary at this critical
juncture in the Namibian question to emphasize strongly
again the total responsibility of the United Nations as
regards Namibian independence.

37. Mr. FONSECA (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, at the
outset let me thank you and through you the other
members of the Council for affording me this opportunity,
of addressing the Council on the question of Namibia. Sri
Lanka extends its sincere congratuIations and good wishes
to you, Sir, on your assuming the presidency of the Council,and its thanks to Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana for his
guidance of the Council in September.
38. We are meeting at the bidding of the African Group
of States and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. It
is good to remind ourselves therefore that this debate,
then, is not a casual occasion. It was not the intention of
the sponsors of this debate that it be conducted for
debate’s sake or prolonged unnecessarily. I shall therefore
be brief.
39. The visit of the Secretary-General to southern Africa
in response to resolution 532(1983) was a major event and
an opportunity
for the United Nations to ascertain
through the person of its highest executive the true situation regarding the question of Namibia. We are most
grateful for the Secretary-General’s excellent report
.(S/15943$ Even the representative of the Government of
South Africa was constrained to concede that the report
represented the correct position regarding the state of progress towards Namibian independence. If the report is in
its final analysis rather pessimistic, it has the virtue also of
being realistic and will therefore enable us in the present
debate not only to take stock accurately of the situation
but also to identify, without illusions, what precisely is
hindering movement towards Nami.bian independence.

32. Since the Council has a moral responsibility to implement its resolutions, and since the Council is the main
organ responsible for maintaining international peace and
security, it must carry out its commitments: it must take
the necessary measures within the framework of Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that
Pretoria’s racist regime will not grant independence and
justice to the Namibian people and will not respect intemational legitimacy unless it is forced to do so by the intemational will, the source of legitimate rights. Only the
imposition of strong sanctions against the regime will force
it to do so.
33. Kuwait believes that, at its present meetings, the
Council should take a step forward in implementing its
previous resolutions by setting a reasonable time-frame for
the implementation of its resolution 435 (1978) and ensuring that forces are joined to ensure its respect. In this we
are encouraged by the Secretary-General, who in his
report stated that:

40. Council resolution 435 (1978) was an unusual show
of unity on a major issue. It promised much because ali the
permanent members of the Council acquiesced in the independence plan it outlined. SWAPO, the national liberation
movement of Namibia, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and the non-aligned countries-indeed,
the entire
international community-accepted,
at least for a time,

“However, no one is more aware than I that we cannot claim real progress until an actual date is fixed for
4

ditions for such an exercise, the logistics for elections, and
the eventual independence of the Namibian people.

the bona tides of the Government of South Africa when it
declared its agreement to implement the plan. The many
false starts, the feints and the deliberate procrastination to’
which the independence plan has been subjected are only,
too well known to us; they have been described in this
debate as well.

45. If I keep my assurance to the Council that this statement would be brief, that does not imply any less a commitment on the part of Sri Lanka to the Namibian people,
under the leadership of SWAPO. I should like to reiterate
Sri Lanka’s solidarity with the struggle of the Namibian
people for the establishment of a free, unified and independent Namibia. We appeal to those States that are of
greater consequence than we to prevail upon South Africa
to heed not merely the voice of the international community but also the voice of reason by permitting the full
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) without delay and
without the imposition of extraneous pre-conditions and
obstacles.

41. The Secretary-General reported that his prolonged
and intensive consultations have resulted, so far as’
UNTAG is concerned, in resolving “virtually all the outstanding issues”. He came to the conclusion that, in fact,
“we have never before been so close to finality on the
modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978)” [ibid.,
para. 24. Suprisingly enough, the representative of South
Africa said just as much at the 2481st meeting. What is,
then, obstructing Namibian independence is clearly something totally out of the context of, if not irrelevant to,
resolution 435 (1978), upon which the entire international
community, including South Africa, predicated Namibian
independence.

46. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
May I begin this our first intervention this month by cbngratulating you, Sir, on your accession to the presidency,
and by expressing my Government’s confidence in your
judgement, integrity and objectivity-all
of which we
know have already been and will continue to be evident in
your conduct of the Council’s business. I would also
express our approval and gratitude-already
abundantly
expressed here-to the representatives of Guyana for their
most expeditious and excellent conduct of the Council’s
affairs last month.

42. South Africa talks of securing the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola as a pre-condition to be ful-,
filled before it gives the independence plan a real chance
to work. The South African representative told us on
20 October that “the South African Government’s position on the question of Cuban withdrawal is acknowledged and has support within the international community” [S/PV.2481, para. 1491. Perhaps we are entitled to
ask whom South Africa has in mind when it speaks of
having support within the international
community.
Cuban troops were present in Angola well before the adoption of resolution 435 (1978). The question of these troops
did not figure in negotiations leading to the resolution. It is
difficult not to question the South African Government’s
bona tides when time and again we find that whenever the
Namibian question is on the verge of solution the South
African Government invariably finds a fresh excuse to
defer its co-operation.

47. The tragic events in Beirut yesterday testify to the
dangerous point to which international issues can grow if
left to fester unresolved. Unfortunately, the people of
southern Africa are no strangers to such unhappyindeed, tragic-scenes. It is our special responsibility as
members of this august body to confront the problems of
our world in a timely, realistic and responsible manner.
This is not easy, for many factors work against anyone
who assumes seriously the task of peacemaker.

43. South Africa has also cast doubt on the impartiality
of the United Nations and its capability of supervising’
Namibia’s march towards independence. Now we find that
South Africa’s complaint is confined to this: that certain
United Nations bodies are biased in favour of SWAPO. It
has been South Africa that has reneged on all its promises.
The United Nations can do no more than create conditions
under which an act of self-determination can be exercised
as a pre-condition for independence. The imputation that
the United Nations is biased is an insult to all its Members
as well as to its Secretariat of independent international
civil servants. The United Nations truly cannot tilt in
favour of South Africa-for
it appears to be this that
South Africa wants.

48. Certainly the members of the Council and the leaders
of the front-line States, as well as those of the contact
group, have expended great effort in the search for a way
to bring Namibia to a peaceful independence. We have
come very close to our goal, but we have not yet succeeded. Meanwhile our frustrations mount, and the call for
violent solutions grows louder. In times like these I believe
that a special value attaches to clear assessment, to the
skills of diplomacy and statesmanship, of our political
leaders. It is our responsibility to help the people of the
world to see better where we are and how far we have
come so that they will renew their commitment to the goal
of a prompt and peaceful settlement of this terribly
troubled and important issue, and not from despair cast
aside the agreements already so painfully reached.

44. The Council’s message to South Africa should be
clear and unequivocal: that-a linkage cannot now be made
between the presence of Cuban troops in Angola and
implementation of resolution 435 (1978). That resolution is
self-sufficient and the provisions in it are all that is
required for the exercise of the right of self-determination
for the Namibian people, the creation of appropriate con-

49. It is for these reasons that the United States especialiy welcomes this opportunity for the Council once
again to exercise its responsibility for Namibia and to
review developments in the negotiations being conducted
pursuant to Council resolution 435 (1978) since the Council’s last discussion in May. On that occasion, the Council
was able to hear directly from the principal parties to the
5

1

_I

negotiations regarding the progress that had been achieved
and to address frankly what remains to be done in order to
bring about implementation
of the United Nations settlement plan. On that basis the Council was able to act
unanimously through the adoption of Council resolution
532 (1983) to ask that the Secretary-General lend his personal good offices to consultations with the parties aimed
at identifying a basis for the movement toward Namibia’s
rightful independence. My Government welcomed the
Secretary-General’s
sincere, constructive and skilful
approach to his mandate under resolution 532 (1983). I
should like once again to express the deep appreciation of
the United States for the dedication and objectivity shown
by the Secretary-General and his staff, which have so thoroughly characterized their commitment to the Namibia
settlement process and which have in fact-and
very
significantly-gained
the confidence of all sides to that
conflict.

States and its -partners in the contact group share that
frustration. However, my Government remains firmly convinced that this obstacle can and should be resolved, that
this can be done with perseverance and good will, that we
will be able to overcome this obstacle. The United States
remains firmly committed to the objective of Namibian
independence pursuant to resolution 435 (1978). Our attachment to freedom, manifested in our foreign and domestic policies since our own independence struggle more than
two centuries ago, permits no other course. Our continuing
concern in these negotiations has been that this goal be
approached realistically, practically. We must recognize
that, as a practical matter, implementation of resolution 435
(1978) will take place only if the fundamental concerns of all
parties are addressed. To that end, we have devoted our
energy to the search for a solution based on reciprocity, with
full mutual respect for security and sovereignty on all
sides; with Namibia’s independence as its only acceptable
result. We will remain engaged in this effort as long as it
appears that there is a chance for a peaceful solution.

50. The Secretary-General’s achievements have been
‘noteworthy. My Government welcomes his interest and
his continued involvement in our efforts to reach our common goal. In his report to the Security Council [S/15943],
the Secretary-General described in detail his discussions in
South Africa, Namibia and Angola, underscoring both the
very significant achievements of his trip and the obstacle
that still stands in the way of a settlement. The United
States attaches the highest importance to the results of the
Secretary-General’s discussions with the South African
Government. In the course of those talks very real progress was made on issues that had until then remained
unresolved over the years. Notably, all questions regarding
UNTAG that had a direct bearing on the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) have now, as we understand it,
been cleared up. The South African Government has also
affirmed its commitment to indicate at an early date, prior
to implementation,
its choice of an electoral system. We
regard this as important forward progress. The South African Government has also stated unequivocally that it now
has no question or reservations regarding the impartiality
of the United Nations in the settlement process. These are
significant accomplishments which have contributed in
important ways to building a climate conducive to a peaceful settlement of the Namibia conflict.

53. The problem of cross-border violence in southern
Africa is of deep concern to us all. We are working toward
a peaceful resolution of the region’s differences and have
urged and will continue to urge military restraint. We do
not believe there are military solutions to the conflicts
afflicting the States of this troubled region. Our policies
are premised on the belief that negotiated solutions are
both possible and essential. As we have said in the past,
cross-border violence cannot be condoned, whether it be in
the form of a bomb placed in a crowded square in Pretoria
by externally-based organizations or in the form of the
continuing violation of the territorial integrity of Angola
by South Africa’s forces.
54. Many speakers in this debate have stated their concern over the amount of time it has taken to move the
negotiations as far as they have come. The truth is that the
complex issues directly relating to the United Nations plan
have required the most delicate negotiation. With the
results of the Secretary-General’s trip there is today virtually complete agreement on the basis for implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). It is also equally clear that there
can be no final resolution of the Namibia question without
the co-operation of the parties most directly involved.

51. Similarly, my Government welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report that SWAP0 President Nujoma, in his
meeting with the Secretary-General in Luanda, reaffirmed
that his organization was ready to sign a cease-fire and to
move forward on implementation on the basis of the agreements that have been reached [ibid, pura. 24.

55. During the May debate, the position of my Government regarding these negotiations was made clear to the
Council. There has been progress since then. As the
Secretary-General’s report makes clear, at the same time
our basic position has not changed, and I will restate that
position today.

52. Although the Secretary-General’s initiative in southem Africa measurably advanced the negotiations, hi report
to the Council also made clear that there does remain one
issue standing in the way of implementation
of Council
resolution 435 (1978): South Africa’s position regarding the
withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola. This put into
focus the frustration widespread in Africa, felt most sharply
among the front-line States that have worked so hard and so
long on the Namibia process. That an issue outside the
scope of resolution 435 (1978) is delaying our common
objective is obviously a matter of frustration. The United

56. The United States neither seeks nor desires any special advantage or position for itself in the negotiations. It is
not our intention, nor is it within our power, to impose our
views or wishes on the parties whose interests and aspirations are most directly involved. We fully respect the fact
that the political decisions needed to proceed with implementation of the United Nations plan are sovereign decisions that can be taken only by the Governments most
immediately and directly concerned. We further recognize
6

that those who must take those decisions will wish to
assure themselves that their own interests and security will
be respected and protected. Our sole objective has been to
assist the parties in overcoming the difficulties that have to
date prevented the implementation.
of resolution 435
(1978) and the attainment of Namibia’s longdeserved
independence.

mentation of the United Nations plan under resolution 435
(1978).
63. The international community’s concern for the delay
in the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) was very
strongly stressed at the Council meetings last May, which
resulted in the adoption of resolution 532 (1983). The mandate given to the Secretary-General by the Council in its
resolution 532 (1983) was in response to that international
concern.

57. While Namibian independence is not yet within our
grasp, it is within our sight, doubling our impatience but
also redoubling our commitment. The United States is
convinced that the will for a settlement is present on all
sides, in no small part based on recognition of the imminent dangerous alternative of an escalating cycle of destructive violence. The future of the people of Namibia, for
which the United Nations and the Council bear unique
responsibility, depends on our working together to keep
the negotiating process firmly on track. The United States
continues to stand ready to work closely with other
members of the Council and with other parties to hasten
the day when an independent Namibia can take its place
among us as a sovereign State. Until that day, it is to each
of us to think how best we can contribute to that
achievement.

64. We note from the Secretary-General’s report on his
visit to South Africa, Namibia and Angola that all outstanding issues relevant to Council resolution 435 (1978)
have virtually been resolved. That statement by the
Secretary-General was confirmed by the representative of
South Africa in his statement of 20 October 1983 before
the Council. In his statement, the representative of South
Africa clearly stated that his Government had agreed to
hold discussions with the Secretary-General in order to
attempt to resolve “the remaining outstanding issues to be
addressed in the context of resolution 435 (1978), namely,
the choice of the electoral system and some problems relating to the composition of UNTAG.” [2#8Zsl meeting, para.
146.1 Referring to the report of the Secretary-General, the
representative of South Africa confirmed that those two
issues had now been resolved as far as South Africa was
concerned. He added that certain outstanding matters
regarding the agreement on the status of UNTAG had also
been resolved. [ibid., para. 147.1

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him
to take a place at. the Council table and to make his
statement.
59. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Sir, when I addressed the
Council at the 2481st meeting, I conveyed to you the congratulations of the United Nations Council for Namibia on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I now have the pleasure of conveying to
you the congratulations of the Zambian delegation. We
are pleased to see you presiding over the Council because
you represent a country, Jordan, which is a staunch sup
porter of the cause of the people of Namibia.

65. It is significant that the representative of South
Africa made it clear in his statement that the remaining
outstanding issues, in his words, “in the context of resolution 435 (1978)“, had been the choice of the electoral system and some problems relating to the composition of
UNTAG. Equally significant and welcome was the confirmation by South Africa that these issues had now been
resolved.

60. May I also, on behalf of the Zambian delegation, pay
a tribute to your predecessor, MF. Noel Sinclair of Guyana, who presided over the work of the Council last month
with distinction.

66. The South African reuresentative also said that his
Government remained filly
committed to seeking a
peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia on the basis
of Council resolution 435 (1978) “within the framework of
the understandings reached with the United States and the
Western contact group”. He added that it was in furtherance of that commitment that his Government had agreed
to hold discussions with the Secretary-General. [ibid., para.
Z46.1

61. My delegation is grateful to the Security Council for
allowing us to participate in thii important meeting on
Namibia. We do so subsequent to important statements
made by eminent African and other non-aligned spokesmen. Those who preceded me, including the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia and the Secretary for Foreign
Relations of SWAPO, the sole and authentic rcpresentative of the Namibii
people, have ably articulated the is&
at hand and indicated what the international community
in general and the people of Namibia in particular seek in
this debate. I do not intend to repeat in detail the ground
already covered by them.

67. We do not know what the “understandings” referred
to by the South African representative are. Whatever they
are, if they are outside the framework of resolution 435
(1978), they certainly cannot commit the United Nations.
In any event, it is gratifying that the Secretary-General’s
visit to South Africa resulted in resolving those matters
within the framework of resolution 435 (1978) relevant to
the implementation
of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia. That indeed is our interest. We
are concerned with and must deal only with matters that
are within the scope of resolution 435 (1978) leading to the
attainment by the Namibian people of their long-delayed
independence.

62. The point of departure in this debate is the report of
the Secretary-General [ibid], which he submitted to the
Council pursuant to paragraph 5 of its resolution 532
(1983). That Council resolution was yet another attempt to
accelerate the independence of Namibia through the imple7

68. Given the progress recorded in the report of the
Secretary-General and confirmed by South Africa in the
statement of its representative in the Council in relation to
the outstanding issues ,remaining for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), it stands to reason that we should
now prepare for the launching of the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia.

within the confines of its relations with the United States
Administration.
74. The continued stress on linkage between Namibia’s
independence and the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola in fact raises serious questions concerning South
Africa’s sincerity in its purported commitment
to the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). Linkage may
well turn out to be a treacherous negation by South Africa
of its professed commitment
to the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978).

69. Prior to the commencement of the plan, however, it
is only logical that South Africa should be asked to indicate, without delay, its choice of the electoral system to be
used in Namibia. The position of SWAP0 on the question
of the electoral system is well known. It has shown great
flexibility in this regard, all in the interest of the speedy
implementation
of the United Nations plan.

75. Zambia maintains that the insistence on the nonissue of linkage, or parallelism, constitutes blatant interference in the internal affairs of Angola. It is highly ironic
that this linkage, which was not envisaged in resolution
435 (1978), should now be introduced in order to stall
further progress towards Namibia’s independence. As is
well known, the linkage issue was not the brain-child of
South Africa; rather a member of the Western contact
group, which initiated the plan for the independence of
Namibia under resolution 435 (1978), contrived the linkage issue, the effect of which has been to prevent the
implementation
of that plan, thus delaying the independence of Namibia. By actively colluding with South Africa
on the linkage issue, a member of the contact group has
worked to prevent the implementation
of the United
Nations plan it had helped to initiate.

70. On the other hand, the South African position on
this matter has remained a secret. As it is necessary that
the electoral system should be known before the Council
adopts an enabling resolution for the emplacement of
UNTAG in Namibia, South Africa’s hitherto secret choice
should now be revealed. It is only fair that all the Namibian people, and indeed the United Nations, should be
informed of South Africa’s preferred choice of electoral
system. South Africa should no longer keep the international community guessing as to what its intentions are on
this matter. The secret must be unveiled without any
further delay.

76. The position of the United States on the linkage issue
is disturbing, to say the least. It is most unfortunate that a
super-Power should seek to inject its own strategic and
ideological preoccupations into a purely decolonization
matter. The independence of Namibia must not be held
hostage to super-Power geopolitical concerns. The question of Namibia must be dealt with purely in the context of
decolonization. It should not be confused with irrelevant
and extraneous issues which have absolutely nothing to do
with the Namibian people.

71. This brings me to the disturbing question of the linkage being insisted upon by South Africa between Namibia’s independence and the withdrawal of Cuban forces
from Angola. While South Africa states, on the one hand,
that i&ues “in the context” of resolution 435 (1978) have
been resolved, it insists, on the other, “that it will not be
possible to put into practice any settlement plan unless a
clear agreement is reached on Cuban withdrawal’*. South
Africa tells us that it is “irrevocably committed on this
issue” and that its position on the question of Cuban withdrawal “is acknowledged and has support within the international community*’ [ibid.. para. 149.1

77. Zambia calls upon the Council to reject categorically
the non-issue of linkage, as it is incompatible with resolution 435 (1978). We hope that, for their own credibility
and, indeed, in the interest of justice and fair play, the
members of the contact group on Namibia will have the
courage of their convictions, m-examine their position on
this matter and identify themselves fully with such a Council position.

72. This position of South Africa is self-contradictory. It
is a. graphic demonstration of the mentality of the South
African regime. As my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Goma, stressed in his statement in the general debate at
the thirty-eighth session of the General Assembly, the
claimed linkage being insisted upon by South Africa is
unquestionably illegal, irrational, irrelevant and diversionary.’
.’

78. The representative of South Africa in his statement
had the audacity-nay,
the arrogance and impudence-to
declare: “Therefore, it would be futile for the Security
Council to attempt to set any deadlines or time-frames for
implementation until the matter of the Cuban presence in
Angola has been resolved, and it should be understood
that South Africa would not accept any such deadlines.”

73. It stands to reason, therefore, that Zambia finds the
South African position totally unacceptable. Moreover,
the claim that the position of South Africa enjoys support
within the international community is ridiculous. It is well
known that the overwhelming majority of the world’s
countries and peoples have rejected the linkage issue with
the contempt it deserves. Only one country is known to
share publicly this position of linkage with the racist
regime of South Africa. It would appear that the South
African regime has a distorted conception of the term
“international
community*.‘, which it evidently defines

[ibid, para. M.]

79. What could be futile about setting a deadline or a
time-frame for the implementation of the plan in view of
the fact that South Africa has conceded that the remaining
relevant issues have been resolved7 Is it not the next logical
8

step for the Council to’ take? Does South Africa really
expect the Council to embrace the extraneous issue of linkage, sit back and wait for the resolution of a matter over
which it has no jurisdiction? That, in the ,view of my delegation, would constitute failure by the Council to live up
to its responsibilities. Under no circumstances must the
international community acquiesce in the designs of South
Africa to place responsibility for the non-implementation
of the United Nations plan on Angola. That responsibility
lies squarely on the shoulders of the Pretoria regime and its
supporters, and it must remain so.

well as to world peace and international security have beeen
very impressively pointed out to the Council.
,
‘.‘..
86. The underlying reasons for this extremely dangerous’
situation are well known. They are the policy of aggression
and terror pursued by the apartheid r&ime in South Africa,
and at the same time the ever more overtly practised complicity of certain imperialist countries, above all the United
States, with the apartheid @me. In shrewdly schemed
co-ordination, all kinds of efforts are made to deny the
Namibian people, struggling courageously under the leadership of SWAPO, their legitimate rights. The transparency
of the manoeuvres to this end is revealed time and again.
The main feature is distinct delaying tactics, accompanied
by a deceptive, purposive optimism.

80. in conclusion, I wish to reiterate Zambia’s condemnation of the racist regime of South Africa for the perpetration
of a dastardly act of aggression against Mozambique on 17
October 1983. Repeated South African acts of aggression.
against and destabilization of front-line and other independent African States in the region clearly demonstrate the
threat to international peace and security that the upurzheid
system represents. .The aggressive posture and designs of the
Pretoria r&me cannot and will not be concealed by its
often-repeated protestations against the so-called spread of
communism in southern Africa.

87. As early as 1976, the Council, in its resolution 385
(1976), had proposed a programme for the solution of the
question of Namibia. Resolution 435 .(1978), which was
adopted two years later, was praised by Western States as
a “%uccess” of the self-appointed contact group. However,
the moment concrete steps towards the implementation of
the resolution had to be taken, one member of the group,
in conspiracy with South Africa, raised artificial obstacles.
Suddenly, insurmountable difficulties seemed to come up
as regards the election system and the composition of
UNTAG, and the competence of the United Nations was
called into question. The solution to the question of Namibia was made dependent on issues having nothing to do
with the matters laid down in resolution 435 (1978)..The
unjustified .linkage was almost unanimously rejected during the general debate of the tbirtyeighth session of the
General Assembly.

81. The crimes of the apartheid r6gime against the
oppressed people and sovereign and independent African
States in the region only strengthen the resolve of our
peoples to eradicate, once and for all, the scourge of apmt.heid and racist minority rule. South Africa’s alarmist rhetoric about the spread of the communist bogey will deceive
no one. The problems of our region do not stem from
communism. The absence of peace and security in southem Africa is a direct consequence of the policies and practices of apartheid of the, South African r6gime.
‘_
82. The PRESIDENT
(ihterpretation frum Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic, whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

84. Our thanks go also to your redecessor, the President
of the Council for the month of speptember, the representative of Guyana.

88. There is no lack of attempts by the closest partners of
Pretoria to block the implementation of decisive measures
to be taken by the United Nations against the terror r&ime
in South Africa and even to divest the Organization of its
responsibility for finding a solution to the Namibia issue
and confront it with a fait accompli. This fully accords with
South Africa’s efforts to achieve so-called internal settlements. Five years ago there was the holding of pseudoelections. They were declared null and void in Council
resolution 439 (1978) Today, when the “Tumhalle Alliance” has come to a shameful end, the AdministratorGeneral plans to set up a Council of State, whose only
function would be to maintain the currently prevailing conditions of exploitation and South -Africa’s hegemony over
Namibia. The German Democratic Republic strongly condemns such attempts to undermine the United Nations plan
for a solution to the question of Namibia.

85. Once again the Council has to deal with the question
of Namibia. We are confronted with the fact that no progress has yet been made in finding a solution to this issue.
My delegation has closely followed the important debate
held so far. The statement at the 248lst meeting by the
representative of SWAPO, Mr. Peter Mueshihange, clearly
demonstrated. the disastrous consequences for the Namibian people of the fact that they are denied independence
and the right to self-determination. At the same time, the
. dangers to the stability ot the situation in southern Africa as

89. All manoeuvres undertaken by the United States and
other Western countries to delay the granting of independence to Namibia are determined by their wide interests in
southern Africa. What matters to them is the preservation,
and possible strengthening, of the apartheid regime as a
bastion of imperialist policy in that region, as well as the
continued exploitation of @human and natural resources
of Namibia. This constitutes an open affront to world public opinion, and at the same time.does harm to the reputation of the Council, as the respective States act arbitrarily
against resolutions adopted by the United Nations.

83. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): The delegation of the German Democratic Republic would like at
the outset, Sir, to express its congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. Your great diplomatic skills will no
doubt contribute to discharging the responsible tasks facing the Council.

9
i

90. Such an approach, together with the unworthy
attempts to whitewash the crimes of up&z&f, simply
encourages Pretoria to continue, and even escalate, its
aggressive policy towards neighbouring States. Regrettably, there is ample proof of that: the continuedoccupation
of Namibia and large parts of the territory of Angola; the
increasing number of acts of aggression against that country, as well as against Mozambique and Lesotho; and the
expanding economic sabotage of other front-line States.
91. The people and Government of the German Democratic Republic vigorously condemn Pretoria’s most recent
barbaric attack, against Maputo, the capital of Mozambique.
92. The diplomatic collusion of imperialist States with
South Africa .k accompanied by otirt political, economic
and military com@licity. Let me recall the fify-milliondollar deal that was concluded only a few weeks ago
between United States corporations and Pretoria with the
express approval of the United States Administration.
That deal enables the racists in South Africa to step up
further their plans to acquire nuclear weapons. We also
notice with great concern that, as can be seen from documents provided by SWAPO, the puppets retained by Pretoria will be directly financed under the cover of so-called
Western European development aid to Namibia.
93. Considering all the problems in connection with the
whole issue, the question must be put of how the right of
Namibia to independence can be exercised. We hold the
view that, in its relevant resolutions, in particular resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), the Council has provided a
clear programme to that end. It is imperative that the
United Nations-and
particularly the Council-meets
its
full responsibility for the solution of the question’of Namibia and for the implementation, in letter and in spirit, of
the resolutions, adopted.
94. In addition to this, the immediate termination of all
collaboration with Pretoria, the strengthening and strict
observance of the arms embargo, and the imposition of
effective sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations would constitute decisive
steps towards the implementation
of the United Nations
plan for Namibia. It is, furthermore, important to provide
extensive assistance to SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, in its courageous
struggle.

Warsaw Treaty, held recently at Sofia, the participating’
States reaffirmed their solidarity with the peoples struggling for freedom, independence ‘and the right- to choose
freely the path their development should take, in conditions of peace and without outside interference.’
97. That is a substantial aspect of socialist foreign policy.
In the future, the German Democratic Republic will continue as in the past to side with the Namibian people and
to provide political and material assistance to their liberation organization, SWAPO. The German Democratic
Republic will, furthermore, continue to support all United
Nations activities aimed at granting independerice to Namibia and-. the right of selfdetermination
to its people.
98. The PRESIDENT
(interprezution from Arabic): ‘The
next speaker is the representative of Tunisia who wishes to
make ‘a statement in his capacity as Chairman for the
month of October of the Group of Arab States. I invite
him to take a place at the Council tabfe and to make his
statement.
99. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) {interpretation from Arabic): Mr.
President, I should like first of all to thank you and the
other members of ihe Council for allowing me to make ‘a
statement in my capacity as representative of Tunisia-and
as Chairman for the month of Octobei of the Group of
Arab States.
100. The fact that the Council’s ‘consideration of the
question of Namibia-that
is, of th.e fulfilment of the legitimate aspiratio-ns of a people to independence and
freedom-is taking place under your presidency, Sir, is
both reassuring and comforting to us. You are one of us:
the representative of a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, of a fraternal Arab country which also finds itself on
the front lines, faced by a colonial situation and supporting
a struggle for right and justice. No one could understand
better than you the struggle of the Namibian people or
could better lead the Council to put a final end to the aims
of the occupier, the designs of the oppressor and the arrogance of the aggressor. Your personal qualities as an experienced diplomat well-versed in international affa$s, as
well as your reputation in the Council, reassure us as to the
outcome of the present deliberations.
101. Allow me also to convey to your predecessor, Mr.
Noel Sinclair of Guyana, our warmest gratitude for the
exemplary way in which he conducted the Council deliberations during the particularly busy month of September.

95. Furthermore, in the documents adopted at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March 1983 and at
the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People. for Independence, held in Paris in
April 1983, it was stated that it is not the few imperialist
countries that will bring about a solution to &heNamibian
problem, but the joint action of the Members of the United
Nations.

102. In referring to the question of Namibia before the
General Assembly on 28 September last, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Tunisia stated the following:
“On the African continent there still persists an anachronistic problem which threatens ultimately to become
the most .resounding failure of this Organization, of the
principles it advocates and indeed of international tegality itself. This is the question of Namibia, which is still
under the yoke of illegal occupation and’the worst type
of colonialism.

96. In the communiqut of the meeting of the Committee
of Ministers fqr Foreign Affairs of the States Parties to the
10

’

!

’

“After so many concessions by the Namibian people
and its sole representative, the South West Africa People’s Organization, after proofs of impartiality and balance by the United Nations, no pretext or subterfuge-certainly
not one which would make of the
sacred struggle of the Namibian people an East-West
issue-is any longer acceptable. We expect of those who
bear special responsibility for the implementation
of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978), and who so far
have not been able to keep the promises they have made
us, explanations and indications of their intentions.“3

of Namibia to independence and the implementation of
the no less legitimate right of independent and sovereign
States to choose their allies.
109. In this respect, it is important to note that this artificial concept of linkage has cropped up after other equally
artificial pretexts have been used long enough to delay
settlement of the Namibian problem. This stems from the
now well-known delaying techniques used and recognized
in southern Africa, as also in the Middle East, which,
under the pretext of some strategic role, enable the occup
ier and the aggressor to act with ever-increasing impunity
and to side-step or neutral& any criticism that may
appear in the West.

103. It is in thii spirit that we have come to the Council
today. It is not our intention to plead an unknown cause,
because the cause of the Namibian people and their battle
for dignity and freedom has reached everywhere and
become known to everyone. We seize this opportunity to
ask their sole representative, SWAPO, to convey to the
Namibian people once again our admiration and our
solidarity.

110. In passing from hand to hand the well-known
recipes that guarantee the connivance if not the blessing of
their allies, the Tel Aviv and Pretoria regimes every day
increase their oppression of the Palestinian and Namibian
peoples under the pretext of fighting against what they call
the terrorists, meaning the Palestine Liberation Organization and SWAPO. They try and outdo each other in their
aggressions against the peoples of southern Africa and the
Middle East, striking in Angola and Mozambique at one
time, in Lebanon and Iraq at another. Using the pretext of
security, they occupy parts of the territories .of sovereign
States Members of the United Nations, as, for example,
Angola, Syria and Lebanon. Yet again, within independent countries, they carry out manoeuvres aimed at destabilization by fanning antagonisms and handing out arms
to their rival factions. Both regimes have used the same
combat, the same strategy, the same techniques and the
same language of force under the fallacious pretext that
their security has been threatened.

104. In his remarkable report, the Secretary-General,
whose objectivity, clear-sightedness and courage deserve
our praise, brought up an important point when he said
that “the position of South Africa regarding the issue of
the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola as a precondition for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) still
makes it impossible to launch the United Nations plan.”
[S/15943, para. 25.1 In the very same report the SecretaryGeneral adds that he will not accept linkage of the two
questions. That is clear and unambiguous.
105. Thus we find ourselves faced with a new obstacle
deliberately placed in the way of the persistent efforts
undertaken to implement resolution 435 (1978). What so
far has been the reaction to this new challenge of
“linkage*‘?

111. This is a curious concept of security invoked by the
very ones who in their respective regions seek and boast of
military supremacy, who receive from their allies massive
amounts of armaments and who even receive assistance in
the manufacture and testing of nuclear weapons. This
eccentric notion gives rise to the question: Why is this
concept of security not to be applied to the other countries
which maintain a peaceful attitude in both regions?

106. At the nineteenth ordinary session of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of OAU, held at Addis
Ababa in June 1983, Africa condemned that concept. The
non-aligned countries denounced that concept at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government, held at
New Delhi in March 1983. At its thirty-seventh session, the
General Assembly rejected the concept. One of the
members of the contact group and a permanent member
of the Security Council, France, has categorically rejected
it. We expect the other members of the contact group to
put an end to the ambiguity that has been maintained on
this extraneous element with regard to the settlement plan
that they themselves initiated. We expect those who within
the contact group have made the freedom of peoples a
profession of faith to match words with deeds, and principles with realities. Freedom is indivisible and can never be
selective.

112. The report of the Secretary-General, which is now
before the Council, among other things draws our attention to the critical economic and social situation of the
Namibian people. One must therefore ask oneself if this is
one of the reasons behind the delay of Namibian independence. But where are Namibia’s natural resources? While it
is known that Namibia is the world’s fourth largest producer of uranium and the sixth largest producer of diamonds, that its land holds immense reserves of petroleum,
lead, copper, zinc and silver, and that it has an agricultural
surplus, we also know that the gap between the gross
domestic product and the national income in Namibia
stems, inter alia, from the outgoing capital in the form of
profits. This is the most apparent indication of the extent
the pillage of this Territory has reached, despite Decree
No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United Nations Council for Namibia.4 Can one not then say that the delay in granting

107. The present deliberations of the Council present an
opportunity for decisive clarification of the responsibilities
of each party.
108. For our part, we wish to restate here our total rejeo
tion of this form of bargaining whereby an attempt is
made to establish a link between the legitimate accession
11

independence to Namibia is due to the existence of uranium and to the considerable profits to be made by multinational and South African companies?
113. How many violations have we seen committed?
How many violations of principles and of law7 How many
violations of the rights, resources and territories of human.
beings? How long will we go on tolerating this situation?
How long will it take for the Council-the
guarantor of
peace and security and the guarantor, according to its own
resolutions, of Namibia’s independence-to
shoulder its
responsibilities and adopt the necessary measures?
114. After the failure, in January 1981, of the Geneva
pre-implementation
meeting, caused by South Africa’s fallacious pretext about partiality by the United Nations,
angry Africa turned to the Security Council in April 1981
and called for sanctions and refiaration. At that time, the
Council demonstrated particular partiality by using the
veto under the pretext that Africa and the non-aligned
were seeking confrontation. ” .
115. In Mav 1983. at the reouest of both the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State-or Government of NonAligned Countries and the OAU, recourse was again had
to the Council, with the fullest possible sense of measure
and moderation and with the hope. of being heard.’ It is
true that the Council adopted resolution 532 (1983). But
what has South Africa’s reaction been to that show of
moderation? The Secretary-General’s report clearly shows
us that there has been no change whatsoever in South
Africa’s attitude.
116. Today we come back to the Council, with the
Secretary-General’s report in hand. That report says,
among other things, that “we have never before been so

close to finality on the modalities of implementing&solution 435 (1978): [ibid., puru. 24.1
117. What will the Security Council’s attitude be this
time? Will it make the necessary effort to bring South
Africa to the negotiating table? What will be the attitude of
the various members of the contact group? Will some continue to support the untenable? Or will they bring to bear
the required pressure that we expect from them-if necessary, resorting to the only method- of taking away from
South Africa the means by which it pursues its policy of
defiance and arrogance, meaning the imposition of sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations?
118. In reaffirming once again our endorsement of resolution 435 (1978) and in calling again for its implementation without any further delay, we expect the Council to
reject categorically any artificial element that is extraneous
to this resolution and to set a clear and tinal time-limit for
South Africa to begin co-operating sincerely in the application of the independence plan for Namibia. Once that
time-limit had run out, the Council would automatically
have recourse to the sanctions providedfor in the Charter.
l%e meeting rose at 6 p.m.

NOTES
’ Oflicial Records of the General Assembly, Tirirty-eighth Session,
plenary Meetings, 12th meeting, para. 112.
* See A/C.1/38/6, p. 7.
’ Offia[ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 10th meeting, paras. 221 and 222.
’ Ibid., Thirtyfifth Sessioh. Supplement No. 24, vol. I, annex II.

.

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS U!UF.S
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans ks librairies et les agences depositrires
du monde entier.. fnformez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous P : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Gentve.
jCAK I-IOJWiHTb

H3~AHWFI OP~AHCCJAUMM OE-bEAMHEHHblX
HAUMfl
06bemlHeHHblx HauHR MOXWO iCylWTb8
KHWXHbIX
SlNa311Ha'i
w aretrrcrnax ao ucex paffouax Mupa. Haaonnrc cttpalxn 06 n3natfstxx a names1 ~H~IXHO~I
Mara3mte HJW tummre no anpecy: Opranst3auna 06~enunenubtx Hattuft. Ceruun no
nponarte n3namtR. HbdiOpK
ifm Xeifeaa.
kf3AaHHXOprZUIH;LaUHH

kOM0 CONSEGUXR PU~LICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicationes de las Naciones Unidas esrrln en vcnta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consultc a su librero odirfjase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidnde Ventas.
Nueva York o Gintbra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

----.

00300

9040205-February

1992-2.050
