s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24573
18 September 1992
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council at its 3115th meeting, on 18 September 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the itero entitled "Further report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM II) ( S/24556)":
"The Security Council has noted with appreciation the further report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM II) (S/24556), which it has studied carefully.
"It reaffirms the importance it attaches to the full implementation
of the Acordes de Paz para Angola", culminating in free and fair
multi-party elections on 29 and 30 September 1992. It congratulates the
Angolans on their success in maintaining the cease-fire and in
registering the great majority of the population to vote in the
elections.
It is convinced of the irreversibility of this process.
"At the same time, the Council calls en the Angolan parties to take
urgent and determined steps to complete certain essential measures.
These include the demobilization of the remaining Government and UNITA
troops, the collection and centralized storage of weapons, and the rapid
completion of the formation of the new National Angolan Armed Forces.
It
is also essential that the police should operate as a neutral, national
force.
"The Council is also concerned at the recent deterioration of the
political and security situation in Angola.
It endorses the
Secretary-General's appeal to President dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi to
exercise leadership at this critical juncture and to ensure that their
followers act with restraint and tolerance. The Council is encouraged by
the reports of positive decisions reached by the two leaders at their
meeting on 7 September 1992 and urges them to implement these without
delay.
Of particular importance is their reported agreement in principle
to the formation of a government of national reconciliation after the
elections.

92-45027

3453h (E)

/

180992

180992

...

S/24573
English
Page 2

"The Council calls upon the Angolan electoral authorities to ensure
that all registered persons are given the opportunity to exercise their
vote ana to extena polling hours on the secona day, if this shoula prove
necessary. The Council also unaerlines the importance of aaequate
logistical planning ana support ana urges the aonor community to move
speedily to provide the remaining requirements iaentified in the
Secretary-General's report.
"The Council is concernea that aoubts have recently been expressed
in Angola about UNAVEM's effectiveness ana impartiality ana welcomes the
aecision of the Secretary-General as expressea in paragraph 9 of his
report to investigate thoroughly all matters raisea in this regara.
It
expresses strong support for the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative ana commenas UNAVEM II personnel who are tackling their
challenging tasks with courage, impartiality ana aeaication.
It urges
the Angolan parties to continue to cooperate closely with the United
Nations ana to take all necessary steps to ensure the security of United
Nations personnel ana property.
"The Council takes note of a reportea agreement between the
Government ana UNITA that the United Nations shoula be askea to extena
UNAVEM's presence in Angola auring the perioa of transition after the
elections.
It will be preparea to consiaer such a request if it is based
on wiae support in Angola ana if it propases for UNAVEM a mandate which
is clearly aefinea in scope ana time.
"The Security Council will continue to keep the situation in Angola
unaer close review ana looks forwara to a further report by the
Secretary-General after the elections."
