A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/124
14 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 91
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/731)]
49/124.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the United Nations University,
Having considered the report of the Council of the United Nations
University on the work of the University in 1993, 1/ and its development in
1994, as presented orally by the Rector of the United Nations University on
7 November 1994, 2/
Taking note of decision 4.2.2 adopted by the Executive Board of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its
one hundred and forty-fourth session, held in Paris from 25 April to
5 May 1994, 3/
Expressing its deep appreciation for the voluntary contributions made to
date by Governments and other public and private entities in support of the
University,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by the Rector to reduce the
administrative costs and consolidate the programme of the University, but
concerned about the continuing financial difficulties it is experiencing,

1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 31 (A/49/31).
2/

Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Second Committee, 20th meeting.

3/
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Decisions Adopted by the Executive Board at its 144th Session, Paris, 25 April
to 5 May 1994 (144 EX/Decisions).
95-76477

/...

A/RES/49/124
Page 2

Noting with appreciation also the decision of the Council to carry out a
forward-looking assessment of the work the University has undertaken under its
medium-term perspective for 1990-1995 in order to determine its future course,
Concerned that there is insufficient awareness of the work the
University is doing, particularly among other United Nations organs, and that
the results of that work are not used as extensively as they could be,
Recognizing that the University is making a growing number of
contributions as a global reservoir of ideas for the international community
in general and the United Nations system in particular, and expecting that
these contributions will increase in the course of its third decade of
existence, which commences next year,
1.
Welcomes the fact that the Council of the United Nations
University has initiated a process of consolidating the programme of the
University and bringing it into closer correspondence with the priorities and
concerns of the United Nations and the world academic community and stresses
the need to continue this process;
2.
Requests, in this connection, the Council and the Rector of the
United Nations University to take further steps to promote the visibility of
the University, particularly among Member States, the United Nations and its
agencies, to strengthen its links with them and to enhance the dissemination
of the results of its work, and to include such steps in the report of the
Council to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session;
3.
Stresses the need to enhance further coordination and cooperation
between the research and training centres of the University;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to consider innovative measures to
improve the communication and interaction between the University and the other
bodies in the United Nations system and to ensure the integration of the work
of the University into all relevant activities of the United Nations system,
taking into account General Assembly resolution 47/199 of 22 December 1992, so
that the United Nations system may draw more extensively upon the work of the
University, and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly at its
fifty-first session;
5.
Requests the Council and the Rector to continue to make efforts to
ensure the efficiency and economy of the activities of the University as well
as its financial transparency and accountability, and to intensify efforts to
augment its Endowment Fund and to mobilize operating contributions and other
programme and project support;
6.
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to make efforts to
ensure and enhance the real value of the capital of the Endowment Fund of the
University;
7.
Appeals to the international community to make voluntary
contributions to the University, in particular to its Endowment Fund.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
