United Nations

S/PV.5113

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5113

th meeting
Tuesday, 18 January 2005, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayoral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Argentina)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Benmehidi
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Rogachev
Mr. Thomson
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Letter dated 13 January 2005 from the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2005/22)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-21213 (E)

*0521213*

S/PV.5113

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts
Letter dated 13 January from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning
counter-terrorism addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2005/22)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg and Paraguay, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kazykhanov
(Kazakhstan), Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein),
Mr. Bichler (Luxembourg) and Mr. Buffa
(Paraguay) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Denisov to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

2

I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2005/22, which contains the
text of a letter dated 13 January 2005 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
transmitting the work programme for 1 January to
31 March 2005.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Andrey Denisov, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
I now call on Mr. Andrey Denisov.
Mr. Denisov (spoke in Russian): As Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), I would like,
at today’s meeting, to inform the Security Council
about the Committee’s activities during the past three
months, as well as to introduce the fourteenth work
programme for the next 90-day period, namely, from
1 January to 31 March 2005.
Before making my briefing, I would like to take
this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
delegations of Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan and
Spain for their outstanding contributions to the work of
the Committee during their membership of the Security
Council. I would also like to welcome the delegations
of Argentina, Denmark, Greece, Japan and the United
Republic of Tanzania, which have already participated
actively in the activities of the CTC as new members
of the Council.
I should like to begin the first open briefing of
2005 by reviewing the Council’s work during 2004.
Security Council resolutions 1535 (2004), 1540 (2004)
and 1566 (2004), as well as other decision adopted by
the Council, have created a new and more
comprehensive and multifaceted agenda for the
Council in the area of counter-terrorism. The Council’s
ongoing focus on various aspects of counter-terrorism
has created additional challenges for the CTC. That
requires additional efforts to accelerate the
revitalization process as part of a changing agenda in
the fight against terrorism, especially in terms of
making the CTC’s Executive Directorate (CTED) fully
operational.
The Committee has also focused particular
attention on building up the Committee’s capacity by
developing new practical ways and means to carry out
more effective monitoring of Member States’

S/PV.5113

implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). I would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
the Executive Director of the CTED, Mr. Javier
Rupérez, and his staff for their useful work and
valuable contribution to the work of the Committee.
During the period covered by the thirteenth work
programme, the CTC has continued to rely upon the
support of the Secretariat. We are extremely grateful to
the entire staff of the Secretariat for its assistance.
Reviewing the reports submitted to the
Committee by Member States in conformity with
paragraph 6 of resolution 1373 (2001) and maintaining
a regular dialogue with States have continued to be the
primary means by which the CTC has monitored the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution and
built up the capacity of States in the area of counterterrorism. The Committee had received 551 reports
from Member States and other entities by 31 December
2004. That included the first reports from 191 Member
States and six reports from other entities, 160 second
reports from Member States and two reports from other
entities, 119 third reports from Member States and one
report from another entity, and 72 fourth reports from
Member States. I should note that, in the coming
months, the CTC will receive the fifth series of reports
from a number of Member States.
At the same time, however, an analysis of the
CTC’s experience with regard to reviewing Member
States’ reports has identified two problems that require
that we take special measures to resolve. The first has
to do with the shortage in the number of experts. We
hope that problem will be resolved once the CTED
becomes operational. The Committee had planned to
review 40 reports during the period covered by the
thirteenth work programme. However, the Committee
actually surpassed that target, reviewing a total of 49
reports. Nevertheless, that is less than the 65 reports
the Committee reviewed during previous 90-day
periods. Another subject of concern in that regard
pertains to the increase in the number of Member
States that have failed to submit their reports in
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) to the
Committee in a timely manner. On 16 December 2004,
the Chairman of the CTC presented to the President of
the Security Council an official list of 75 Member
States that had not met their obligations under the
timetable established to submit their reports to the
CTC. I would like to emphasize that, operating through
the CTED, the Committee is prepared to provide

Member States with the necessary assistance and
guidelines on issues relating to their implementation of
the resolution, including assistance to guarantee the
timely submission of reports. The CTC has also begun
to review that problem in a broader context. Effective
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) calls for more than just reviewing reports; it
requires additional means and resources.
The Committee has also continued to make
efforts to develop new approaches to providing
technical assistance. In that regard, the Committee is
beginning to undertake analytical work to assess the
assistance needs of Member States, with a view to
including that analysis in the process of reviewing
reports. Following the guidelines of the CTC, the
experts of the CTED have already prepared first drafts
of assessment letters to various Member States. With
the consent of the States concerned, the Committee
intends to provide such assessment data to interested
donor States and organizations. The Committee will
continue to carry out its work in accordance with that
approach, strengthening the role of the CTC in the
global coordination of technical assistance in order to
enhance the effectiveness of such assistance and
harmonize it with the actual needs of States. The
Committee will also continue to update the Directory
of Counter-Terrorism Information and Sources of
Assistance and the Assistance Matrix, as important
sources of information for Member States interested in
receiving technical assistance.
In accordance with resolution 1566 (2004), which
reaffirmed the Security Council’s appeal to all Member
States to accede to the 12 international conventions and
protocols related to terrorism, the CTC has continued
to take steps to achieve that goal as a matter of priority.
The Committee focused in particular on prompt
ratification of all 12 conventions and on the importance
of effectively incorporating their provisions into
national legislation, regardless of whether or not a
State is party to a regional convention related to
terrorism. The CTC will continue to encourage
Member States to accede to the 12 relevant
international conventions and protocols and will
regularly monitor progress in that area.
With respect to the achievements of the
Committee over the past three months, I should like to
underscore the fact that the Committee has essentially
completed its preparations for the CTC’s first visit to
several Member States, in implementation of

3

S/PV.5113

resolutions 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004), taking into
account the particular importance of such visits to
achieving the aim of the revitalization of the CTC. The
Committee has accelerated its work to prepare for
those visits, the first of which is slated for March of
this year.
Since November last, the CTC has been carrying
out preliminary consultations with several Member
States regarding a possible time-table and conditions
for the implementation of CTC visits. The Committee
is committed to the idea of implementing such visits to
Member States in order to develop a deeper and more
direct dialogue with national Governments, to enhance
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), and to ensure a more accurate assessment of
the capacities of States and of their needs in terms of
technical assistance for the full implementation of the
resolution.
The CTC attaches great importance to broadening
cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional organizations, in accordance with the
action plan agreed at the special meeting of the
Committee on 6 March 2003.
During the period under review, the CTC actively
prepared for its fourth special meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
The Committee commends the proposal of the
Commonwealth of Independent States jointly to
organize that meeting in Almaty, Kazakhstan, from 26
to 28 January 2005, as well as the efforts of the
Government of Kazakhstan to prepare for it.
The Committee deems of particular importance
the further development of its relations with
international, regional and subregional organizations
and will maintain the existing practical thrust of its
measures in implementing the decisions of the Almaty
meeting in order to strengthen the global counterterrorism network.
Over the last three months, the CTC has
continued to abide by the fundamental principle of
transparency in its work. The web page of the
Committee has been regularly updated and improved. I
should note that, thanks to the efforts of the Secretariat,
it is currently accessible in all official languages of the
United Nations.
In accordance with resolution 1566 (2004), the
CTC was fully resolved to broaden its interaction and

4

coordination with other structures of the United
Nations involved in fighting terrorism. One example of
this kind of cooperation was the participation of the
CTC, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the seminar held in
late November and early December 2004 in Paraguay
on a draft resolution on counter-terrorism.
The Committee devoted particular attention to
further cooperation with the Security Council
committees involved in various aspects of the
prevention of terrorism — the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning AlQaida and the Taliban, and the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on non-proliferation
in the context of the threat of terrorism.
The Chairmen of the three committees have held
informal meetings in order to find new areas of
cooperation and coordination among the Committees.
That approach has contributed to greater agreement in
the implementation of a single, comprehensive strategy
of the Security Council in the fight against terrorism.
On that basis, the Chairmen of the Committees
established under resolution 1267 (1999) and
resolution 1540 (2004), respectively, were invited to
take part in the fourth special meeting of the CTC in
Almaty.
Furthermore, the Committee has maintained
cooperation between experts of the CTC and the
Monitoring Group on sanctions against Al Qaeda and
the Taliban. The CTC will also seek to establish
appropriate contacts with the newly appointed experts
of the Committee established under resolution 1540
(2004), as well as the working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004). Such cooperation among the
committees must take place in full compliance with the
rules of procedure and the mandates of the relevant
organs.
In conclusion, I would like to make several
general comments regarding the fourteenth work
programme of the CTC.
In the next three months, two practical tasks have
a high priority — first, implementation of the first
visits to Member States, and, secondly, the convening
of the fourth special meeting of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations in
Almaty. However, all of the goals set forth in the
programme can be achieved only on the condition that

S/PV.5113

the CTED becomes fully operational as soon as
possible. At this time, now that the CTED budget has
been adopted and work on its administrative
mechanisms has been completed, it is of particular
importance to recruit in a timely manner experts and
staff whose qualifications accord with the requirements
and tasks related to the revitalization of the CTC.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Denisov for his comments and his
comprehensive briefing.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I should like to thank the
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Denisov, for his comprehensive briefing,
which my delegation fully endorses. His able
administration of the Committee’s work is greatly
appreciated. We support the ambitious 90-day work
programme he has submitted, which includes wellestablished priorities. My Government also has high
expectations for what the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) can accomplish when established,
and we note with great satisfaction that the CTED is
breaking new ground.
As Denmark fully associates itself with the
forthcoming statement by my colleague, the
Ambassador of Luxembourg, on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to limit my intervention
to a few brief points.
First, I would like to express my Government’s
general support for the recommendations on counterterrorism contained in the report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. In cruel and
despicable ways, terrorism keeps reminding us how
serious a threat it poses to international peace and
security. A lot has been done by individual countries,
as well as through multilateral cooperation —
including through the efforts of international, regional
and subregional groups — in limiting the terrorists’
room to manoeuvre. But, as we all realize, this is only
the beginning. We are facing a long and arduous battle
that requires a sustained and multi-pronged approach.
In this long-term endeavour, it is essential that
the United Nations take the leading role. We agree that
it is important to develop a comprehensive strategy to
counter the threat of terrorism and look forward to
making our contribution to implementing this
recommendation of the High-level Panel.

It is of great concern that a growing number of
countries are falling behind in their reporting
obligations. We recognize that reports alone do not
stop the work of terrorists. Nevertheless, those reports
remain the backbone of the CTC’s ability to monitor
the actual steps taken on the ground. It is therefore of
particular concern that 31 countries have not submitted
their second reports; in fact, those 31 countries are
losing touch with the CTC. We realize that reporting
can be a strain on already limited administrative
resources. But in the light of the potential risk posed by
terrorists exploiting loopholes, we urge those
Governments to seek assistance in meeting their
obligations rather than simply giving up.
While the responsibility for reporting and
implementing obligations under resolution 1373 (2001)
lies with States, the CTC should also be creative in
helping countries to overcome possible constraints in
order to get back on track. The establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
provides a much needed infusion of resources to
Secretariat support for the CTC. The CTED is already
at the starting block and will soon be up and running.
We are hopeful that that will pave the way for a more
substantial dialogue with States on the implementation
of their obligations. As the Chairman has outlined in
the work programme for the next 90 days, the first onsite visits to States are likely to take place soon. We
strongly support those visits and encourage States to
extend full cooperation to the visiting teams.
Much has been said about the need to make it
easier for countries to access the technical assistance
they need to fulfil their obligations. My Government
considers that a high priority. The CTED’s role as
facilitator of technical assistance is crucial and we are
moving in the right direction, but the glass may not be
even half full. We hope that a fully staffed CTED can
ensure that needs are efficiently identified and
prioritized. Also, it is essential to focus on matching
those needs with potential donors and implementing
agencies. We look forward to working with the CTC
and the CTED in achieving that goal.
Finally, I strongly believe that we will achieve
those goals only if we succeed in duly involving
international and regional organizations. Therefore, I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
Chairman and the organizers of the CTC’s fourth
special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations and bodies, which will take

5

S/PV.5113

place later this month. Better cooperation is the key to
ensuring efficient use of resources invested in
countering the terrorist threat.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of Denmark for her proposals.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to thank Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his
briefing. For the past three months, under his
leadership, the CTC has carried out effective work,
which merits commendation by the Security Council.
During the transitional period of CTC reform, the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) has
been active. Here, we should like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Rupérez, Director of the
CTED.
We welcome the CTC’s fourteenth 90-day work
programme. We hope that the CTED will become fully
operational as soon as possible so that it can implement
the various points agreed by the Council on revitalizing
the CTC. In that connection, I should like to make
three brief points.
First, the CTC should assist in and promote the
formulation of a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy. The CTC is one of the Council’s most forceful
mechanisms in the field of counter-terrorism; its
authority and legitimacy are widely recognized by all
sides. The CTC should continue to play a central role
in that field, including — in accordance with the
requirements of resolution 1566 (2004) — by
promoting best practices and formulating norms and
regulations in the field of counter-terrorism so as to
help Member States carry out their counter-terrorism
obligations. We support an early commencement of
work by the working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004) so that it can play an important
role in expanding the legal basis of, and common
understanding in, the field of counter-terrorism.
Secondly, the CTC should continue to strengthen
and improve its counter-terrorism assistance efforts by
assessing the assistance needs of Member States and by
serving as a bridge between donor countries and
recipient countries. It has played a beneficial role in
that regard. It should further utilize its advantages and
take practical measures to promote the integration of
resources among donor countries, United Nations
agencies and regional organizations so that counter-

6

terrorism assistance can have a greater practical result.
We hope that the CTC will carefully plan its first visits
to Member States, making those visits an important
way in which to strengthen its dialogue with Member
States and to meet their assistance needs.
Thirdly, we welcome the CTC’s fourth special
meeting with international, regional and subregional
organizations, to be jointly hosted by the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the
Government of Kazakhstan. We hope that that meeting
will further promote cooperation between the CTC and
the relevant organizations in the counter-terrorism
field. We also support continued strengthening of the
coordination and communication among the CTC, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the 1566 working group.
Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I want to begin
by putting on record the United Kingdom’s
appreciation not only for Ambassador Denisov’s
briefing, but also for the work done by him as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
and by paying tribute to the staff of the Russian
delegation, who have worked hard to support the CTC
during this period of transition. I would also like to
thank Mr. Rupérez for the effort he has devoted to
pursuing the earliest possible establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED).
I can associate my delegation with the remarks to
be made in due course by the representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union, so I
will comment on only a few points, beginning briefly
with the question of the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate.
From the United Kingdom’s point of view, the
delays in the CTED’s establishment have been
frustrating. Nevertheless, we are now on the threshold
of the functioning of the new structure. We very much
hope that it will be in place and fully operational by the
time of the next of these open meetings. It is important
that the CTED be staffed with experts who are able to
bring with them a real understanding of the issues of
counter-terrorism. The CTC has an ambitious agenda in
dialogue with States, in dialogue with international,
regional and subregional organizations and in dialogue
with other parts of the United Nations. The CTC is also
developing its role in technical assistance and taking
on new responsibilities — for instance, in compiling

S/PV.5113

best practices. We are all going to need highly
qualified and experienced experts to help us take that
work forward.
There are several important elements to the
CTC’s agenda in coming months. My delegation sees
two key areas. The first is a welcome deepening of the
CTC’s relationship with States. I would like to use this
meeting to encourage all States — not least through
their missions in New York — to get to know the CTC
and the staff of the CTED. The Committee, I know, is
very keen to understand the particular circumstances
and challenges of each country in developing its
approach to counter-terrorism and in implementing its
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).
In that context, the beginning of the CTC’s
programmed visits to States is extremely welcome to
us. We look forward to those visits becoming a regular
part of the CTC’s work. They are a very direct way to
help countries tackle terrorism, and they offer an
unparalleled opportunity for the CTC itself to
understand in depth the challenges on the ground.
Another part of the CTC’s outreach approach is
its dialogue with international, regional and
subregional organizations. Between them, those
organizations have a more specialized and detailed
knowledge of the challenge of implementing resolution
1373 (2001) than the CTC can ever have. We look
forward to the CTC’s meeting in Almaty next week and
would like to thank the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Government of Kazakhstan for their role
in making it possible.
As current Chair of the Group of Eight, the
United Kingdom would like to emphasize the
commitment of that grouping, in particular its CounterTerrorism Action Group, to working with the CTC and
the CTED.
Technical assistance will continue to be a second
key area for the work of the CTC and the CTED. The
developing direct relationship with States — both
donor and recipient States — will, of course, be key to
that, as will the relationship with organizations that can
provide specialist advice. As Chair of the Group of
Eight’s Counter-Terrorism Action Group, the United
Kingdom will also work to ensure that the Group
continues to develop its role in supporting the CounterTerrorism Committee. And we look forward to greater
cooperation between those two bodies.

The United Kingdom will be working through the
CTC to support a more proactive and targeted approach
to assistance. We think it vital that in the work of the
CTC we consider not only whether we are meeting our
responsibilities to process reports but whether we are
in fact meeting our greater responsibility to help States
tackle terrorism nationally and internationally.
It is worth noting at this point, however, that
unless States engage with the CTC, it will be
impossible for us on the Committee to be able to
analyze accurately what States need. For that reason, as
well as for many others, I should like to add my voice
to those who have already called on States to meet the
timetable for reporting and, if doing so poses
difficulties, for them to get in touch with the
Committee to start a conversation about how it can be
done.
Before I close, I would like to mention two areas
of work that will be happening in parallel with the
work of the CTC. First, Council members will be
considering how best to make sure that the Council’s
counter-terrorism effort is as effective as it can be. By
that I mean, among other things, how we can best use
and coordinate the expertise that we have in the four
Council subsidiary bodies that deal with the issue.
The second area of work parallel to that of the
CTC is the work that has already started, to consider
the report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change. Some of the key proposals in
that report address terrorism. One in particular is worth
mentioning this morning: the recommendation for a
comprehensive “pan-United Nations” strategy on
terrorism. The United Kingdom fully supports that
proposal. The Secretary-General has already said that
he is acting on it, preparing a strategy that will bring
together a range of tools and organizations across the
United Nations system. I am sure that the CTC will be
a key part of the United Nations approach.
Nevertheless, the issue of how to make a real
difference against terrorism goes further than the work
or the competence of the CTC alone. The United
Kingdom looks forward to engaging in that broader
debate as well.
The Council has a busy agenda on counterterrorism in the coming year. The CTC is designed to
play a central role in the international effort against
terrorism. It is important, we think, for the Committee
and the Council that we are seen to do so. 2005 should

7

S/PV.5113

be an important year for the CTC, one in which we can
use our new resources to have a real impact. The
United Kingdom and my mission stand ready to play
their parts in shouldering that responsibility, rolling up
our sleeves and getting on with the substantive work
ahead.
The President (spoke in Spanish): It is useful, we
believe, to recall for the Council the importance of the
technical assistance that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee can provide.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
wish first to acknowledge with thanks the welcome
extended to my delegation by Ambassador Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
As a new member of the Security Council and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the United Republic of
Tanzania will do all that is within its capability to
cooperate with others to help enable the CTC
undertake its important mandate, established under
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
As one of a growing number of countries with
first-hand experience of a major terrorist attack on its
soil, Tanzania’s resolve in the war against that scourge
has never been stronger, while paying due regard to
human rights principles. That was reaffirmed by
Tanzania’s President, Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, in
his address to the General Assembly last September:
“There should never be any doubt about our
unflinching resolve to cooperate with others in
combating terrorism in all its forms” (A/59/PV.3,
p. 20).
Tanzania strongly believes that the war against
terrorism would be best coordinated and most
effectively fought through the United Nations. That is
where the importance of the CTC, as established under
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), is evidently
appropriate.
We thank the Chairman of the CTC for his
briefing on the work done in 2004. We would like to
express our gratitude for the commendable work of the
Committee in scrutinizing the reports submitted by
Member States. However, as the briefing indicated, the
crucial issue of the shortage of expert capacity should
be promptly addressed. Hopefully, the full
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), under its able Executive Director,
Mr. Javier Rupérez, would resolve the problem.

8

We note with interest that the CTC is still
undertaking efforts to elaborate a new approach to
facilitating the provision of technical assistance.
Tanzania is looking forward to, and awaiting the
outcome of, the efforts currently undertaken by the
CTC and the experts of the CTED in that respect. We
believe that such technical assistance could be of
immense help and could significantly help developing
countries, in particular the least developed countries, in
preparing and submitting proper reports on time.
In that respect, Tanzania also supports the
conduct of visits by the CTC to Member States. The
visits are a useful source for the exchange of
information and experiences on the exact technical
assistance requirements for fully implementing
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant resolutions on terrorism.
On a related subject, the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, under the direction of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the
Taliban, will be visiting my country, the United
Republic of Tanzania, on 26 and 27 January 2005. The
Government is looking forward to welcoming the
visiting Security Council Team, and is willing to
discuss with it, on a first-hand basis, the requirements
for our reporting obligations under Security Council
resolution 1267 (1999).
We would also like to thank Ambassador Denisov
for the submission of a work programme for the CTC
for the next three months — January to March 2005.
Going through the programme, one cannot fail to be
impressed with the immense amount of work to be
undertaken by the CTC in order to implement the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). Tanzania would
also like to commend the good preparations done by
the CTC for the convening of the fourth special
meeting with international, regional and sub-regional
organizations, to be held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, from
26 to 28 January 2005.
Finally, we commend the efforts by the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. In its
report released recently, the Panel proposed a
definition of terrorism — a matter that has been
eluding the General Assembly for almost 10 years and
which has stalled the process of concluding a
comprehensive convention on terrorism. The definition
proposed in the report is similar to the language and

S/PV.5113

elements of Security Council resolution 1566 (2004).
We believe that that definition can be a useful guide to
the General Assembly in helping to build consensus
and agreement on this matter so as to enable the
convention to be adopted as soon as possible.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Mahiga for reminding us of the
importance attached to the issue of terrorism by the
High-level Panel established by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): I, too, would like to
thank Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), for his comprehensive
report on the activities of the Committee over the past
three months, and its fourteenth 90-day work
programme covering the period from the beginning of
this month to the end of March this year.
The scourge of terrorism remains one of the
defining threats to international peace and security for
the twenty-first century. In fact, in the synopsis of its
report contained in document A/59/565, the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change cites
terrorism as one of the “six clusters of threats with
which the world must be concerned now and in the
decades ahead”.
Given that scenario, the work of the CTC serves a
central role in fulfilling Security Council’s mandate —
the maintenance of international peace and security
under the Charter. We note with satisfaction that there
has been steady progress in the work and in the
evolution of the CTC. This includes, first, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
which was established last June and which has been
useful and functional with regard to the CTC, even
though it has yet to become fully operational.
Secondly, cooperation between international, regional
and subregional organizations is flourishing and has
produced notable results. Thirdly, coordination with
other Council bodies dealing with terrorism continues
to expand. And, fourthly and most importantly,
interaction with Member States is advancing and
deepening, mainly through country reports, which have
served as the most important mode of dialogue
between States and the CTC in the fight against the
menace of terrorism.
The CTC has pursued its mandate vigorously
under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1535 (2004) and 1566
(2004), which most recently affirmed the unity and
resolve of the Council in rooting out terrorism and its

perpetrators. The working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004), which the Philippines is
privileged to chair, will hold its first meeting and start
its work before the end of the month.
While the work of the CTC is progressing, there
is still plenty of room for improvement. We hope to see
the CTED activated early within the next 90-day
period. As pointed out by Ambassador Denisov, the
transition period before the CTED reaches full capacity
is undercutting the productivity of the CTC in
reviewing country reports and performing its other
tasks. We encourage the process of hiring experts and
personnel to be carried out in an expeditious manner so
as to enable the CTED to reach high gear as early as
possible.
On the matter of the composition of the
Directorate, my delegation places strong emphasis on
the hiring of competent individuals on the basis of the
principle of gender equity and geographic balance. We
believe that a representative pool of experts in the
CTED will provide a greater measure of legitimacy and
a solid source of intimate knowledge of all the areas of
the world, which will benefit the work of counterterrorism.
We are pleased to note that visits to States, with
their consent, as envisaged under resolution 1535
(2004), will be carried out within the next 90-day
period. We also note that the CTC is preparing for the
first of such visits and finalizing the framework within
which such visits will be conducted. We have always
considered that face-to-face interaction between the
CTC and Member States is qualitatively better than
letter-writing and the submission of country reports,
and could be transformative in improving international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Cooperation
is enhanced by better understanding, and country visits
by the CTC would contribute to greater understanding
by Member States of what the Council is trying to
achieve in the counter-terrorism field.
Ambassador Denisov also raised the issue of the
growing trend of the late submission of country
reports. The problem has steadily worsened over time,
and the CTC must begin seriously to consider remedial
approaches to deal with the growing problem of tardy
reports. If the matter is not resolved, at stake will be
the effectiveness of the CTC in the short term and, in
the longer term and more critically, the credibility of
the Security Council. In a larger context however, the

9

S/PV.5113

problem appears to be the exclusive domain of the
CTC. But it is also plaguing the other Council
Committees dealing with counter-terrorism and nonproliferation issues. Thus, it is critically important for
all concerned Council bodies to ensure close
coordination and cooperation in pursuing their
respective mandates. They should seek synergistic
approaches and methods that will help them to pursue
their respective mandates and resolve common
problems.
We support the activities that are already
undertaken, and to be undertaken, by the CTC to
actively
and
effectively
strengthen
practical
cooperation
with
international,
regional
and
subregional organizations in all areas related to
resolution 1373 (2001). We know that, under the joint
auspices of the CTC and the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the fourth meeting with such
organizations will be held later this month in Almaty,
Kazakhstan. We hope that that meeting will further
deepen contacts and cooperation between the CTC and
those organizations for the purpose of obtaining the
full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
Finally, in the fight against terrorism, we fully
adhere to the idea that the Security Council, working
through the CTC, must be guided by the principles of
cooperation, transparency and the equal treatment of
all States. The global effort against terrorism requires
the Security Council and the rest of the membership of
the United Nations to remain committed partners if
success is to be achieved in eradicating that scourge. It
is my hope that that will be our shared goal as we
move ahead in this endeavour.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Baja for reminding us of the importance
of transparency in the Committee’s work.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like at the outset to thank Ambassador Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
for his report, and to say how much we appreciate his
work as Chairman of the Committee.
I endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.
Terrorism is one of the gravest threats to
international peace and security, as the High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change reiterated in

10

its report to the Secretary-General. France is actively
participating in the fight against that scourge and is
working for effective United Nations action to that end,
and in particular for effective action by the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC). I wish in that regard to
stress the following aspects of recent developments in
the Committee’s work.
The Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate is
now being set up, consistent with resolution 1535
(2004), and will soon be fully operational, pursuant to
the Council’s request in resolution 1566 (2004). I
should like to thank Mr. Rupérez once again for his
resolute work to that end and to pay tribute to the
States Members of the United Nations that have given
the Executive Directorate the resources necessary to
carry out its mission.
Turning to the Committee’s new programme of
work, I should like to underscore a number of goals
stressed therein, to which France attaches priority.
First, as I have said in the past, France is gratified
that the organization of visits to the field has been
recognized as one of the Committee’s new priorities,
allowing it to become more operational and useful. The
visits will enable us more accurately to assess how
States are discharging their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). They will result in
recommendations, including on technical assistance
where necessary in order to help States to comply. The
first visit will take place in the coming months, which
is a very positive development.
The programme of work also emphasizes
strengthened cooperation between the CTC and the AlQaida sanctions Committee, as well as with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We fully support that objective. I would add
that cooperation between the CTC and the Working
Group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004)
offers further potential for strengthening United
Nations counter-terrorism activities.
France is also gratified that the CTC has begun to
consider the increasingly worrisome phenomenon of
States’ delaying the submission of their reports to the
Committee. Such tardy reports are evidence of the
frequent difficulties involved in their compilation,
which, if undertaken in earnest, can be quite onerous.
However, the Council cannot accept that the
obligations incumbent under resolution 1373 (2001)
are not fully met. We must therefore remedy the

S/PV.5113

situation by identifying the type of assistance that
States may require. The Global Programme against
Terrorism of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) provides advisory services that can
be useful in the preparation of reports. Above and
beyond respect for the formal obligations involved in
reporting, France hopes that the CTC will soon get to
work assessing the requirements for technical
assistance to States.
Cooperation between the Committee and other
United Nations bodies, as well as with international
and regional organizations, is stressed most
appropriately in the Committee’s programme of work.
Within the Organization, we believe, rapprochement
and close cooperation with UNODC is of great
importance. As to international organizations, France
also hopes that the CTC will be able to work more
effectively with the G-8’s Counter-Terrorism Action
Group, because we believe that the Group can provide
meaningful support to the CTC’s mission. As to
regional organizations, the Committee is about to
convene an important concertation and information
exercise in Almaty. The programme of action and
follow-up to be presented there enjoy our support, and
we hope that the organizations invited to the meeting
will fully endorse the document’s orientations.
Over and above the work of the CTC under
discussion today, everyone is mindful of the
recommendations of the High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change. We await with great interest
the global strategy to be prepared under the SecretaryGeneral’s guidance. We share the hope that an
agreement will emerge on the definition of terrorism,
thus strengthening the consensus that must underpin
our activities. The September summit, we hope, can
produce great progress on those issues, but we must get
down to work forthwith and consider how we might
give new momentum to United Nations counterterrorism activities.
France believes that the Working Group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) could
contribute to that ambitious exercise.
Mr. Rostow (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Chairman Denisov for his
briefing this morning and, indeed, his entire team for
their leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). These quarterly public Council meetings help

ensure that counter-terrorism remains at the top of the
Council’s and the United Nations agenda.
The Security Council and its counter-terrorism
bodies are entering an important phase, and every
effort should be made to ensure proper coordination.
The Working Group established under resolution 1566
(2004) will start meeting later this month. The Group
has an important mandate, which includes making
recommendations to the Council on practical measures
to be imposed on those involved in or associated with
terrorist activities other than those on the AlQaida/Taliban sanctions Committee’s consolidated list.
In carrying it out, however, the Group should take
special care to coordinate with existing Council
counter-terrorism bodies.
In addition, the experts of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) will
soon arrive in New York to begin their work of
reviewing and analysing the reports submitted to that
body. By early spring, we expect the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate to be fully staffed and
ready to start visiting States to assess on-the-ground
efforts to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We
encourage States that need help to reach out to
Ambassador Rupérez and his team and welcome them
to visit their capitals. With those visits under way, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee will be moving to its
next phase and a step closer to being able to identify
those States that are not meeting their obligations
under resolution 1373 (2001).
Resolution 1566 (2004) explicitly called on the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida/Taliban
sanctions Committee and the 1540 Committee to
enhance cooperation with each other. While we have
seen some progress in that area, including the first-ever
meeting among the Chairmen of those bodies, there
needs to be more sharing of information and
consultation to ensure the most effective Council
contribution to the global fight against terrorism.
There are a number of concrete steps that can and
should be taken in that area. First, there should be
regular meetings among the experts assigned to support
each of the Council’s terrorism-related bodies.
Secondly, the Chairman of each committee should
regularly hold a joint meeting for the wider United
Nations membership to report on its work and to allow
Member States to ask questions. Thirdly, the work
programmes, including the proposed travel, of the

11

S/PV.5113

Counter-Terrorism Committee’s Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the Monitoring Team should be drawn up
together. Finally, the Executive Directorate, the
Monitoring Team and the experts of the 1540
Committee, once they begin their work, should share a
common database of information.
Although there are three Committees, and now a
Working Group, involved in the global counterterrorism campaign, we must not forget that they are
all Security Council bodies. Each is supervised by, and
indeed part of, the same body. Indeed, they are the
Security Council. In the coming weeks and months,
improved coordination among the Council’s counterterrorism bodies will be essential to make the United
Nations a more effective player in the international
counter-terrorism effort.
Allow me to highlight the importance of the
CTC’s fourth special meeting of international, regional
and subregional organizations, which is to be held next
week in Almaty, Kazakhstan. Such meetings offer
representatives of those organizations an opportunity to
discuss the challenges they are facing in developing
and implementing their counter-terrorism programmes,
share best practices and improve coordination between
and among the different players in the growing
counter-terrorism industry. Yet that gathering should be
about more than talking and exchanging information; it
should lead to action and results.
In short, while the discussions in Almaty are
important, the follow-up is equally, or even more,
important. Too often we have seen meetings of that sort
not lead to the follow-up action necessary to advance
the international counter-terrorism agenda. For
example, there are still too many regional and
subregional organizations that have yet to adopt or
implement counter-terrorism action plans. We still have
not seen enough organizations develop and disseminate
counter-terrorism best practices.
Almaty will be the first special meeting of the
CTC since the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate and the appointment of
Ambassador Rupérez as its leader. We have every
confidence that he will help the participating
organizations to take the necessary practical follow-up
steps to advance the multilateral counter-terrorism
campaign.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I would like to thank
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee

12

(CTC), Ambassador Andrey Denisov, for his
comprehensive presentation on the work of the
Committee and on the work programme for the coming
months. As a member of the bureau, I wish to associate
myself with his words. May I also express
my appreciation for the presence among us of
Ambassador Rupérez, Executive Director of the CTC’s
Executive Directorate (CTED), as well as for his
contribution to the work of the United Nations. In
addition, I wish to stress the valuable work being
carried out by the Secretariat in support of the
Committee and its subcommittees.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
Brazil’s firm commitment to counter-terrorism and our
repudiation of terrorism, in all its forms and
manifestations, as a most serious threat to peace and
security. As the use of indiscriminate violence against
non-combatants violates the most fundamental values
of the Charter of the United Nations, terrorism fully
deserves the strongest collective repudiation.
Unfortunately, as seen in the case of other forms of
violence such as organized crime, it seems unlikely
that terrorism will be completely eliminated. At the
United Nations the question now mainly has to do with
the establishment of clear, legitimate and acceptable
limits to the use of violence. If effective international
cooperation mechanisms are properly established,
terrorism may be kept at very low levels.
In order to reach such a desirable outcome, the
United Nations should have the primary responsibility
for fostering a coordinated, comprehensive and
integrated response on the part of the international
community against terrorism, as was recently noted by
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change. Such a strategy should not be restricted to
punitive measures, but, rather, also properly tackle the
root causes of terrorism. It is well known that the dire
situations usually linked to social, political and cultural
oppression, as well as severe economic inequalities,
often create an environment favourable to the
development of extremism. Any acceptable strategy
should fully take into account the need to observe the
relevant provisions of international law and due
process.
We trust that the CTED will become fully
operational in the near future, as the Chairman of the
CTC has mentioned. We also hope that it will be able
to help with the broadening and enhancement of the
dialogue of the Committee and its subcommittees with

S/PV.5113

the Member States and other United Nations bodies
and
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations — and in particular with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. We welcome the
convening of the special meeting of the CTC with such
organizations to be held in Almaty next week. We also
hope that the CTED will be in a position not only to
facilitate the actual offering of technical assistance, but
also to make sure that the cooperation provided to
countries by third parties is fully satisfactory. We
believe that the first joint visits by the CTC and other
relevant organizations, which are scheduled to start in
March 2005, will provide an opportunity to identify
countries’ needs, thereby allowing for the provision of
more focused cooperation.
Brazil recalls that the future composition of
CTED personnel needs to observe the requirement of
technical competence, as well as to reflect the values
and legal systems of United Nations regional groups.
We believe that consensus can be built on the basis of
those principles. In our view, the CTC and CTED are
structures designed mainly to shelter States that are
willing to cooperate but that, for various reasons, find
themselves unable to do so. The CTC and, by
extension, the CTED are not to be likened to sanctions
committees.
We believe that resolution 1566 (2004) reflects
compromise language that contains a clear and
important political message. Properly speaking,
however, it should not be construed as a conceptual
definition of terrorism. Furthermore, as foreseen in the
Charter, we believe that reaching an agreed definition
of terrorism falls under the functions and powers of the
General Assembly. We are not convinced that the
Security Council should assume such treaty-making
prerogatives. In the absence of such a definition, there
may be a risk of issues before the Committee becoming
unnecessarily politicized.
Finally, I wish to stress that Brazil welcomes
current efforts to update and strengthen the efforts of
the United Nations in the area of counter-terrorism and
remains open to participating in the deliberations
concerning this very serious issue. In that regard,
Brazil expects that the global strategy to combat
terrorism to be presented by the Secretary-General, as
well as his recommendation on that issue, will help us
to overcome existing difficulties.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Sardenberg for reminding us that the
support of regional organizations is important in
combating terrorism, and that fighting terrorism should
take place in the context of full respect for human
rights.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Ambassador Denisov for
his comprehensive presentation on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
challenges ahead. I take this opportunity to extend to
him our appreciation for the impressive leadership he
is displaying at the helm of the CTC.
As Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union, I shall
confine myself to only few brief comments of a
complementary nature.
For several years now, terrorism has topped the
agenda of the Security Council. The very first speech I
delivered before the Council last year, on 12 January,
was terrorism-related. Furthermore, the starting point
of Romania’s contribution within the Council to
fostering successive initiatives in the field of
combating terrorism was its active involvement in the
intricate process of negotiating resolution 1526 (2004),
which was unanimously adopted on 30 January 2004.
It is therefore no coincidence, I believe, that
United Nations Members are once again called, at the
beginning of this new year, to learn about the activities
of one of the most dynamic subsidiary bodies of the
Council and to express their views on this topic.
Countering the ominous scourge of global
terrorism
requires
continuous
review
and
reinforcement of the mechanisms at the disposal of the
United Nations, as well as the consolidation of the
institutional dimension of the efforts undertaken in that
field at the United Nations level.
Visits by the CTC to selected Member States,
with their consent, is one of the most recent
instruments with which the Committee has been
provided in its endeavours to enhance dialogue with
the relevant authorities of the respective countries. It is
our belief that such visits will contribute significantly
to strengthening the monitoring of the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) while also giving important
indications of States’ needs for technical assistance.

13

S/PV.5113

Nevertheless, close coordination and cooperation
are required between the CTC and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban in preparing such
visits in order to avoid any possible overlap. Joint
visits by the two Committees could be envisaged to
achieve that goal. Since the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) has become fully
operational, the participation of its representatives in
such joint visits might also be contemplated.
The significant number of States that are late in
submitting their national reports to the CTC remains of
particular concern. Non-reporting, regardless of
motivation — lack of willingness or lack of capacity
on the part of the States concerned — is a highly
worrisome situation that must be addressed on a
priority basis. Further measures should be therefore
sought to boost the level of reporting by States
Members of the United Nations.
In carrying forward its leading role in the global
fight against terrorism, the Security Council benefits
from the work of three energetic subsidiary bodies,
namely the CTC, the 1267 Committee and, lately, the
1540 Committee. The mandates and activities of those
Committees are closely interlinked, as terrorist acts and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are
two faces of the same coin. Cooperation among their
Chairmen, as well as among their experts, is therefore
essential to ensuring a coherent approach on the part of
the Council in combating terrorism. The informal
tripartite consultations mechanism which has already
been established should be further consolidated and
given new dimensions. The regular exchange of
information as well as collaboration in analysing and
responding to reports submitted by Member States
could bring added value to such efforts.
Such interactions will not be complete if they do
not encompass the undertakings expected from the
working
group
established
under
resolution
1566 (2004). I take this opportunity to welcome
Ambassador Baja of the Philippines to the
chairmanship of that working group and to assure him
of our full cooperation, as expressed in the context of
the explanations of vote made after the voting on
resolution 1566 (2004) by most of the members of the
Council. We trust that, under the able leadership of the
Permanent Representative of the Philippines, the
working group will become an important source of

14

valuable recommendations for the work of the Security
Council in the field of combating terrorism.
In the same vein, it is crucially important that the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
under the notable guidance of Ambassador Javier
Rupérez, enter swiftly into full operational mode and
that it receive all necessary support from the entire
system, on a clear priority basis — as should be the
case for all structures established by the Council to
effectively counter the dual proliferation of terrorist
acts and of weapons of mass destruction, respectively.
I believe that, as the United Nations membership
moves to examine the recommendations of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, it is a
good opportunity for our delegation to register its
support for the general strategy on combating terrorism
United Nations-wide that is proposed and supported by
the Secretary-General.
Finally, I would like to express our gratitude to
the Commonwealth of Independent States and to the
Government of Kazakhstan for the efforts made in
organizing the fourth special meeting of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
to be held next week in Almaty. We fully support
furthering the practice of holding such meetings, as
they are aimed at increasing the cohesiveness of the
global response to the dreadful threat posed by
international terrorism, while drawing upon the results
of the important strides made at the regional and
subregional levels in this fight.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I think that all
the members of the Council share the views of the
representative of Romania as to the importance of
cooperation between the CTC and the 1540 Committee,
which he is so ably chairing.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): Let me
thank Ambassador Denisov for briefing the Council on
the activities of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). I should like also to take this opportunity
to commend the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED),
Ambassador Rupérez, for his effective work and his
firm dedication to the mission that has been entrusted
to him.
No country can feel safe from the threat of
terrorism, and no country alone can feel strong enough
to deal with it. We therefore need to continue to pool

S/PV.5113

our efforts and to strengthen international cooperation,
which remains the best means to counter terrorism.
The CTC and its Executive Directorate therefore
need to continue resolutely their efforts on the ground
by strengthening a constructive dialogue with States in
order to provide them with the necessary assistance
and to ensure that the legal, institutional and
operational conditions are in place to monitor the
movement of funds, trans-border activities on the part
of terrorist groups or individuals, and the circulation of
weapons and other chemical products.
In that respect, the framework document for onsite assessments remains a valuable tool that must be
finalized as soon as possible to serve as a context for
CTC visits on the ground. My delegation believes that
visits to Member States are of great importance, as
they make it possible to determine the level of
implementation by States of their obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001); assess their capacities to meet
their obligations; and, in particular, to identify the
measures that must be taken to help States to
strengthen their protection, in particular in the area of
technical assistance.
The ultimate goal in this respect is to help States
to protect their peoples from threats and to contribute
to protecting the peoples of other States. From that
standpoint, the CTC must work proactively to increase
the productivity and effectiveness of its actions in the
area of the provision of assistance. That is all the more
necessary because the effectiveness of measures to
combat terrorism depends on their full implementation
by all States members of the international community.
Furthermore, the States that have not yet done so
should consider becoming parties to the various
conventions and protocols related to terrorism. They
need to take the appropriate legislative measures that
will enable them to honour their international counterterrorism commitments. Here, the submission of
periodic reports is an equally important aspect. States
must strive to ensure that the measures they take in the
context of fighting terrorism are in full accordance
with human rights and international humanitarian law.
But, beyond all those activities, the international
community must address social inequalities and
injustice — in short, underdevelopment — and
conflict, because these indicate dysfunctionality in the
system that can generate violence and extremism. In
particular, we must undertake further efforts to prevent

the collapse of vulnerable States. Failed States — or
States under stress, as we tend to call them today —
are ideal safe havens for terrorist networks. In fact, the
international community must place greater priority on
promoting mutual respect and understanding among
peoples to make our world more friendly and united. In
that way, we can deprive terrorism of its breeding
ground and eliminate this scourge in order to
strengthen international peace and security.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I,
too, should like to thank Ambassador Denisov for his
excellent presentation of the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and for his efforts as
Committee Chairman. I should also like to take this
opportunity to express my delegation’s appreciation to
the delegations of Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan
and Spain, which have left the Council and which,
during their mandate, showed great commitment and
spared no effort to carry out the CTC’s mandate. In
addition, I should like to welcome the CTC’s new
members. Finally, I cannot fail to welcome the
presence of Ambassador Rupérez, Executive Director
of the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED), and to thank him and his team for their efforts
and their contribution to the implementation of the
CTC’s mandate.
The number of reports submitted by Member
States under resolution 1373 (2001) is significant. The
CTC is preparing to receive the fifth series of reports,
and we hope that the necessary resources, including
human resources, will be made available to it so that it
can carry out its mandate. We note, however, that 75
Member States have not fulfilled their obligations by
submitting their reports on time. That is a source of
concern for my delegation, since most of those States
are developing countries, particularly African
countries. We note the willingness shown by the
Committee, through the efforts of its Executive
Directorate, to provide them with the assistance and
advice needed for the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). We hope that a proactive approach is
taken to engage in direct dialogue with those countries,
including by raising the awareness of regional
organizations.
It goes without saying that implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001) is not limited to
reviewing reports, but also requires additional and
tools resources. That is why we welcome the fact that
the CTC has already begun an analytical effort to

15

S/PV.5113

assess States’ assistance needs, which
integrated into the report review process.

will

be

In the past, my delegation has called on the
Committee to organize visits to selected States as a
means of direct dialogue with them to strengthen the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to assess
technical
assistance
needs
to
ensure
such
implementation. The CTC has already adopted general
guidelines and procedures for the preparation, carrying
out and assessment of such visits. These are tools that
will enable it to better perform its tasks under
resolution 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004). We are
pleased that, beginning in March, the CTC has
scheduled a number of visits to States in various
regions. That effort, which forms part of the
implementation of the goal of revitalizing the CTC,
deserves to be encouraged and reaffirmed.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that the CTC
will hold its fourth special meeting with international,
regional and subregional organizations in Almaty,
Kazakhstan, from 26 to 28 January 2005. In that
regard, we appreciate the offer by the Commonwealth
of Independent States and the efforts of the Kazakh
Government to prepare that meeting, which seek to
develop the relations between the CTC and
international and regional organizations and hence to
strengthen global counter-terrorism efforts.
We note with satisfaction the informal contacts
between the Chairmen of the CTC, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). In that connection, we believe that the
coordination of the schedule of visits deserves
particular attention. Moreover, we would like to see
greater interaction among those bodies and between the
CTC and the various United Nations structures
involved in the fight against terrorism. We approve the
fourteenth work programme for the next trimester and
the goals set out therein. Now that the budgetary and
administrative provisions have been finalized, we are
confident that the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate will become fully operational.
Finally, Algeria, which is firmly committed to the
fight against terrorism and which voted in favour of
resolution 1566 (2004), believes that that resolution’s
main objective was to reaffirm the mobilization of the
international community in fighting against that

16

scourge and not to provide a definition of terrorism,
which is the sole prerogative of the General Assembly,
the Organization’s legislative and deliberative body,
which, we hope, will be able to arrive at a consensus
definition of the phenomenon of terrorism as soon as
possible.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): At the outset, we thank
Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), for his detailed and
substantive briefing concerning the activities of the
CTC for the past three months and its future work
programme for the first trimester of 2005. We also like
to congratulate him on his able leadership of the CTC.
Our thanks go also to Ambassador Rupérez and his
team for their work in the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). Greece, as a new member of the
CTC, is determined to actively participate in its work
and to establish close and constructive cooperation
with the Chairman and the other members of the
Committee.
Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later in the debate by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. I would like, however, to add the
following points.
Greece fully supports the open debates of the
Council on the activities of the CTC. We are convinced
that they contribute to further transparency and better
understanding of the Committee’s role in the global
fight against terrorism and they increase its universal
legitimacy. In our view, the effective implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) is intrinsically linked to
public perception concerning the credibility and
legitimacy of the work carried out by the CTC.
By ensuring that all States have taken effective
steps aimed at fully implementing resolution 1373
(2001), enhancing their counter-terrorism capacity and
promoting universal adherence to anti-terrorism
conventions, the CTC has proved that terrorism is a
universal challenge and that the fight against it requires
both internal and global action. Greece is firmly
committed to the full implementation of that resolution
and other counter-terrorism resolutions, including,
most recently, resolution 1566 (2004).
However, we firmly believe that counterterrorism activities must at all times be in conformity
with respect for the United Nations Charter and
international law, including international human rights

S/PV.5113

law and refugee and humanitarian law. In that respect,
we welcome the recommendations of the report of the
High-level Panel on Treats, Challenges and Change
concerning terrorism and, in particular, those relating
to the need for all Member States to ratify and
thoroughly implement the 12 United Nations antiterrorism conventions and protocols, to achieve a
consensus definition on terrorism within the General
Assembly, to rapidly complete negotiations on a
comprehensive convention on terrorism, to promote a
comprehensive United Nations strategy to fight
terrorism and to institute a process for reviewing cases
of individuals and institutions claiming to have been
wrongly placed or retained on the watch lists of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban.
We are encouraged by the Security Council’s
continued efforts to make the CTC more efficient,
competent and pertinent to global action against
terrorism, and to accelerate the revitalization process,
particularly by making the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate fully operational.
In our view, the provision of technical assistance
to States is a key element for the effective
implementation of the resolution. In this regard, we
welcome the initiative of the Committee to start
assessing the assistance needs of Member States and —
if the State concerned agrees — to share such
assessments with interested donor States and
organizations. In this connection, we think that the
updated Assistance Matrix is an important tool for
interested States to identify and obtain technical
assistance.
Following resolution 1566 (2004), we support the
development of a set of best practices, in consultation
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and United Nations bodies, to assist
States in implementing resolution 1373 (2001).
Concerning the main tasks of the Committee over
the next three months, Greece welcomes the decision
of the Committee to undertake its first visit to a United
Nations Member State. Such visits, carried out with the
consent of States, could be useful in terms of
establishing a better dialogue with such States and of
providing a more accurate picture of the situation on
the ground.
Finally, we welcome the forthcoming fourth
special meeting of the CTC with international, regional

and subregional organizations, to be held in Almaty,
Kazakhstan, in cooperation with the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Government of Kazakhstan.
Such meetings enhance the current level of cooperation
with international organizations, contribute to avoiding
duplication of activities and increase the effectiveness
of resource utilization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Vassilakis for his interesting comments.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Denisov for his presentation today on the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
for the commendable work that has been done by the
CTC under his leadership. Japan has been participating
in the work of the CTC as an interested State. Now, as
a member of the CTC as from this month, we will be
able to engage more actively in the work of the CTC
and enhance our cooperation in order to help the
Committee to meet the expectations of the international
community by upgrading the counter-terrorism efforts
of Member States.
My Government supports the programme of work
for the first quarter of this year, as outlined by
Ambassador Denisov. I would like to make three brief
points regarding the work programme, on which we
believe the CTC should be focusing particular attention
as we move forward.
First, Japan expects the fourth special meeting of
the CTC with international, regional and subregional
organizations, to be held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, at the
end of the month, to be important in developing closer
links between the CTC and those organizations. In this
regard, Japan, and my mission here, would like to
thank the Government of Kazakhstan for offering to
host that important meeting. Japan will participate in
the meeting, including by sending staff from the New
York mission. I wish to stress that, in order for the
CTC to be able to facilitate full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions, enhanced
dialogue and cooperation with the many counterterrorism-related organizations at the international,
regional and subregional levels is critically important.
It will also be necessary to avoid duplication of
effort, as well as to close gaps in the work done by
such organizations covering a variety of counterterrorism activities. In this connection, we hope that
establishing best practices by the CTC in relation to

17

S/PV.5113

dealing with the financing of terrorism, as requested in
Security Council resolution 1566 (2004) and
mentioned in the most recent programme of work, will
be facilitated through the process of consultation with
relevant organizations, some of which will be
participating in the forthcoming special meeting.

tragic, are not in vain. It carries a heavy responsibility
in that regard, and the international community expects
it to continue its work with unflinching determination
in pursuit of the best practically attainable measures
aimed at preventing and working towards the
elimination of the scourge of terrorism.

My Government considers it appropriate that the
CTC should begin developing best practices, in the
first instance on measures related to the financing of
terrorism in the first instance. But it should then be
able to gradually extend its work on best practices to
other areas of counter-terrorism policy.

To that end, we expect that the CTC will continue
to cooperate fully with other committees related to
terrorism, such as the Al Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

My second point has to do with the importance of
the CTC’s visits to States, as called for in Security
Council resolution 1566 (2204). While we welcome the
visits programme, we realize that there will be a limit
to the number of States that the CTC and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
will be able to manage to visit. That being the case, the
visits by the CTC and the CTED should not only
concentrate on the States visited, but should also
inform and bring benefits to other States not visited
through the sharing of information and experience
gained, which may be useful in assisting those other
States in their efforts to enhance their counter-terrorism
capacity.
In the same vein, we would expect that, upon
completion of a foreign visit, the CTC would share to
the extent possible, its findings, views and information
on States’ needs assessments with interested Member
States.
Thirdly, my Government has high expectations of
the analytical work that will be done by the CTED
when it becomes fully operational during the first
quarter of this year. We hope that the new team of
CTED experts will eventually be able to submit to the
CTC a report in which it will present its comprehensive
analyses and views and, where appropriate, make
recommendations regarding technical assistance
requirements of Member States. It should present its
views regarding the regions and countries with respect
to which the CTC should be intensifying its efforts,
benefiting from consultations with experts from other
relevant organizations.
The international community has suffered untold
tragedy and misery as a result of an ever-increasing
number of acts of terror. The CTC must ensure that the
sacrifices made by the victims of terrorism, however

18

Finally, let me express my appreciation to
Ambassador Denisov for his unfailing strong
leadership and to the experts and secretariat members
of the CTC, as well as to Ambassador Rupérez and the
Directorate staff, for their commendable efforts. My
Government pledges its continued full support for the
work done in this important Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful to Ambassador Oshima for urging the
international community not to abandon the fight
against terrorism and to support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity.
I would like to thank Ambassador Andrey
Denisov, Chairman of the CTC, and Ambassador Javier
Rupérez, Executive Director of the Executive
Directorate of the Committee, for their work.
Briefly, I should like to say that combating
terrorism has become one of the main priorities of the
United Nations, as has been demonstrated in recent
years. Argentina shares the international community’s
concern on the need to advance towards an effective
response to the scourge of terrorism.
The reports that have been circulated to the
Council set out the important progress achieved in
recent months and prospects for the coming quarter.
We should like briefly to note Argentina’s hopes for
the coming months.
First, the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
should deepen its dialogue with the Member States in
order to solve, inter alia, the problems connected to
delays and inefficiencies in the submission of reports.
With the help of the Executive Directorate, we should
analyse various ways to streamline cooperation by

S/PV.5113

offering advice to States that require it in order to make
it easier for them to comply with the Council’s
resolutions and, in particular, to submit their reports in
a timely manner. We believe that the first visit to a
Member State, to be carried out in March, will
undoubtedly set an important precedent in the
cooperation of and assistance to Member States,
helping them better to assess the assistance that the
United Nations may provide. Argentina will participate
actively in the CTC’s adoption of the guiding
document for visits to States.
Secondly, it is essential that we develop the best
possible level of cooperation between the CTC and the
various international, regional and subregional
organizations, as has already been noted. That is why
we wish to point out the importance of the fourth
special meeting of the CTC in Almaty next week. We
are especially grateful to Kazakhstan and to the
Commonwealth of Independent States for organizing
that meeting.
We should also like to prioritize cooperation
within the United Nations system, be it between the
CTC and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) or, more particularly, between the
CTC, the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, which I chair on behalf of Argentina. A
good example of such cooperation was the seminar
held in Asuncion, Paraguay, in December 2004. The
seminar on drafting counter-terrorism legislation,
organized jointly by the Government of Paraguay and
the United Nations, was attended by the CTC, UNODC
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights. The outcome was held to be most satisfactory,
and we commend the organizers.
We also hope that the CTC’s work will be more
effective once the Executive Directorate becomes fully
operational. The cooperation and assessment tasks
entrusted to the Executive Directorate will undoubtedly
be of vital importance to the CTC.
Finally, we wish to add that United Nations
counter-terrorism activities must be effective and serve
as an example to the entire international community.
To be effective, they must be seen by civil society to be
impartial, transparent and respectful of the principles
of the Charter, international law and, most especially,
human rights. I reaffirm the resolute commitment of
my Government, as a member of the Security Council

and Chairman of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, to the struggle.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now call on the representative of Luxembourg
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Bichler (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania;
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and Serbia and Montenegro;
and the European Free Trade Association country
Norway, member of the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.
First of all, I wish on behalf of the European
Union to express my appreciation to Ambassador
Denisov, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), for his comprehensive briefing on
the activities carried out by the Committee during the
past three months and on the programme of work for
the next 90 days, which the EU fully supports.
The European Union very much looks forward to
pursuing its good cooperation with the standing and
new members of the CTC. I would also like to thank
Mr. Rupérez for his valuable work since assuming the
leadership of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). The European Union is looking
forward to the CTED’s becoming fully operational
during the current 90-day period.
The European Union continues to attach great
importance to the open debates of the Security Council
on the issue of counter-terrorism, and in particular on
the work of the Committee. They contribute to
strengthening the general acceptance and legitimacy of
the CTC among all the members of the United Nations
family.
While the European Union actively supports your
call, Sir, on all States that have not submitted their
reports on time to do so as soon as possible, we would
like to focus today on three aspects which the
European Union believes deserve particular attention.
First is the development of a comprehensive
strategy to fight terrorism. At its summit meeting in

19

S/PV.5113

Brussels in December 2004, the European Union
reiterated its determination to combat the continued
threat of terrorism through a comprehensive and
integrated approach, reinforcing both internal and
international cooperation, in accordance with the
principles on which the Union is founded.
The European Union also reiterated its conviction
that, in order to be effective in the long run, the
Union’s response to terrorism must address the root
causes of terrorism. As radicalization and recruitment
can be closely connected, the European Union has
decided to establish by June 2005 a long-term strategy
and action plan on both issues.
In that context, the European Union welcomes the
recommendations concerning counter-terrorism put
forward in the report of the High-level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change with regard to the
major role the United Nations should take in
developing a comprehensive strategy to fight terrorism.
Those include the urgent need to complete negotiations
on a comprehensive convention on terrorism, the
particular importance of reaching a consensus on a
legal definition of terrorism as soon as possible, the
urgency of achieving universal ratification and
comprehensive implementation of all international
counter-terrorism conventions and protocols, the need
to facilitate assistance to those who need it in order to
increase their capacity to prevent terrorism, and lastly,
closer coordination with all United Nations bodies and
all other actors in the global counter-terrorism effort.
Through its counter-terrorism coordinator,
Mr. Gijs de Vries, the European Union is currently
working to promote greater coordination between the
various counter-terrorism initiatives, policies and
activities of the European Union.
The second aspect I would like to raise today is
related to respect for due process. The European Union
is convinced that terrorism must be fought in the
context of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Counter-terrorism efforts must never take
place in the absence of respect for due process and the
rule of law. There can be no trade-off between human
rights and effective security measures. Indeed, respect
for human rights must remain an integral part of any
global counter-terrorism strategy.
In that regard, the European Union welcomes the
fact that a human rights expert will be one of the main
advisers of the Executive Director. We expect that

20

expert to increase the profile of human rights and the
rule of law within the Executive Directorate and in its
contacts with other United Nations bodies dealing with
human rights, as well as in its outreach to Member
States.
In the same context, the European Union also
welcomes the recommendation of the High-level Panel
to institute a process for reviewing the cases of those
claiming to have been wrongly placed or retained on
the watch-list of the Al-Qaeda and Taliban sanctions
Committee. Such a process could also benefit the work
of other sanctions committees.
My third point pertains to the more dynamic role
to be played by the CTC in its relations with the
outside world. The European Union welcomes the fact
that the CTC and the Executive Directorate will
enhance and broaden their dialogue with Member
States and international, regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome the fact that the first visit
by the CTC to Member States is now scheduled for
March 2005. We also welcome the upcoming fourth
special meeting of the CTC with international, regional
and subregional organizations, which is to be held in
Almaty, Kazakhstan, in cooperation with the
Commonwealth of Independent States. The European
Union will participate actively in that very important
meeting.
In addition, direct dialogue will facilitate the
development of a set of best practices, in consultation
with the relevant bodies of the United Nations — in
particular with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other
international, regional and subregional organizations —
and the provision of technical assistance. It will also
make it possible to better tailor those practices to the
real needs of Member States. For its part, the European
Union is actively pursuing its relations with third
countries, in particular through visits and direct
dialogue, including the possibility of providing
technical assistance.
In conclusion, allow me to congratulate the
Chairman of the CTC for the work he has done in very
clearly identifying the priorities for the three months
ahead. I would also like to reassure you, Mr. President,
that the European Union remains firmly committed to
the full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), as
well as all other Council resolutions related to counterterrorism.

S/PV.5113

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37, I now call on the representative of
Kazakhstan.
Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I
would like to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for organizing this debate, which provides
an opportunity to review the progress made in the fight
against terrorism and to identify priorities for the
Counter-Terrorism Committee’s (CTC) activities in the
future. My delegation would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Andrey Denisov for his effective and
inspiring stewardship of the activities of the CTC, as
well as to thank him for his presentation of the CTC’s
work programme for the next 90-day period and his
briefing on the Committee’s work during the last three
months. I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Executive Director of
the Committee’s Executive Directorate (CTED),
Ambassador Javier Rupérez, for his commendable
efforts.
My delegation has a positive assessment of the
CTC’s work during the reporting period. It is
encouraging to note that, despite the existing
difficulties in getting the Executive Directorate up and
running, the Committee has been able to make
considerable progress in the revitalization of its
activities. We note with great satisfaction that the
Committee is finalizing preparations to begin its visits
to several Member States, in compliance with
resolutions 1535 (2004) and 1566 (2004), the first of
which is planned for March 2005. Such visits represent
a qualitatively new and practical instrument designed
to develop cooperation and dialogue with Member
States and to provide much-needed technical and
expert assistance in the fight against terrorism.
A new element in the Committee’s work has been
the analytical work to assess the requirements of
Member States in the context of preparing their reports
on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and to
develop an integrated assistance matrix. The
Committee’s record during the reporting period
indicates that it is actively applying new approaches to
the coordination of technical cooperation with States,
closely linking that mission with efforts to reinforce
interaction
with
international
and
regional
organizations.
As indicated in the report by the Chairman of the
CTC, that Committee, in cooperation with the

Commonwealth of Independent States, will hold its
fourth special meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations in Almaty, Kazakhstan. On
behalf of my Government, I would like to express our
deep gratitude to the Security Council and its CounterTerrorism Committee for the high honour and privilege
of hosting such a significant event.
We consider it very important that the CTC
meeting will be convened jointly with the
Commonwealth of Independent States, in the heart of
the Eurasian continent. Counter-terrorism activities in
our region are closely linked with efforts to prevent the
trafficking of drugs, arms and human beings. Most of
the region’s organizations pay special attention to the
development of cooperation in counter-terrorism
activities. In particular, in addition to carrying out
other meaningful activities, the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization have set up, and quite successfully
operated, specialized antiterrorist centres. We believe
that the experience we have acquired in the process
might prove useful to the CTC.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Kazakhstan has been cooperating fully with the CTC
since its inception and intends to provide to that
important body all the necessary assistance, exerting
every effort to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Government of Kazakhstan for having organized the
fourth meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to
be held in Almaty.
Mr. Buffa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset, on behalf of the delegation of
Paraguay, to thank Ambassador Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
for his briefing and to congratulate him on the work he
has been doing under the mandate entrusted to him by
the Council on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations. I should like also to congratulate
Ambassador Javier Rupérez for his work as Executive
Director of the CTC.
The Government of Paraguay has consistently
condemned energetically terrorism in all its aspects,
which it considers to be a scourge affecting all
humanity. We therefore believe that, in order to fight
terrorism, it is imperative that the international

21

S/PV.5113

community act in a coordinated and committed
manner.
My Government reiterates once again its resolute
support for the work that the Security Council is
carrying out, in cooperation with Member States, in the
context of the global combat against terrorism. My
country, in keeping with resolution 1373 (2001), has
ratified and acceded to the 12 international conventions
in the field of terrorism. Those instruments have now
been incorporated into our national legislation, in
keeping with constitutional provisions.
Ambassador Denisov also mentioned the highlevel seminar to follow up on the recommendations of
the resolution, whose goal was to analyse national
legislation and regulations on terrorism and bring them
into conformity with the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001). The seminar was held last December at the
request of the Government of the Republic of Paraguay
in Asunción, Paraguay, in cooperation with the CTC;
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
Vienna; the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights; and the Inter-American Committee
against Terrorism of the Organization of American
States (OAS). It was a pivotal event in helping to bring
domestic legislation into conformity with international
agreements, leading to an agreed body of legislation
that complements and updates, in keeping with
international standards, the available tools for
combating terrorism. Meetings were also held with
representatives of the three branches of the State —
Executive, Legislative and Judicial.
The National Congress went into recess on 20
December and will resume its meetings on 1 March,
and we expect the Executive branch to submit the draft
law to the Congress at that time.
We must stress that the presence at that seminar
of an expert from the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights was very important in terms of
clarifying that all relevant legislation must be
consistent with humanitarian law, thus dispelling any
doubts that might arise in that connection. We wish
also to highlight the presence of an expert from the
OAS Inter-American Committee against Terrorism,
thereby fulfilling the role assigned to regional
organizations under the resolution.
Allow me, on behalf of the Government of
Paraguay, to voice our gratitude to the Chairman of the
CTC, Ambassador Denisov; to the CTC Executive

22

Directorate; to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in Vienna; and to the OAS Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism for their outstanding
cooperation in the holding of the seminar. I wish also
to say before this important body that the Republic of
Paraguay is fully compliant in terms of bringing its
legislation into conformity with existing norms in the
area of the combat against terrorism; that it responds to
CTC reports in a timely fashion and in the proper
format; and that in our country there is a national
commitment on the part of the three branches of
Government to continue to fight this battle.
I should like also to point out that, at the
subregional level, Paraguay, along with Argentina,
Brazil and the United States of America, belongs to the
Three Plus One group, whose principal goal is
cooperation and the elaboration of mechanisms to
combat terrorism.
The Government of Paraguay will continue to
stress this issue in the Sixth Committee, so that, as
requested in the report of the High-level Panel, we can
reach a definition of terrorism, which has been
discussed for almost a decade now, and so that we can
finalize the draft conprehensive convention on
international terrorism, thereby finally providing the
international community with a unified legal
framework to combat terrorism.
We hope that the first visit of the CTC to a
member State in March 2005 will represent a practical
step towards making progress in the task of
cooperation with, and lending technical assistance to,
Member States in their efforts to prevent and combat
terrorism.
Finally, we wish every success to the CTC’s
fourth meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations, to be held in Almaty
Kazakhstan at the end of the month.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We would like
to convey to the Government of Paraguay our
congratulations on the success of the seminar held in
December in Asunción.
I call on the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this opportunity to address in particular the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) as well as the
overall United Nations response to terrorism in
general, also in the light of the recent publication of the

S/PV.5113

report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change.
The year ahead offers a number of opportunities
for the United Nations to step up its efforts and
efficiency in the fight against terrorism. The High-level
Panel has identified terrorism as one of six categories
of threats with which the world must be concerned in
the years ahead. Liechtenstein has consistently joined
the international community in strongly condemning
all acts of terrorism, irrespective of their motivation
and wherever and by whomever committed. We concur
with the Panel’s finding that it is imperative to develop
a global strategy for fighting terrorism that addresses
root causes and strengthens responsible States and the
rule of law as well as fundamental human rights.
The most important and complex aspect of such a
strategy concerns efforts to reverse the causes or
facilitators of terrorism. Pointing to causes or
facilitators is sometimes perceived as an attempt to
justify terrorist acts, contrary to the unjustifiable nature
of all forms and manifestations of terrorism, and is thus
neglected in the international community’s overall
response. However, we must fight all aspects of
terrorism with resolve, including in particular its root
causes. These phenomena, ranging from major political
grievances to failed States and poverty, often constitute
threats to our common security in and of themselves.
We hope that the process leading to the United Nations
summit in 2005 will bring about strong new measures
aimed at combating those phenomena and thereby
contribute to the fight against terrorism.
Countering extremism and intolerance is another
important pillar of such a strategy, as is the
development of better instruments for State
cooperation in counter-terrorism. In the latter area,
much work lies ahead, going far beyond the processes
already in place, such as the negotiation of a
comprehensive international convention against
terrorism. Practical cooperation between States in the
areas of law enforcement and intelligence sharing and
relevant assistance and capacity-building need to be
improved. The CTC’s Executive Directorate (CTED)
should continue to play — and further strengthen — its
leading role in the coordination of such assistance.
We have repeatedly stressed the importance of
respecting the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the fight against terrorism.
We therefore commend the High-level Panel for

placing strong emphasis on that important aspect. The
work of the Security Council in this area leaves room
for improvement. Instituting a process for reviewing
cases of individuals and institutions claiming to have
been wrongly placed or retained on the list of the
Al Qaeda/Taliban Sanctions Committee would be one
important step in that direction. Furthermore, we are
confident that the experts of the CTC’s Executive
Directorate will carry out their tasks with sensitivity
for human rights concerns, and we commend Executive
Director Rupérez for the envisaged inclusion of a
human rights expert on his team. The forthcoming CTC
visits to States, starting in March this year, will provide
a good opportunity to put into practice the principle of
an integrated approach of the rule of law and effective
counter-terrorism measures.
Major advances in the United Nations fight
against terrorism are expected not only in the context
of the follow-up to the report of the High-level Panel
and the work of the strengthened CTC and CTED, but
also in the context of the consultations of the working
group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).
Although we previously expressed concern about the
mandate of the working group — in particular with
respect to due-process standards — we are confident
that it will work in an inclusive and transparent manner
and will respect all standards relevant to the rule of law
and human rights. That will effectively strengthen the
credibility and thus the efficiency of any new measures
to be adopted.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Once again, I
would like to welcome the presence of Ambassador
Andrey Denisov, Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, and of Mr. Javier Rupérez, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate.
After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the
briefing by the Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) on the work of the
Committee.
“The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
peace and security and that any acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their

23

S/PV.5113

motivation,
committed.

whenever

and

by

whomsoever

“The Security Council recalls the statement
by its President on 19 October 2004
(S/PRST/2004/37), which indicated the Council’s
intention to review the structure and activities of
the CTC; resolution 1535 (2004) on the
revitalization of the Committee; and resolution
1566 (2004) emphasizing the urgent need to
strengthen international cooperation in combating
terrorism.
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
pursue its agenda as set out in the work
programme for the CTC’s fourteenth 90-day
period (S/2005/22). It invites the CTC in
particular to ensure that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate becomes fully
operational in the shortest possible time, and to
take additional measures to enhance cooperation
with the Al Qaeda/Taliban Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), and to initiate contacts
with the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004).
“The Security Council notes the importance
of continuing the CTC’s efforts in the following
key areas: to enhance the capabilities of Member
States to combat terrorism; to identify and
address the problems faced by States in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001); to facilitate
the provision of technical assistance and
cooperation adjusted to the recipient countries’
needs; to encourage the largest possible number
of States to become parties to the international
conventions and protocols related to counter-

24

terrorism; and to strengthen its dialogue and
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations acting in the areas
outlined by resolution 1373 (2001).
“The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the CTC to hold its fourth special
meeting with international, regional and
subregional organizations from 26 to 28 January
2005 in Almaty, Kazakhstan.
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
accelerate the preparation of assessments of
Member States’ assistance needs so that these can
be shared with the relevant States and, in due
course, with interested donor States and
organizations. The Council invites the CTC to
conduct the first of its visits to Member States in
March 2005 in order to enhance the Committee’s
monitoring of the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and to facilitate the provision of
technical and other assistance for such
implementation.
“The Security Council notes that, as of
16 December 2004, 75 States had not submitted
their respective reports to the CTC in time, as set
out in resolution 1373 (2001). It calls on them
urgently to do so in order to maintain the
universality of response which the threat of
terrorism and the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) require.
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
continue reporting on its activities at regular
intervals.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/3.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.
