S/PV.7375

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7375th meeting

Wednesday, 4 February 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Ramoškaitė
Mr. Haniff
Mr. McLay
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2015/51)

15-03031 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1503031*

S/PV.7375

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the first
meeting of the Council for the month of February 2015,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Cristián
Barros Melet, Permanent Representative of Chile, for
his service as President of the Council for the month of
January 2015. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Barros Melet and his team for the great diplomatic skill
with which they conducted the Council’s business last
month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2015/51)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nicholas
Kay, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Maman
Sidikou, Special Representative of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, to participate
in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ambassador Sidikou,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/51, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kay.

2/8

04/02/2015

Mr. Kay: First of all, I would like to congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, and to thank you for taking
the initiative to circulate many written questions in
advance of today’s briefing. I hope my briefing in the
open meeting will cover a lot of those questions; others
will be answered in the closed meeting. I also thank you
for this opportunity to brief the Council on Somalia. I
am particularly pleased to be doing so with my friend
and colleague, Ambassador Sidikou. The partnership
in Somalia between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations is unique, strong and essential for
success.
I would like to use this briefing, if I may, to take
a hard look at the challenges ahead this year. When I
look ahead to 2015, I am both excited and worried. I am
excited because this year will be decisive in whether
and how Somalia can become a unified, peaceful and
federal State. I am worried, because the challenges and
risks are significant — delays and setbacks will have an
even greater impact this year than last.
The year 2015 should be the year of federalism and
delivery. The Federal Government’s Vision 2016 remains
the plan. But timelines have shortened significantly,
largely as a result of repeated political crises. First, we
need to accelerate the momentum established in 2014
in the federalism process, particularly building the
capacity of existing interim regional administrations
and establishing new ones where they do not exist.
Within the next few months we need to see all the
interim regional administrations in place. I welcome
the intention to establish without delay an interregional
consultative forum in Somalia.
Secondly, with a constitutional referendum expected
in early 2016, the bulk of the constitutional review,
including important discussions on power and resource
sharing, will need to be completed this year.
Thirdly, key decisions and preparations for the
2016 referendum and elections must be made. The longdelayed National Independent Electoral Commission
and the Boundaries and Federation Commission need
to be established and operationalized urgently. We must
continue to support and build the Federal Government’s
leadership and capacity, but inclusive political processes
will be the key. Somalia’s regions must play a full part
in State-building and peacebuilding processes, and
minority and marginalized groups need to be included
in them. Women’s participation and leadership at the

15-03031

04/02/2015

The situation in Somalia

local and national level must be promoted. I note with
concern that words and good intentions have not so far
translated into action when it comes to selecting women
for senior roles. Traditional elders and political leaders
have a responsibility to make sure this happens.
Political infighting of the kind we saw last year
could derail the whole project. The most recent crisis
has delayed all key Government business for over three
months and left Parliament divided and distracted. I
welcome the appointment of the new Prime Minister,
Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, but I am
disappointed that it has not yet been possible to reach
agreement with Parliament on a new Cabinet.
Once a Cabinet has been approved, future crises
need to be avoided. To do this, Federal leaders and
institutions, including Parliament, have a responsibility
to improve their working practices, transparency and
engagement with each other. Those with the greatest
power and influence have the greatest responsibility
to find workable compromises. They will be held
accountable by Somalis and international partners for
further instability and delay.
The importance of the political process this year
will raise the stakes in Somali politics. I worry that
tensions will rise as the 2016 elections get closer.
Somalia’s people and nascent institutions will be
breaking historic new ground this year, as the country
moves down the road to federalism and democracy.
It is up to the country’s political leaders to guide this
process responsibly, build confidence among all groups
and put aside narrow interests. A spirit of compromise
is the hallmark of strength not weakness.
The sacrifice, courage and dedication of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali National Army have had a decisive impact on
security in Somalia. The United Nations Support Office
for AMISOM (UNSOA) has played an exceptionally
effective part in this success in 2014 and deserves
recognition, as does the European Union (EU) for its
role in meeting much of the costs of AMISOM and its
deployment of the EU Training Mission to Mogadishu.
The campaign against Al-Shabaab will continue
to advance in 2015. AMISOM and the Somali
National Army will continue to counter Al-Shabaab’s
asymmetric approach. They need the right capability to
defeat this threat. Combating terrorism also requires a
more coherent regional approach, both within Somalia
and in the Horn of Africa more broadly, to undermine

S/PV.7375

Al-Shabaab’s cross-border capability, finances and
intent. Security for Somali civilians must improve.
Al-Shabaab is not the only threat they face. Between
the United Nations, AMISOM and federal and regional
authorities we need to recognize and respond to the
continuing potential for local inter-clan disputes to lead
to conflict.
I am grateful for the Council’s attention to the
need to secure main supply routes to liberated areas.
A great deal depends on it. Secure access will improve
and enable military operations, allow independent and
impartial needs-based humanitarian supplies to be
delivered and, crucially, allow resumption of normal
commercial activity.
Stabilization has to work this year. We need
creative ways to accelerate delivery that strengthens
the legitimacy of local administrations. Collectively we
shall need to accept and manage the risk involved in such
programmes. I look forward to greater implementation
of the Federal Government’s stabilization strategy,
particularly local reconciliation and peacebuilding
activities. To do this, we need more secure movement
within liberated areas.
Promoting the rule of law is an important part
of the peace dividend in newly recovered areas and
a key part of State-building more broadly. This year
we need to help extend basic access to justice sector
institutions — police, justice and corrections — to the
regions.
In 2015, we also need to set the foundations for
a sustainable Somali defence sector. Implementing
commitments made in September at the London Security
Event will be key. Coherent support to 10,900 Somali
National Army personnel in joint operations with
AMISOM, the development of a plan for the defence
sector, coherent national security architecture and
militia integration into national security forces are the
challenges. All this must be politically realistic — guided
by and with the grain of the federalism process. It must
also be financially sustainable.
Somalia remains one of the most dangerous places
in which the Council has mandated operations. I pay
tribute to the work and sacrifices of AMISOM and
Somali troops over the last year. We were all saddened
by the loss of life in the 25 December attack inside
the Mogadishu International Airport area. I thank
the Council members for their heartfelt statements of
support and solidarity.

15-030313/8

S/PV.7375

The situation in Somalia

I am also most grateful for the professional
work of the United Nations Guard Unit, provided by
Uganda. In 2014, it allowed us to expand our presence
in Mogadishu. Without it, we could not achieve the
mandates the Council set for UNSOM and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM. But, as we have
expanded, the Guard Unit has been stretched to the
limits of its capacity. In 2015, the demands on the United
Nations will only increase. We shall need to expand
our presence in the regions to support stabilization
and Vision 2016. That will require a further expansion
of the Guard Unit. I hope the upcoming joint African
Union-United Nations benchmarking review can
address this issue, among other things.
The United Nations, the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the European Union and other international partners are
working ever more closely together to ensure coherent
support to make progress in Somalia. IGAD will
continue to play a critical role in political processes,
particularly at the regional level.
Delivering progress this year will require even
closer collaboration and accountability between the
Federal Government and international partners. The
Copenhagen High-level Partnership Forum, held in
November 2014, reaffirmed that the Somali Compact
remained the right framework for that purpose.
Partnership and mutual accountability need to be
translated into concrete actions and must be extended
to all areas, including aid flows, human rights and
public financial management.
Somalis need to see the coordination and financing
mechanisms established in 2014 deliver in 2015.
Jointly agreed sectoral flagship programmes must be
funded and implemented. I appeal to Member States
and other partners to contribute to the United Nations
Multi-partner Trust Fund.
Somalis also need to see an improvement in human
rights and the protection of women and children this
year. I welcome Somalia’s recent ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. We must also
build the key institutions, particularly the national
Human Rights Commission. Promoting and protecting
human rights must underpin and become a core part
of what existing federal and sub-federal institutions
deliver.
Meanwhile, we must not be complacent about the
humanitarian situation. In 2014, thanks to early warning

4/8

04/02/2015

and early action, we were able to prevent a deterioration
of one of the most dire and enduring humanitarian crises
in the world. But Somalia is still teetering on the edge.
In 2015, we must see concerted action by the Federal
Government and international partners to pull it back
from the brink. That means both an ongoing life-saving
emergency response and implementing longer-term,
durable solutions.
The year 2014 saw important progress in key areas:
the campaign against Al-Shabaab, the State-formation
process and the establishment of some key institutions.
That progress was the result of partnership among
Somalis and between Somalis and the international
community. I am heartened that international partners
remain united and committed to peace, security and
development in Somalia.
Over the past four months, Somalia’s increasingly
secure return to the community of nations has been
marked by an unprecedented series of high-level
visits, including by the Secretary-General, along with
the Presidents of the World Bank and the Islamic
Development Bank; the AU Commissioner for Peace
and Security; the Secretary-General and representative
of the League of Arab States; and, most recently, the
Turkish President. The IGAD Council of Ministers
meeting in Mogadishu on 10 January 2015, which was
the first since 1985, was a major sign of commitment
and confidence. I welcome the recommendation to hold
an IGAD summit in Mogadishu in 2015. It is clear that
peace and security in Somalia matters to the region,
Africa and the world.
Despite all the bumps in the road, I still get a
palpable sense from Somalis I meet across the country
that progress is both urgent and possible. We now
have more work to do this year than last. The Somali
Compact and Vision 2016 remain the right frameworks.
The High-level Partnership Forum meeting planned
for May in Mogadishu will be a critical opportunity to
adjust our plans, if necessary, to meet our targets by
September 2016.
For Somalis to have lasting peace, they need to
build a sustainable and inclusive State. Politics this
year must be more inclusive than it was last year,
at both the national and regional levels. The main
responsibility lies with Somali political leaders in and
outside Government, in the regions and in Mogadishu.
I pay tribute to their hard work and daily courage. The
United Nations and other international partners stand
firm in our own commitment. I remain inspired by the
15-03031

04/02/2015

The situation in Somalia

dedication and bravery of the United Nations family in
Somalia, and I thank the Council for its unflinching
support.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Kay
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sidikou.
Mr. Sidikou: First, let me apologize, Mr. President,
for speaking to the Security Council by videoteleconference. I would have preferred to attend this
important Security Council meeting in person, but, as
my colleague and good friend Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Kay has just stated,
there is a critical political activity in progress, namely
the constitution of a Cabinet of Ministers, which entails
real-time diplomatic and political facilitation on our
part. Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kay and I therefore thought it prudent that, in the spirit
of our growing partnership and collaboration, there
was the need for one of us to remain in Mogadishu to
support our Somali brothers and sisters as they seek to
have the list of Cabinet Ministers-designates endorsed
by the Federal Parliament.
As the Council is well aware, in 2014, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Army launched two successful offensives,
Operation Eagle and Operation Indian Ocean, resulting
in the recovery of 16 towns from Al-Shabaab. Beyond
recovering those towns and liberating the population
from Al-Shabaab’s tyranny, our joint AMISOM and
Somali National Army military campaigns have
also opened up space for political activities outside
Mogadishu. The regional States-formation process is
progressing well, as Mr. Kay just mentioned. Dialogue
and local reconciliation efforts are under way in many of
those recovered areas despite some intermittent violent
inter-clan conflict. The need, therefore, to support
the Somali political and traditional leadership at both
the federal and regional levels as the political process
enters an even more sensitive stage, which includes the
constitution-making process and the elections, cannot
be overemphasized.
While we anticipate that the conventional phase
of military operations against Al-Shabaab will be
largely completed by the end of this year, we cannot
claim that Al-Shabaab will thus have been defeated. As
predicted, Al-Shabaab has and will continue to resort
to asymmetric attacks. They will continue to seek to
disrupt our main supply routes and step up attacks

S/PV.7375

in the subregion. The Al-Shabaab of today is not the
Al-Shabaab of yesterday. We must therefore respond to
this new reality accordingly. We simply cannot continue
to do business as usual. Yes, we have achieved a lot, but
we can do better and achieve even more.
It is in that regard that, early this year, AMISOM
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
held a retreat in Kampala with the Federal Government
of Somalia and our partners to reconsider how we are
doing business. At the end of the retreat, we prioritized
the following actions in addition to continued efforts to
degrade the capabilities of Al-Shabaab: first, the urgent
need to support the rebuilding of the Somali National
Army through the organization and integration of local
forces while taking into account their sustainability;
secondly, the need to enhance support for effective
defence and security services in Somalia and to
focus on community-centred approaches to safety
and security, including community policing; thirdly,
the need to focus on ensuring sustained access to the
recovered areas by securing the main supply routes as
a key priority; and, fourthly, the need to ensure that all
our operations are fully compliant with applicable and
relevant international human rights and humanitarian
law standards, in line with the Secretary-General’s
human rights due diligence policy. We have also
realized that we need to reconfigure the Mission and
resource it appropriately to be able to achieve these
priorities.
Using our experience so far in the recovered
areas, we have been able to define the critically
required resources, including engineering, medical and
civilian-military cooperation capabilities. With these
capabilities, our military units will carry out basic
social service support to local government authorities
that will both facilitate the restoration of governance
and also win the population. I believe also that our
policing efforts have to now involve more community
policing. This is critical as we seek to support the
Government in realizing the Vision 2016 agenda and
the peacebuilding and State-building goals outlined in
the New Deal Compact.
In this phase, there is an extremely urgent need
for the accelerated development of the Somali security
forces to continue enabling stabilization efforts and to
avoid reversals of the gains that have been made to date.
The integration of militia and the standing up of the
Somali National Army requires the concerted efforts of
all partners rallying behind a Somali-led process. Let

15-030315/8

S/PV.7375

The situation in Somalia

me seize this opportunity to thank the Security Council
for the unprecedented support provided to the Somali
National Army. The provision of non-lethal support,
as authorized by the Security Council, has contributed
significantly to enhancing the operational effectiveness
of the Somali National Army.
In the eyes of ordinary Somalis, liberation from
Al-Shabaab will only translate into peace if and when
they begin to see its dividends. The Government, with
the support of the international community, has to
redouble its efforts to provide basic services to the areas
under its control. We need to provide food, sanitation
and clean drinking water. We need to rehabilitate
medical facilities and educational institutions. We need
to generate employment for the Somali youth in order
to wean them away from the conflict and divert their
energies towards more productive activities.
Clearly, our political or military approaches
can fully succeed only if they are underpinned by
a reconstruction and development plan to support
them. The Somali business community and diaspora
are vibrant, contributing at least $1 billion dollars to
Somalia in remittances. Their involvement and support
is critical as Somalia moves into a post-war economy.
That is why we are supporting the Government to
engage the Somali diaspora to help generate more
economic activities in Somalia and to contribute to
early recovery activities.
Please allow me to thank all stakeholders and
partners of Somalia, including the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the European Union, the
League of Arab States and individual Member States for
their continuing support to the Federal Government of
Somalia and to the African Union. I wish to encourage
all of us to continue in this partnership to achieve
peace, stability, recovery and development in Somalia.
As we continue to work more closely, we will become
more effective on the ground. This is what ultimately
will also enhance the integrity of the international
community as an honest broker in the peace process
for Somalia.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Sidikou for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Kullane (Somalia): I thank the Council for the
opportunity to address it today on behalf of the Federal
Government of Somalia.

6/8

04/02/2015

I acknowledge the statements provided to the Security
Council by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Nicholas Kay and Ambassador Sidikou of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
The Federal Government remains appreciative of the
support for political progress and stability provided by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
as well as the support provided by AMISOM, which is
a backbone for Somalia at the moment.
There can be no escaping the fact that Somalia has
had an eventful few months across the spectrum in terms
of politics, security and development. Commentary
on Somalia has focused on political instability and
disunity for the past few months. We are hopeful that
the political situation is fast approaching resolution.
The new Council of Ministers was announced by Prime
Minister Sharmake on 27 January. It will be presented
to Parliament for a vote on Monday, 9 February.
While there can be no denying that the political
instability has tested the patience of all domestically
and internationally, it would be wrong to presume that
this has completely stifled all progress. It has made
progress more difficult, but not impossible. In fact,
while political stability and unity is, of course, optimal,
it is the lack of capacity of the federal institutions that is
the more pressing issue faced by Somalia. Somalia is not
alone in facing political instability, but other countries
weather political storms because they have robust
institutions in place that continue with the business of
the Government, despite politicians. Somalia does not
have this luxury. If our political situation is exposed,
then our institutions are also exposed. The President
and Prime Minister have called attention to this and
encouraged the new Council of Ministers to exercise
restraint in replacing civil servants within ministries,
instead advocating that senior civil servants, if they
have been performing, remain in their positions so that
the Government work continues apace.
Despite the situation, progress has been made. The
legal framework required for the implementation of
Vision 2016 advanced; the Independent Constitutional
Review and Implementation Commission law was
passed by the Council of Ministers and endorsed by
the Parliament; and the Executive Commission was
appointed by the Speaker. The Parliament passed the
Boundaries and Federation Commission law and the
decree for its establishment was signed by the President
on 31 December 2014. It is the intent that several other

15-03031

04/02/2015

The situation in Somalia

outstanding pieces of legislation, including the National
Independent Electoral Commission law, the Human
Rights Commission and the Political Parties Law, will
be approved by the Parliament in this sitting.
The process of federation continues with improved
cooperation with Puntland and the Interim Juba
Administration and the agreements reached for the
establishment of the south-west and central interim
regional administrations. Technical committees are in
the early stages of establishment and discussions are
ongoing for the establishment of an interim regional
administration covering the remaining southern and
central regions of Somalia.
District-level administrations are being established.
Following the Local Governance law, interim and
permanent administrations are being established in
several districts and caretaker administrations have
been put in place in all recovered districts. Gains made
are fragile and will need consolidation to become
sustainable. The formalization of the Government
system must now extend outward to regional-level
governments. This process must be overseen by the
centre, but be responsive to local demand and mindful
of local contexts. Time must be allowed for change to
take root and due process to be followed by all agents
of change.
Accompanying these political and governance
processes, reconciliation activities are taking place,
ranging from social to civic dialogues and political
reconciliation activities at the district and national
levels. Reconciliation conferences have been initiated
in Kismaayo and Baidoa, and there is a commitment
to holding one such conference in each newly formed
interim regional administration. The political progress
in reaching out to the regions is commendable. Making
progress on the Somali Compact objectives hinges on
the resolution of political challenges, with ongoing
close and regular monitoring required. It was agreed
at the High-level Partnership Forum in Copenhagen
that the political progress would be reviewed within six
months.
Somalia signed the Convention for the Rights of the
Child in January, making the United States and South
Sudan the only remaining countries in the world not to
have signed. The Federal Government will now work
on drafting and adopting child-friendly policies and
systems, and implementing measures to target child
survival, development, participation and protection,

S/PV.7375

and provide regular reports on its progress to the
Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Security remains critical for political, social and
economic progress. Establishing capable, accountable
and inclusive Somali security institutions remains vital.
The integration of existing security forces into a cohesive
structure is a priority that goes hand in hand with the
progress on political inclusiveness. The integration of
local armed groups into the Somali National Army
and the federal and regional security structures is a
critical part of the political benchmark and constitutes
a cornerstone of a mutual accountability framework
between the federal Government and the states. There
has been progress on the Federal Government’s road
map on the integration of forces and an agreement to
rapidly develop a concept note and detailed plan setting
out integration principles.
The Somali National Army, in joint operations with
the African Union Mission in Somalia, has successfully
accomplished two joint offensive operations, recovering
80 per cent of southern and central regions of Somalia
from Al-Shabaab. The Government’s policy of offering
amnesty for defections from Al-Shabaab extremist
groups was highly effective, with a steady stream of foot
soldiers defecting. Several high-value defections were
also recorded — the senior Al-Shabaab commander,
Sheikh Mohamed Said Mohamed, “Atom”; Zakariya
Ismail Ahmed Hersi; and the commander Hussein
Dhubi. We acknowledge the cooperation of the Security
Council in delisting those individuals from the United
Nations Sanctions List.
Progress has been made in meeting the requirements
of the resolution 2142 (2014). Weapons and ammunition
management has progressed with the establishment of
a defined institutional framework for oversight. The
Somali Federal Government also signed a maritime
interdiction letter in compliance with the Security
Council’s most recent resolution on the matter.
We acknowledge the constituting of the new United
Nations Monitoring Group and we look forward to
establishing a respectful, robust professional working
relationship with it. To that end, we remind the Council
of our joint commitment to convening twice-yearly
meetings to discuss the progress made in Somalia
within the framework of the Committee’s guidelines
for the conduct of its work, with the goal of improving
the effectiveness of our Government’s engagement with
the Monitoring Group, the Security Council and the

15-030317/8

S/PV.7375

The situation in Somalia

Sanctions Committee. The last such meeting was held
in August 2014 in Mogadishu. We therefore urge the
Council to consider convening a meeting in Mogadishu
soon.
The President has been clear that 2015 must be the
year for delivery. Somalia is at a critical juncture in its
efforts to achieve security and stability. We are winning
the war but must win the peace. As we look towards to
the next two years, we must urgently deliver on priority
legislation, establish commissions and ensure the

8/8

04/02/2015

public consultations that will enable us to achieve the
three intertwined strands of the Vision 2016.
The Federal Government of Somalia appreciates
the Council’s consideration of the matters raised today.
I am available for any questions the Council may have.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

15-03031
