141

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Recalling its resolutions 32/ I 60 of 19 December 1977
and 33/197 of 29 January 1979 concerning the Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa and, in this regard,
noting Lesotho's geopolitical situation, which necessitates
the urgent development of air and telecommunication
links with neighbouring countries of Africa and the rest of
the world,
Taking account of Lesotho's need for a national network
of roads, both for its planned social and economic development and to lessen its dependence on the South African
network, to reach various regions of the country affected
by the imposition of travel restrictions by South Africa,
Taking note of Lesotho's special problems associated
with the employment of large numbers of its able-bodied
men in South Africa,
Taking note also of the priority which the Government
of Lesotho has accorded to the problem of absorbing into
the economy the young generation, as well as migrant
workers returning from South Africa,
Welcoming the action taken by the Government of
Lesotho to make more effective use of women in the development process by promoting their participation in the
economic, social and cultural life of the country,
Taking account also of Lesotho's position as a least
developed, most seriously affected and land-locked country,
Recalling its resolution 32/98, in which it, inter alia, recognized that the continuing influx of refugees from South
Africa imposed an additional burden on Lesotho,
l. Expresses its concern at the difficulties that confront
the Government of Lesotho as a result of its decision not
to recognize the so-called independent Transkei, and of its
rejection of apartheid and acceptance of refugees from
apartheid oppression;
2. Endorses fully the assessment of the situation contained in the report of the mission to Lesotho annexed to
the report of the Secretary-General; 82
3. Takes note of the requirements of Lesotho, as described in the report of the mission to Lesotho, including
initial projects presented by the Government of Lesotho to
the round-table conference of donors held in Lesotho from
14 to 17 May 1984;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the measures he has taken to organize an international
programme of economic assistance for Lesotho;
5. Notes with appreciation the response made thus far
by the international community to the special programme
of economic assistance for Lesotho, which has enabled it
to proceed with the implementation of parts of the recommended programme;
6. Reiterates its appeal to Member States, regional and
interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide financial, material and technical assistance to Lesotho for the implementation of the projects
identified in the report of the mission to Lesotho;
7. Calls upon Member States and the appropriate
agencies, organizations and financial institutions to provide assistance to Lesotho so as to enable it to achieve a
greater degree of self-sufficiency in food production;
8. Also calls upon Member States to give all possible
assistance to Lesotho to ensure an adequate and regular
supply of oil to meet its national requirements;
9. Further calls upon Member States to assist Lesotho
in developing its internal road and air systems and its air
communication with the rest of the world:.
I 0. Commends the efforts of the Government of
Lesotho to integrate women more fully into development

efforts and requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the Government on the type and amount of assistance it
will require to achieve this objective;
11. Draws the attentwn of the international community to the round-table conference of donors held in
Lesotho from 14 to 17 May 1984 and urges Member States
and the appropriate agencies and organizations to provide
assistance to Lesotho in accordance with the outcome of
that meeting;
12. Also draws the attention of the international community to the special account which was established at
United Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 407 ( 1977),
for the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Lesotho;
13. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring further to the attention
of their governing bodies the special needs of Lesotho and
to report to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1985 on the
steps they have taken;
14. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to cooperate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an
effective international programme of assistance to Lesotho
and to report periodically to him on the steps they have
taken and the resources they have made available to assist
that country;
15. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme offinancial, technical
and material assistance to Lesotho;
(b) To consult with the Government of Lesotho on the
question of migrant workers returning from South Africa
and to report on the type of assistance which the Government requires in order to establish labour-intensive projects to deal with their absorption into the economy;

(c) To keep the situation in Lesotho under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1985, of the current status of
the special programme of economic assistance for Lesotho;
(d) To report on the progress made in the economic
situation of Lesotho and in organizing and implementing
the special programme of economic assistance for that
country in time for the matter to be considered by the
General Assembly at its fortieth session.

103rd plenary meeting
17 December /984

39/184. Assistance to Democratic Yemen
The General Assembl}.
Recalling its resolution 38/206 of 20 December 1983
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1982/6 of 28
April 1982 and 1982/59 of 30 July 1982 concerning the
extensive devastation caused by the heavy floods in Democratic Yemen,
Reca!h ng also resolution 107 (IX) of 11 May 1982 of the

142

General Assembly - Thirty-ninth Session

Economic Commission for Western Asia, 81 in which the
Commission called for the urgent establishment of a programme for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
flood-stricken areas of Democratic Yemen.
Having considered the report prepared by the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator on the
extent and nature of the damage caused by the floods, 84
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Democratic Yemen. 8 '
Recognizing that Democratic Yemen. as one of the least
developed countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden of rehabilitation and reconstruction of the affected
areas,
Recognizing also the efforts made by Democratic Yemen to alleviate the suffering of the victims of the floods.
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken regarding assistance to Democratic Yemen;
2. Expresses its gratitude to those States and international, regional and intergovernmental organizations that
have provided assistance to Democratic Yemen;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
mobilize the necessary resources for an effective, comprehensive programme of financial, technical and material
assistance to Democratic Yemen in order to help mitigate
the damage inflicted on it and implement its rehabilitation
and reconstruction plans;
4. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously
through bilateral or multilateral channels to the reconstruction and development process in Democratic Yemen:
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system - in particular the
United Nations Development Programme. the World
Bank, the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International
Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, the United Nations Children's Fund and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization to maintain and expand their programmes of assistance to
Democratic Yemen and to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective programme of
assistance to that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to continue their assistance to the development requirements of Democratic Yemen;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the situation
in Democratic Yemen under review and to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
l03rd plenary meeting
/7 December 1984

39/185. Special economic assistance to Benin
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 35/88 of 5 December 1980, 36;
208 of 17 December I 98 I. 37 /I 5 I of I 7 December 1982
and 38/210 of 20 December 1983, in which it appealed to
the international community to provide effective and continuous financial, material and technical assistance to Ben83 See Official Records of the 1,·co1Jomu and Soual Council. /'Jill. Supplement No. 12 (E/ 1982/22), chap I
84See E/ECWA/156.
85 A/391381.

in so as to help that country overcome its financial and
economic difficulties,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 419 ( 1977) of
24 November 1977, in which the Council appealed to all
States and all appropriate international organizations,
including the United Nations and its specialized agencies,
to assist Benin.
Having heard the statement made by the representative
of Benin on 5 November 1984,86 in which he described the
serious economic and financial situation of his country and
the action taken hy his Government to tackle these difficulties.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Benin, 87
Noting from the report that, in spite of various
unfavourable factors, Benin continues to achieve some
positive results in its development efforts thanks to the
action taken by the Government and the assistance provided by the international community,
Deeply concerned, nevertheless, by the fact that Benin
continues to experience serious economic and financial
difficulties, characterized by a marked balance-of-payments disequilibrium, heavy burdens of its external debt
and a lack of resources to implement its planned economic
and social development programme,
Noting also that the persisting unfavourable climatic
conditions in the coastal and northern regions of Benin
have led to losses in agricultural and livestock production,
Noting that a round-table conference of partners in the
economic and social development of Benin was held at
Cotonou in March 1983 and that the Government took
steps to organize the follow-up of its results,
Taking into consideration the objectives of Benin's
national development plan for 1983-1987,88
Having noted the efforts made by the Government of
Benin to mobilize international support for the country's
development plan by organizing the round-table conference held at Cotonou in March 1983 with the assistance
of the United Nations Development Programme,
Considering that Benin is one of the least developed
countries,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to organize and mobilize support
for the international programme of economic assistance to
Benin;
2. Takes note of the report of the review mission sent
to Benin in June 1984; 89
3. Notes with satisfaction the interest and support
which the participants in the round-table conference have
shown for Benin's development plan;
4. Expresses Its appreciation for the assistance already
provided or pledged to Benin by Member States, United
Nations bodies and regional, interregional and intergovernmental organizations;
5. Appeals to Member States, international financial
institutions, the specialized agencies and other United
Nations bodies to respond generously and urgently to the
needs of Benin as set forth in that country's development
plan for 1983-1987;
6. Requests the appropriate programmes and organizatwns of the United Nations system - in particular the
86 Sec Offinal Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session.
Second Committee, 35th meeting. paras. 13-16.
s7 A'39/383.
88 fh,d. annex, sect V.
s 9 lh1d .. annex.
