A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/125
23 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 112 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/644/Add.2)]
52/125. Strengthening of the rule of law
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by adopting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 Member States have pledged
themselves to achieve, in cooperation with the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Firmly convinced that the rule of law is an essential factor in the protection of human rights, as
stressed in the Declaration, and should continue to attract the attention of the international community,
Convinced that, through their own national legal and judicial systems, States must provide appropriate
civil, criminal and administrative remedies for violations of human rights,
Recognizing the importance of the role that can be played by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in supporting national efforts to strengthen the institutions of the rule
of law,
Bearing in mind that, in its resolution 48/141 of 20 December 1993, the General Assembly entrusted
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights with, inter alia, providing advisory services
and technical and financial assistance in the field of human rights, enhancing international cooperation

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

98-76897

/...

A/RES/52/125
Page 2

for the promotion and protection of all human rights and coordinating human rights activities throughout
the United Nations system,
Recalling the recommendation of the World Conference on Human Rights, which was held at Vienna
from 14 to 25 June 1993, that a comprehensive programme be established within the United Nations with
a view to helping States in the task of building and strengthening adequate national structures that have
a direct impact on the overall observance of human rights and the maintenance of the rule of law,2
Recalling also its resolution 51/96 of 12 December 1996, and taking note of Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1997/48 of 11 April 1997,3
1.

Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;4

2. Praises the efforts made by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to accomplish its ever-increasing tasks with the limited financial and personnel resources at its
disposal;
3. Expresses its deep concern at the scarcity of means at the disposal of the Office of the High
Commissioner for the fulfilment of its tasks;
4. Notes that the United Nations Programme of Advisory Services and Technical Assistance in the
Field of Human Rights does not have sufficient funds to provide any substantial financial assistance to
national projects that have a direct impact on the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the
rule of law in countries that are committed to those ends but that face economic hardship;
5. Affirms that the Office of the High Commissioner remains the focal point for coordinating
system-wide attention on human rights, democracy and the rule of law;
6. Welcomes the deepening of the ongoing dialogue initiated by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights with other relevant bodies and programmes of the United Nations
system, with a view to enhancing system-wide coordination of assistance in human rights, democracy and
the rule of law;
7. Encourages the High Commissioner to continue this dialogue, taking into account the need to
explore new synergies with other organs and agencies of the United Nations system with a view to
obtaining increased financial assistance for human rights and the rule of law;
8. Also encourages the High Commissioner to continue to explore the possibility of further contact
with and support of financial institutions, acting within their mandates, with a view to obtaining technical
and financial means to strengthen the capacity of the Office of the High Commissioner to provide

2

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 69.

3

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1997, Supplement No. 3 (E/1997/23),
chap. II, sect. A.
4

A/52/475.

98-76897

/...

A/RES/52/125
Page 3

assistance to national projects aiming at the realization of human rights and the maintenance of the rule
of law;
9. Requests the High Commissioner to accord high priority to the technical cooperation activities
undertaken by the Office of the High Commissioner with regard to the rule of law;
10. Takes note with appreciation of the proposal contained in the report of the Secretary-General
that an analysis be undertaken of technical cooperation provided by the United Nations in the field of
human rights with the aim of formulating recommendations for inter-agency coordination, funding and
allocation of responsibilities in order to improve efficiency and complementarity of action concerning,
inter alia, assistance to States in strengthening the rule of law;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third
session on the results of the contacts established in accordance with the present resolution, as well as on
any other developments pertaining to the implementation of the above-mentioned recommendation of the
World Conference on Human Rights.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
