S/PV.7738

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7738

th meeting
Friday, 15 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Eleventh report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2016/590)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution
2233 (2015) (S/2016/592)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-21989 (E)
*1621989*

S/PV.7738

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of the victims of the terrorist
attack in Nice
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of the
members of the Security Council Security, I would like
to condemn in the strongest terms the cowardly and
barbaric terrorist attack that took place in Nice, France,
on the evening of 14 July, the French national holiday,
during which more than 80 innocent people, including
many children, were killed and dozens wounded. I also
want to express my sincere condolences to the families
of the victims and my deepest sympathies to the injured,
as well as strong solidarity with the French people.
(spoke in English)
This and other recent attacks, including the terrorist
attacks this month in Bangladesh, Iraq and Saudi
Arabia, have affected countries and people from all
over the world. The members of the Security Council
express their deep sympathy and condolences to the
families of the victims, as well as to the peoples and the
Governments of the countries affected.
I now invite Council members to rise to observe a
minute of silence in tribute to the memory of the victims.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Eleventh report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2016/590)
Fourth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2233
(2015) (S/2016/592)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
2/7

15/07/2016

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/590, which contains the eleventh
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well
as to document S/2016/592, which contains the fourth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
7 of resolution 2233 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: With a deep feeling of sorrow, I join the
Security Council in strongly condemning the terrorist
attack that took place yesterday in Nice. I express my
deepest sympathies and condolences to the families
of the victims and to the Government and the people
of France.
The recent strategic victories against the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Fallujah and
Qayyarah and the progress made in cutting off ISIL
forces in Hawjia have once again proved that Iraqis
are capable of defeating Da’esh, with support from
the international community. Following the liberation
of Fallujah, Prime Minister Al Abadi sent senior
delegations to provide briefings on Iraq’s progress
against Da’esh to a number of States, notably to the
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, with
an invitation to join forces in the fight against this
increasingly global threat to international peace and
security. The need for cooperation and mutual support
has never been more apparent. As you mentioned,
Mr. President, hundreds of civilians were recently
killed in a spate of attacks attributed to ISIL in Iraq,
Turkey, Bangladesh and Saudi Arabia.
Progress against Da’esh has now put liberation of
Mosul firmly on the agenda. As preparations continue,
with increased focus and acceleration, a point of
importance for us is that Prime Minister Al Abadi has
prioritized United Nations-supported humanitarian
operations and has requested the international
community to urgently provide the necessary
financing. Together with planning the military aspects,
the Government and the local actors need to accelerate
political planning for the day after the liberation, while
addressing issues of governance, law and order and
political management of Mosul and the rest of Ninewah
governorate. I note the increased coordination between
Baghdad and Erbil and encourage continued efforts
to that end. Also, any international assistance must
16-21989

15/07/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.7738

be fully coordinated with the Government of Iraq and
must respect the principle of the sovereignty of Iraq.

to safety under some of the most difficult and perilous
conditions imaginable. That is also a political statement.

On 28 June, the Federal Supreme Court ruled
that the parliamentary sessions of 14 and 26 April
were nullified. That decision means that the situation
reverts to the pre-14 April status quo, with Speaker
Al-Jubouri maintaining his position, while the five
ministerial appointments of the 26 April session need
to be revisited. The Parliament returned from recess
and held plenary sessions on 12 and 13 July.

Notwithstanding all of that, since the announcement
of the Fallujah military operation, on 22 May, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has
received credible reports of human rights violations and
crimes, including torture and killings, disappearances
and other allegations of mistreatment of those detained,
committed by elements of the popular mobilization
forces and the Iraqi security forces operating in the
Fallujah area, notably during the initial phases of
the operation. For example, UNAMI has registered
statements supporting claims that 95 men remain
unaccounted for after they were intercepted by forces
affiliated to popular mobilization forces while leaving
their homes in Al-Sejar area on 25 May, while another
643, men including boys, remain missing since 5 June
after they were intercepted by mobilization-affiliated
forces while leaving Saqlawiyah.

Also today, tens of thousands supporters of
Muqtada al-Sadr demonstrated in Baghdad in support of
reforms and security and against corruption. In the past
weeks, protests against the Government also emerged
in response to the deteriorated security situation in
Baghdad in the wake of terrorist attacks — notably
in Karrada on 3 July, which victimized hundreds of
civilians, a barbaric act that all of us condemned in
strongest possible terms. Of concern are repeated calls,
supported by many politicians, to conduct retaliatory
executions of those convicted of terrorist acts.
The need for Iraqi political and community
leaders, in particular the Council of Representatives,
to prioritize reconciliation based on a single vision and
coordinated approach remains a matter of considerable
urgency to ensure that the post-Da’esh phase in Iraq’s
history be more stable, secure and prosperous than in
the past. Sustainable peace and security can be achieved
only with a historic compromise that puts an end to the
divisive policies of intolerance, inequality and political
and social injustice.
I continue to call on the Government to also take
specific steps to promote women’s rights and their
participation in politics and national reconciliation
processes as part of the reform process, as well as to
support the victims of conflict-based sexual violence
more effectively.
In the Fallujah operation, the Government gave
unprecedented priority to protecting the lives and
dignity of civilians. The military assisted civilians
in identifying safe escape routes and facilitated the
extraction of civilians from war zones. A week into
the operation, the Prime Minister announced that the
battle would be slowed to better ensure the safety of
civilians trapped inside the city and used by ISIL as
human shields. That made a difference. Nearly 90,000
civilians took the decision to leave, and have made it

On 6 June, Prime Minister Al Abadi announced
the setting up of a committee to investigate violations
and crimes. In my meeting with Mr. Al Abadi last
Monday, I reiterated the message delivered to the Prime
Minister by the Secretary-General in his telephone call
on 26 June, namely, that it was imperative that the
committee took swift action to identify the whereabouts
of the missing men and boys and to secure their safe
release or transfer to lawful Government authorities.
The authorities must hold accountable any individual
who may have been responsible for any violations
that have been committed. Also, those lessons from
Fallujah shall be taken into account while planning
liberation of Mosul.
A newly published UNICEF report reveals that the
number of children in danger of death, injury, sexual
violence, abduction or recruitment into armed groups
in Iraq increased by 1.3 million in 18 months. I urge
the Government of Iraq to establish as soon as possible
a high-level inter-ministerial committee to ensure
coordination and dialogue between the Government of
Iraq and the United Nations on all issues with regard to
grave violations of children’s rights.
The retaking of Fallujah should not cast doubt on
the remaining ability of ISIL to conduct devastating
attacks in different areas of the country, despite its
consistent losses of manpower, command structure,
morale, local support and territory. While the Dae’sh’s
governance project in Iraq is collapsing, the group has

16-219893/7

S/PV.7738

The situation concerning Iraq

increasingly resorted to brutal insurgency tactics using
suicide bombers. The pattern of reinvigorated urban
terrorism with a sectarian focus, notably the attacks
against civilian targets and infrastructure in Baghdad, is
indicative of that trend. Luckily, so far, they have failed
in their efforts to re-ignite sectarian confrontation.
Providing and guaranteeing law and order and security
to all citizens of Iraq is a top responsibility of the
respective State organs and institutions and must remain
their prerogative. With the progress in fighting Da’esh,
reforming Iraqi security institutions and ensuring that
the State has full control of all armed groups becomes
a priority.
The humanitarian situation has deteriorated further
since the start of the military operation for Fallujah,
with 640,000 persons currently displaced persons
in Anbar governorate alone. Nationwide, more than
10 million Iraqis require some form of humanitarian
assistance, including 3.4 million people who have been
displaced since the rise of ISIL in 2014. Although the
humanitarian appeal for 2016 requested $861 million,
as I brief the Council today it is only funded at
38 per cent. A reallocation of existing resources is
under way, but more funding is urgently needed, not
only for the current emergency response but also for
the anticipated requirements arising from the Mosul
liberation campaign, where the humanitarian effort
could cost as much as $1 billion. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs estimates
that the Mosul operation will be the largest and most
sensitive humanitarian crisis in the world in 2016, and
it is vital that resources are made available now to make
timely preparations possible.
The impact of underfunding on the crisis in Iraq
is significant. The patience of host communities is
disappearing and the distrust in the Government is
growing. Prospects for stability and reconciliation
after ISIL are put at risk. The United Nations efforts
to help stabilize areas newly liberated from ISIL are
expanding. That includes Ramadi, and will also soon
include Fallujah. Stabilization efforts can only expand
further after the threat of improvised explosive devices
and the explosive remnants of war has been addressed.
The United Nations Mine Action Service is working in
Iraq with partners to address explosive contamination.
It also urgently requires financing in the amount of a
minimum of $300 million over the next three years.
With regard to the Kuwaiti file, I would like
to welcome the new dynamics, determination and
4/7

15/07/2016

political will to achieve results that the Iraqi Ministry
of Defence has shown since taking over the technical
overview of the missing Kuwaiti persons dossier. New
momentum was also evident in the efforts of the Iraqi
Ministry for Foreign Affairs to locate missing Kuwaiti
property. Thousands of Kuwaiti books are being
prepared for official handover to the Government of
Kuwait. During his recent visit to Kuwait on 26 June,
the Secretary-General, in his meeting with the Amir
of the State of Kuwait, commended Kuwait for its
consistent support for Iraq, while he reconfirmed the
United Nations continuing resolve to see progress on
the file. The Government of Iraq, in turn, has to abide
by its international obligations and strive to achieve
concrete results on this very important matter.
The world must recognize that Iraq requires more,
not less, international support at this critical juncture.
The pledging conference organized in support of Iraq
to be held in Washington, D.C., on 20 July is a sign of
the international community’s continued commitment
to a stable and peaceful Iraq and its recognition of
the sacrifices that Iraq and its people bear in fighting
the Da’esh terrorist group. While the international
community is ready to offer assistance, Iraqis must
implement substantive reforms, in particular economic,
institutional and anti-corruption reforms that will put
their country on the road to recovery and improve the
lives of Iraqis. People demand genuine change.
The President: I thank Mr. Kubiš for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Japan on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and today we indeed see that Japan has made a great
deal of effort in organizing today’s meeting. I also want
to thank France for the work it carried out during its
presidency of the Security Council.
On behalf of my delegation, I also want to express
our sincerest condolences to the French people
following the abominable terrorist attack that took
place yesterday, which resulted in the deaths of a large
number of civilians who were celebrating the 14 July
French national holidayin the city of Nice in the south
of France. We wish to express our sincerest sympathies
to the families of the victims, and we pray to God the
Almighty for the recovery and health of those who
were injured. The Iraqi Government wishes to express
sympathy to the Government and the people of France
16-21989

15/07/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

in the fight against terrorism, takfirism and all forms
of extremism.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and his team for
all the assistance provided through the work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
both Baghad and New York. I thank him for his very
productive efforts.
The Iraqi Government is making every possible
effort to fight terrorism, notably in improving the
capacities of the security forces and regaining all the
territories that were only recently taken by Da’esh
terrorist gangs. That is happening thanks to the
command and supervision of the General Commander
of the Armed Forces, the Prime Minister of Iraq. My
Government acknowledges that the Iraqi army and
security services have truly succeeded in liberating the
city of Fallujah, whereby we have been able to regain
control of a number of villages and neighbourhoods
in the city and consequently recover the city centre,
formerly under the control of Da’esh. We continue in
our efforts to allow internally displaced persons to
return safely to their cities, in particular through our
work in removing anti-personnel mines.
Over the past several weeks, we have fought to
liberate Rutbah city, the town of Baghdadi and the road
between Haditha and Heet, breaking the siege imposed
on Haditha since 2014. We also liberated city of Trebil
on the border between Iraq and Jordan. That city will
be soon be reopened, as well as the points of entry that
will allow refugees to return home. We will be able to
recommence trade between the two brotherly countries
of Jordan and Iraq.
Through the assistance of the international
coalition, the Iraqi Government was able to liberate
approximately 60 per cent of territory formerly under
the control of Da’esh terrorist groups. We are also
carrying out preparatory efforts to liberating Mosul.
As the Council is aware, certain operations are already
under way under the supervision of the Joint Operations
Command, and several villages have already been
retaken in the first phase.
The Government has already put in place a number
of plans to ensure stability in the various areas that
have been liberated. In particular, the Government
has created stability by providing basic services for
the population in general and security services for
displaced citizens who seek to a safe return to their

S/PV.7738

places of origin. Thanks to the assistance of the
international coalition and funds from United Nations
Development Programme, we have been able to make
progress towards building a more stable Iraq.
More than 700,000 Iraqis have returned to their
homes in zones liberated from Da’esh and other terrorist
groups. Once again, thanks to significant financial
resources provided by the international coalition, we
have been able to ensure the security of those areas
before displaced persons had begun to return. We have
also been able to provide basic services to those people
so that they can return to normal life.
Iraq condemns in the strongest possible terms
efforts of some Arab and non-Arab media to manipulate
information on events through a strong sectarian bias in
their reporting. That is exactly what Da’esh has been
trying to do through its policies designed to incite
hatred. Of course, Iraqis opposed the different terrorist
organizations that infiltrated the region, and it was this
Iraqi opposition that led to the liberation of Fallujah
from the hands of Da’esh. The liberation was a victory
for all Iraqis regardless of their community of origin or
religious affiliation.
The liberation of Fallujah allows us to return to a
path of national cohesion. Fallujah is, first and foremost,
an Iraqi city, and the people of Iraq love and respect
that city much more than any of the Da’esh terrorists
do, especially since the citizens of Fallujah saw hunger,
suffering and death when the city was under Da’esh’s
control. It is now time to apply resolution 2178 (2014),
on foreign terrorist fighters, in order to halt the flow
into Iraq of such fighters, who come from more than
120 States Members of the United Nations. We also
need to cut off the sources of financing for these groups,
including the illicit trade in antiquities and Iraqi oil. We
must stop — at the source — logistical aid, medical
assistance and arms from reaching to terrorists.
The Iraqi Government would like to stress the
importance of the commitments that the international
community has made, in particular commitments
made in Security Council resolutions, with respect to
impunity. Some groups associated with Da’esh still
enjoy a certain degree of impunity, while flows of
financial assistance continue to reach them and other
groups associated with Da’esh. Governments of the
world need to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with Iraq in
its fight against terrorism, in particular by providing

16-219895/7

S/PV.7738

The situation concerning Iraq

a firm stance against all groups and entities that are
providing financial assistance to terrorists.
In that regard, the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs
presented an official inquiry to the Government of Saudi
Arabia in order for light to be shed on why Saudi officials
permitted Saudi non-governmental organizations to
send funds to terrorist groups in Iraq under the pretext
that the aid was for the children of Fallujah. We would
recall that Security Council resolutions are legally
binding on all States around the world and that they
are to be respected without exception. That is essential.
There can be no exceptions. The Iraqi Government
asks all of the countries of the world and the relevant
United Nations sanctions committees to respect these
binding decisions, work to limit the terrorist capacities
of Da’esh and cut off all sources of financing that these
terrorist groups enjoy.
In addition, we would like to remind the members of
the Security Council that it is extremely important that
they call on Turkey to withdraw its forces from Iraq.
Turkish forces have violated not just an independent
State’s sovereignty, but also other principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Turkey should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Iraq and refrain from interfering in Iraq’s domestic
affairs. Iraq has not violated the sovereignty or territorial
integrity of Turkey. We call on the Security Council
to order Turkey to immediately withdraw its forces
from Iraq, in particular those that made incursions
into Iraqi territory without obtaining any authorization
whatsoever from the Iraqi Government.
The Government and the people of Iraq would like
to thank all the States members of the international
coalition, in particular the United States of America
and the members of the European Union, as well as all
other countries beyond the international coalition, for
the efforts they have made to date to fight terrorism.
We also thank them for the logistical support they
have extended to Iraqi security forces in the context
of full coordination among forces, which has been
crucial to protecting our sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We recognize in particular the efforts made
to restore stability in the areas retaken from Da’esh by
Iraqi forces.
It is now incumbent upon us to ease the humanitarian
crisis facing all the internally displaced people in Iraq.
We need to mitigate the immediate risks coming from
the presence of mines and explosive devices left behind
6/7

15/07/2016

by Da’esh’s criminal gangs. We must provide the basic
services that people need and create opportunities
for their employment. We are grateful to the United
Nations and its specialized agencies for the efforts
made to provide the Iraqi Government with the support
it needs in addressing the domestic situation. We call
upon all the States of the world to continue financing
these assistance programmes in Iraq.
Iraq is working tirelessly to improve its relations
with Arab countries and other countries in the region.
Proof of this is the improvement in our relationships with
Kuwait, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Iran. We also continue
to maintain relations with the Syrian Government.
The Government of Iraq is committed to making
progress on the issue of the missing Kuwaiti citizens
and archives. Our national committees are working
diligently to determine what happened to the Kuwaiti
reported missing. A technical sub-committee has met,
as has a Tripartite Committee, which recently held its
forty-second meeting, with a view to finding out what
had become of the missing Kuwaitis. On 23 May, a
meeting was held in Kuwait to discuss developments
related to potential burial sites for some of the missing.
Since then, the Iraqi authorities have continued their
exhumation work on remains at 1,300 sites around
Al-Kumaisia, but we have not yet found any evidence
of Kuwaiti bodies at the sites in question. We must
therefore re-evaluate the witness statements received
that attested to the kidnapping of Kuwaitis. We will also
have to re-assess information provided by witnesses at
certain Kuwaiti bases. Announcemts will be placed in
the Kuwaiti media to call for witnesses who may be
able to provide credible information. All of this is with
a view to carrying out furhter exhumation work in
areas identified by the witnesses. To that end, the Iraqi
Defence Ministry has developed a plan for the second
half of this year.
Iraq expresses its profound gratitude to the State of
Kuwait, to the Amir and to the country’s Government and
the people for postponing the payment of compensation
amounting to $4.6 billion until the agreed-upon date of
1 January 2018.
Iraq is committed to protecting and repatriating
the residents of Camp Hurriyah. In that connection, we
express our appreciation for the efforts of Ms. Lute to
find a lasting solution to this issue.
I would like to inform the Security Council of the
desire of the Government of the Republic of Iraq to
16-21989

15/07/2016

The situation concerning Iraq

extend the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq for one year, in line with the statement
made by Prime Minister Al Abadi and the letter
addressed by Foreign Minister Al-Jaafari to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon dated 11 May 2016, and in
accordance with the letter and spirit of the provisions
set out in resolution 1770 (2007).
Finally, we thank Special Representative Ján Kubiš
and his team for their efforts in advising the Iraqi
Government. We appreicate the activities undertaken

S/PV.7738

by UNAMI for a unified and stable Iraq, free from
terrorism. We condemn the killing of a UNAMI staff
member, and we would like to inform the Council that
te competent Iraqi authorities are conducting a thorough
investigation to identify the perpetrators of that crime
in order to bring them to swift justice.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

16-219897/7
