A /70/PV.29

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

29

th plenary meeting
Monday, 12 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 114
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General
for Internal Oversight Services
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/388)
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly, in its resolution 48/218 B, of 29 July 1994,
decided to establish the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, under the authority of the Secretary-General,
the head of which would be at the rank of UnderSecretary-General.
By the same resolution, the Assembly further
decided that the Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services should be an expert in
the fields of accounting, auditing, financial analysis
and investigations, management, law or public
administration. That official should be appointed by
the Secretary-General, following consultations with
Member States, and approved by the General Assembly.
For that purpose, the Secretary-General should appoint
the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight
Services with due regard for geographic rotation and, in
doing so shall be guided by the provisions of paragraph
3 (e) of resolution 46/232, of 2 March 1992, whereby the
Assembly decided in particular that, as a general rule,
no national of a Member State shall succeed a national
of that State in a senior post and that there should be

no monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any State
or group of States. The official should serve for one
fixed term of five years without possibility of renewal
and may be removed by the Secretary-General only for
cause and with the approval of the General Assembly.
In the light of the provisions of resolution 48/218 B,
the Secretary-General proposes to appoint Ms. Heidi
Mendoza as Under-Secretary-General for Internal
Oversight Services for one fixed term of five years,
beginning on 15 November 2015 and ending on
14 November 2020.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to approve that appointment?
It was so decided.
Mr. Thöresson (Sweden): I have the honour today
to speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries, namely,
Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own
country, Sweden.
The Nordic countries warmly welcome the
appointment of Ms. Heidi Mendoza as Under-SecretaryGeneral for Internal Oversight Services. We would like
to congratulate her on her new functions, and we look
forward to working closely with Ms. Mendoza over the
coming five years.
The Nordic countries attach great importance to
the oversight functions at the United Nations. Those
functions are crucial to the whole United Nations system
and to the Member States in ensuring an efficient,
effective, transparent and accountable United Nations.
Over the past few months, we have been concerned

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-30802 (E)

*1530802*

A/70/PV.29

by the negative attention that the Office for Internal
Oversight Services has attracted as a result of the
United Nations handling of the situation in the Central
African Republic. Independence and transparency are
prerequisites for effective oversight. An operationally
independent Office for Internal Oversight Services is
key to fulfilling the many important tasks assigned
to the Office as well as to rebuilding the confidence
among Member States that the Office can play a role
in protecting the integrity of the United Nations and
promoting accountability within the Organization.
On the eve of the United Nations seventieth
anniversary, and with several large transformative
reform initiatives on the table, the importance of
oversight cannot be overestimated. The Nordic
countries are confident that Ms. Mendoza will lead the
Office for Internal Oversight Services effectively and
efficiently through these important times at the United
Nations, and she can count on our full support in that
endeavour.
Ms. Yparraguirre (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes the appointment by the Secretary-General
of Ms. Heidi Mendoza as Under-Secretary-General
for Internal Oversight Services. We would like to
express our deep appreciation for the endorsement of
that appointment by the regional groups and for the
affirmation it received today from Member States. It is
a great honour for the Philippines that a highly qualified
woman from the developing world has been chosen to
serve in a senior position in the United Nations. We
are fully confident that she will serve with the highest
standards of efficiency, competence and integrity and
will continue the good work of her predecessor in the
Office for Internal Oversight Services, Ms. Carman
Lapointe.
Ms. Mendoza will leave her post as Commissioner
in the Philippine Commission of Audit, where she
has served for over 20 years in the areas of audit,
investigation, fraud examination and good governance.
Her vast experience as Chairperson of the Audit
Committee of the Public Sector Standards Board
and External Auditor for the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the World Health
Organization and the International Labour Organization
renders her most able to take on that important new
portfolio.
Her qualifications and wealth of experience,
coupled with her commitment to excellence and
integrity, make her a wise choice for the job. Those
2/29

12/10/2015

qualifications are crucial at this juncture in the history
of the United Nations, which is celebrating its seventieth
anniversary, moving forward with the ambitious 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
and pursuing a platform for reforms in various fields of
United Nations work.
Good governance, the rule of law and effective,
accountable and transparent institutions within the
United Nations itself are necessary for ensuring that
the United Nations continues to be a credible champion
in the global fight against corruption and achieves its
lofty goals. We are fully confident that Ms. Mendoza
will live up to those challenges as she steps into the
role of assisting the Secretary-General in fulfilling the
oversight responsibilities over the resources and staff
of the Organization through internal audit, monitoring,
inspection, evaluation and investigation services.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the appointment of Heidi
Mendoza as the next Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services. We extend our warm
congratulations to her and take this opportunity to
underscore the importance of the Office for Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) and its independent role in
providing critical oversight over the United Nations.
The United States is committed to ensuring a strong
OIOS that is able to carry out robust audits and
effective investigations to ferret out waste, fraud and
corruption. The Office must have the ability to conduct
performance evaluations of key programmes, thereby
enabling management and Member States to ensure
effective use of resources. We look forward to working
with Ms. Mendoza and engaging with Member States to
strengthen OIOS.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of sub-item (i) of agenda
item 114.
Agenda item 138
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/70/416)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution,
entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment

15-30802

12/10/2015

of the expenses of the United Nations: requests under
Article 19 of the Charter”, without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/2).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 138.
Agenda item 122
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70357)
Identical letters dated 17 June 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the General Assembly and the President of
the Security Council (A/70/95)
The President: Peace operations are the heart
of the United Nations global engagement. They are
among the major innovations since the inception of the
United Nations that have enabled the Organization to
better fulfil its mandate and have contributed to peace
and security in our world. But peace operations, like
any tool, are in constant need of refinement. Evolving
challenges and threats to international peace and
security make it necessary for the United Nations to
strengthen its role, capacity, efficiency and, more
particularly, the effectiveness of its field operations.
Today’s debate is both necessary and timely. The
dramatic global refugee crisis and other humanitarian
and ongoing security crises demonstrate just how
complex today’s conflicts have become. In the light
of those new realities, we must review our practices
and instruments, how we approach policy and
operational questions and how we address budgetary
and management issues. I therefore commend the
Secretary-General for having taken the initiative to
launch this review. The High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations consulted rigorously, and its work
resulted in a number of concrete recommendations.
Subsequently, Member States have received the
Secretary-General’s implementation report (A/70/357).
Having examined those important contributions, it
is now up to the membership to consider how that key
initiative can be transformed into concrete steps that
will ensure that the United Nations peace operations
can adequately respond to our changing world. That
is a unique opportunity and, at the end of today’s
debate, I will return to the question of how best to offer
procedural clarity on the next steps. It is of course also

A/70/PV.29

worth bearing in mind that that review of the United
Nations peace operations is complemented by the
10-year review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture and a global study on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security. An effort to ensure the synergy
and coherence generated by those three reviews will
promote a holistic reflection on matters that are clearly
interconnected. Facts on the ground, including threats
to global security, such as epidemics, violent extremism
and proliferation, among others, are powerful evidence
that a comprehensive and more integrated approach
to peace and security is urgently needed. On 10 and
11 May 2016, I will convene a high-level thematic debate
in order to advance synergies generated by those three
reviews. The participation of Member States and all
stakeholders in the preparations for that debate, in the
event itself and in its possible follow-up will be crucial.
We have a common interest to have a United Nations
that is truly equipped to translate the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations into concrete reality, and
a shared responsibility to make that happen.
I now give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon to start the discussion.
The Secretary-General: I thank the President of
the General Assembly for bringing us together for a
particularly timely debate on how to best to strengthen
United Nations peace operations.
In recent years, all of us have grown deeply
concerned about the escalating challenges confronting
United Nations peace operations, both peacekeeping
and special political missions. One year ago today, I
appointed a High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations to assess our operations and suggest ways to
meet those tests. President José Ramos-Horta of TimorLeste, with wide-ranging national and United Nations
experience, was uniquely suited to lead that effort.
Ms. Ameerah Haq, who has served as Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and as Vice-Chair
of the Panel, has also had extensive exposure to the
realities that the United Nations faces in the field. I
am very pleased that both are with us today. The task
was ambitious and the timing was short, yet the Panel
delivered its report, entitled “Report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations on uniting our
strengths for peace: politics, partnership and people”
(see A/70/95). The Panel’s report is wise and bold and
reflects the results of consultations with the diverse
stakeholders in every region of the world. I thank the

15-308023/29

A/70/PV.29

Panel for its outstanding service on behalf of all those
around the world living under the threat or the reality
of conflict.
Last month, I submitted to Member States my
implementation report (A/70/357). It conveys my strong
support for the Panel’s recommendations and identifies
those areas where I believe we can move forward
immediately. My report calls for the General Assembly
and the Security Council to consider a number of
important recommendations directed at Member States
and which I fully endorse. It deliberately leaves some
of the structural proposals to my successor, but I
wholeheartedly support the need for those changes to
be given serious consideration.
United Nations peace operations are a global
instrument. Making them fit for purpose is a collective
responsibility. I hope that today will mark the start of
early and concerted efforts to strengthen a set of vital
tools at this time when they are most in need. The
historic adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals,
last month, underscores a long-standing truth — there
will be no peace without development, no development
without peace, and neither without respect for human
rights.
The case for renewed investment in United Nations
peace operations is urgent and clear. We are living in
a time of global turmoil. Large-scale conflicts have
tripled since 2008. More than 60 million people have
been forcibly displaced, the most since the Second
World War. Violent extremism is on the rise. I fully
endorse the Panel’s call for a focus on politics, people
and partnership. United Nations peace operations are
political tools. Their objective is to pursue and sustain
negotiated political settlements. They cannot substitute
for a clear political strategy to bring an end to conflict.
Nor should they be used to give the appearance of
action, or given mandates without the means. Peace
operations must be used responsibly. United Nations
peace operations must be judged by their impact on
people. They must make every effort to protect civilians
and defend the rights of people in conflict. And they
must never abuse that trust.
The United Nations cannot tackle today’s challenges
alone. We must strengthen partnerships to meet the
growing complexity of conflicts. In my implementation
report I set out an agenda for action to translate those
priorities into concrete steps over the next 18 months.

4/29

12/10/2015

First, we need to bring prevention and mediation
to the centre of our efforts to promote international
peace and security. Early action saves lives and money.
Effective prevention and mediation keep politics at the
fore. As the toll of human lives rises and humanitarian
needs and costs escalate dramatically, I am calling for a
concerted prevention agenda that makes greater use of
the full range of tools, including my good offices.
Secondly, we need to change the way we plan and
conduct United Nations peace operations. We need to
become faster and more agile in limiting the spread of
violence and seizing opportunities to resolve a conflict.
We need to move away from template-determined
approaches to a more targeted approach with mandates
tailored to specific demands on the ground. We need
a shared understanding of the tasks involved so as to
strengthen coordination between the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries. And we
need to work hand in hand with national actors and local
communities. We also need capabilities, uniformed and
civilian, that can deploy quickly and operate effectively
in challenging environments. We must ensure
that administrative procedures are systematically
configured to support dynamic field environments.
I thank those Member States that came forward with
their commitments of scarce and valuable resources
at the summit on United Nations peacekeeping held
on 28 September. That is a significant step forward in
equipping United Nations peace operations for today
and tomorrow.
United Nations personnel, civilian and uniformed,
must always uphold the highest standards of conduct
and be held accountable when they do not do so. It
is shameful that that has not always been the case.
We must work together to eliminate the scourge of
sexual exploitation and abuse, which tarnishes the
reputation of the United Nations and detracts from the
contributions of so many brave men and women. We
must also do everything in our power to enhance the
safety and security of our personnel. Those courageous
men and women often work in difficult and dangerous
conditions to help make the world a better place. We
should do our utmost to keep them safe.
Thirdly, we need stronger and more partnerships.
Effective peace operations are those in which
multiple actors — United Nations bodies, troop- and
police-contributing countries, regional organizations,
host countries and others — pull together and take

15-30802

12/10/2015

A/70/PV.29

advantage of each other’s strengths. Each partnership
will be distinct, thus reflecting the overall strategy and
specific demands.

Mr. Halfaoui (Morocco): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

In our partnerships with regional organizations,
we will aim to prioritize standing arrangements for
early consultation and rapid response, including
bridging arrangements. The African Union is bearing
an increasingly heavy burden, along with several of
the continent’s subregional organizations. It is time
to take United Nations-African Union ties to a new
level, including through predictable and sustainable
financing for African Union peace operations. We must
also deepen our ties with the European Union and other
organizations that can contribute.

I thank the President of the General Assembly for
his initiative, the Secretary-General for the presentation
of his report (A/70/357) and the Chair of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations and its
members for their comprehensive report (see A/70/95).

United Nations peace operations are an essential
tool, but they are not the only international tool. I
welcome the ongoing intergovernmental reviews on
peacebuilding and on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
and security. My report has drawn on those reviews
and identified the links among them. There is far more
we can do to sustain peace and help post-conflict
societies avoid a relapse into violent conflict. And
despite important gains in advancing the women and
peace and security agenda, we have still not done
enough to involve women in peace processes and other
decision-making processes.
The coming World Humanitarian Summit, to
be held in Istanbul in May 2016, is a further piece of
the picture. That will be an opportunity to reinforce
our common endeavour to save lives and prevent and
alleviate suffering. Taken together, those efforts can
enable us to renew the instruments available to the
United Nations.
We do not have many opportunities to reform
United Nations peace operations comprehensively.
The last major effort of that kind was 15 years ago. Yet
we all understand how much the world has changed
since that time. It is essential that we act urgently and
collectively and not wait, as in the past, for crisis or
tragedy to propel reform. I stand ready to work with
Member States in the months ahead.
I thank members for their presence here today. Let
our actions speak louder than our words on behalf of the
people around the world who look to us for leadership
and support.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

As the group representing 90 per cent of the troopcontributing countries, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries has a clear and well-known position on all
aspects of peacekeeping, which I will not reiterate at
this stage. I will focus my intervention on the following
points.
The Movement is of the view that both the report of
the High-level Panel and that of the Secretary-General
should be studied carefully, as they will enable us to
cover all critical aspects of peace operations.
On the procedural front, NAM reiterates that the
development of concepts, policies and strategies should
be part of an intergovernmental process and that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations is the
sole body in charge of policymaking in peacekeeping.
Therefore, all recommendations relating to peacekeeping
should be addressed to the Special Committee. In
that connection, recommendations relating to special
political missions should be addressed to the Fourth
Committee, and those with financial implications
should be addressed to the Fifth Committee.
To conclude, I wish to assure the Assembly that
NAM is following the review process closely and
will engage constructively with the Secretariat and
the relevant bodies of the United Nations. However,
in order to ensure a successful interaction among all
of the relevant stakeholders, transparency, clarity and
information-sharing are essential.
The President: I now give the floor to the former
Head of Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.

15-308025/29

A/70/PV.29

Let me first thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/70/357), which gives us a valuable and
comprehensive picture of the state of play with regard to
peace operations today and the challenges that we need
to address collectively. We are grateful for the work done
by the Secretariat and by the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, led by President RamosHorta. It is a pleasure for me to welcome both him and
the members of his Panel here today. We equally value
the consultative approach that underpinned the process.
In adopting the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), the General Assembly
agreed on a development framework that will ultimately
contribute to global stability. The link between security
and development is unquestionable. We very much
welcome the inclusion of Sustainable Development
Goal 16, on peaceful societies, in the 2030 Agenda. The
security-development-human rights nexus is critical to
achieving long-lasting stability, and in that sense, the
global 2030 Agenda and the global peace and security
agenda cannot be separated.
The global security environment has changed
dramatically in recent years. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly identifies the challenges
that need to be tackled. That can be done only in a
truly global partnership, as the Secretary-General
has just underlined. We are happy to attest that the
European Union and the United Nations enjoy such a
partnership. We have recently identified joint priority
areas for strengthening the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the European Union on
peacekeeping and crisis management up to 2018.
At the same time, we are encouraged by the
opportunities provided by the review of the United
Nations peace and security architecture. Business as
usual is no longer an option. With the imminent release
of the global study on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the launch of
intergovernmental negotiations on the peacebuilding
architecture, we now have all the three building
blocks needed for efforts to enhance United Nations
effectiveness in the global security environment.
The outcome of the ongoing reviews should be bold
in ambition and propose concrete steps to enhance
effectiveness. No one reform should be undertaken in
isolation from the others. The search for coherence,
synergies and complementarities among those reviews
should guide our work ahead.

6/29

12/10/2015

We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
the future of United Nations peace operations. Many
of the suggestions of the High-level Independent Panel
have been picked up and further developed. Key issues
that the European Union and its member States have
identified have found a place in the Secretary-General’s
report, such as the need for coherence, for linking
development and security efforts, for making use of the
full spectrum of responses, for placing the protection
of civilians up front, for mainstreaming gender aspects
throughout and for better and more clearly defined
mandates and transition arrangements. Allow me to
reflect on some of those aspects.
First, we fully support the notion that the full
spectrum of peace operations should be used in a
continuum of responses. We encourage all within the
Secretariat to work collaboratively to ensure a coherent
response.
Secondly, even the most successful peace operations
cannot be a substitute for political processes. Prevention
and mediation, making full use of the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices, the early deployment of United
Nations special political missions, United Nations
regional and bilateral peacebuilding and mediation
tools and public diplomacy must become a priority. That
would show that the global system is intent on reducing
armed conflict. Likewise, consolidating peacebuilding
efforts must be on the agenda throughout, and the
peacebuilding agenda must be fully synchronized with
peacekeeping efforts. Wider peacebuilding activities
must be given the means to be effective.
Thirdly, the protection of civilians and the
prevention of atrocity crimes must be at the core of any
peace operation’s mandate. We welcome the emphasis
on a regular assessment of the mission’s political and
protection effect, the extent to which the mission has
the capabilities to fulfil its protection mandate and the
additional political and practical support required.
Crucially, the protected must not be harmed by
those meant to protect them. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s emphasis on increased accountability and his
efforts to strengthen the system’s ability to deal with
sexual exploitation and abuse swiftly and decisively.
Local ownership is an important factor in
protecting civilians. We welcome the suggestion for
mission-wide strategies and guidance to engage with
the local populations. Similarly, corruption should also
be recognized as a driver of conflict and instability.

15-30802

12/10/2015

Fourthly, we are committed to advancing the
women and peace and security agenda, both internally
and in relations with third countries. The focus on
gender mainstreaming in mission settings is welcome,
as is the intention to strengthen gender expertise in
missions.
Fifthly, United Nations peace operations need to be
equipped with clear, coherent and achievable mandates
that include a strong human rights component. Adequate
resources needed for peace operations, including
special political missions, should be ensured so that
they can deliver on their mandated tasks. Operations
should make the most efficient use of human, political
and financial resources.
We are keen to understand better the benefits of
the Secretary-General’s proposal that the dedicated
capacities for child protection and conflict-related
sexual violence should cease to exist as separate entities
in peace operations and should instead be consolidated
within the human rights components of missions. The
European Union attaches great importance to those
special protection mandates, and changes in mission
structures should not curtail missions’ ability to
effectively protect women and children in situations of
armed conflict.
In the light of the complex and dangerous
environments in which such missions are operating,
we underline the important role of information and
intelligence for delivery on mandates and personnel
protection. We support efforts by the United Nations to
further develop those capacities for current and future
missions.
Finally, we welcome the reference to reinforcing
global-regional partnerships. As stated earlier, our
two organizations recently agreed to cooperate more
deeply on topics of mutual interest, ranging from rapid
response to facilitating the contribution of European
Union member States to United Nations peacekeeping,
security-sector reform, mutual support and enhanced
information exchange.
We also conduct missions and operations in support
of United Nations objectives and United Nations
peacekeeping across the world. Currently, 17 European
Union crisis missions are deployed, of which 6 are
military and 11 civilian. They allow for burden-sharing
and support for United Nations activities, notably in
Mali, the Central African Republic, Somalia and the

A/70/PV.29

Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as in the
Balkans.
We also remain committed to giving full support
to Africa’s efforts to manage its own security. I would
also underline that fact in response to the comments
made by the Secretary-General in his presentation.
The European Union has agreed to increase funding
for its African Peace Facility from €750 million to
€900 million for the period 2014-2016.
The role of regional organizations within United
Nations-led interventions could be better defined,
whether it entails facilitating rapid deployment when
appropriate, acting as a complement to United Nations
operations or being deployed in a bridging capacity
gaps.
Let me conclude by reiterating our commitment to
a strong global order and to an effective United Nations.
More than ever, Europe is ready to play its part. Those
words — “more than ever, Europe is ready to play its
part” — are probably the last words I have the honour
to pronounce in my capacity as Head of Delegation of
the European Union in the Assembly, and I am very
pleased that it was precisely those words.
Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone): Let me by thanking
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor to make a
statement on behalf of the Group of African States.
The African Group holds in high regard the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see A/70/95). That is understandable, given the fact
that a high proportion of United Nations peacekeeping
operations are concentrated in Africa. It is for that
reason that Africa has taken the High-level Panel’s
work very seriously. We acknowledge the great length
to which the Panel went to consult with Member States,
regional and subregional bodies and other stakeholders.
The common African position on the United Nations
review of peace operations was adopted by the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union at its five
hundred and second meeting, held on 29 April, in which
Africa as a region articulated its position regarding the
work of the Panel.
Having reviewed the High-level Panel’s report, we
wish to underscore that it provides a comprehensive
approach to strategic and operational aspects of peace
operations. In that respect, we welcome the four
strategic shifts identified in the report that would be
required so as to enable the international community to

15-308027/29

A/70/PV.29

successfully adapt to the changing nature of conflict,
namely, the need for a political approach, the need to
view peace operations as encompassing a continuum of
options ranging from the appointment of special envoys
to the deployment of peacekeeping operations, the need
to forge partnerships with regional organizations in
order to exploit fully the comparative advantages of
each organization, and the need to adopt a field-focused
and people-centred approach.
We wish to express our deepest appreciation to the
High-level Panel for taking into account many of the
views expressed in the African common position, as
transmitted to the United Nations for the consideration
of the Panel in the preparation of its report.
We wish in particular to emphasize, first
of all, that the core principles of peacekeeping
operations — consent, impartiality and the limited use
of force — remain relevant but need to be interpreted
with flexibility in the face of the new, emerging
challenges to peacekeeping.
Secondly, conflict prevention and mediation should
be given paramount importance; hence the primacy of
political solutions.
Thirdly, partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations are key to operating in future in order to
be able to address some of the constraints facing the
United Nations. The legislative basis for partnership lies
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Fourthly, the strategic partnership that has been
forged with the African Union should be identified as
a template for the relations of the United Nations with
regional organizations generally.
And, fifthly, in the light of the slow deployment
of forces into the field, the United Nations should bear
in mind the capacities being developed by the African
Union to speed up the deployment of peacekeeping
operations.
We wish to express support for the principles that
should underpin that partnership, namely, consultative
decision-making, a division of labour based on
respective comparative advantages, joint analysis,
planning, monitoring and evaluation, an integrated
response to the full conflict-cycle, including prevention
and transparency, accountability and respect for
international standards, in consonance with the
principles endorsed in the African common position

8/29

12/10/2015

and other documents relating to the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union.
We express our particular appreciation to the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations for
its resuscitation of the recommendations of the Prodi
report (see A/63/666), entitled “Report of the African
Union on the African Union-United Nations panel on
modalities for support to African Union operations”,
with regard to the founding of the Security Councilauthorized African Union-led peace support operations.
We acknowledge that the recommendation made
by the High-level Panel for the use of United Nations
assessed contributions on a case-by-case basis,
including the costs associated with the deployment
of uniformed personnel, marks a significant step. We
therefore urge that that proposal be endorsed by the
United Nations decision-making organs, and we hold
ourselves ready to follow up on that recommendation
with the relevant organs, committees and interested
parties within the United Nations.
We also take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled “The future of United Nations peace
operations: implementation of the recommendations
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations” (A/70/357). We are willing to engage with
the Secretariat on how to implement the important
recommendations made by the High-level Panel,
including the lessons learned in the transitions from
African Union peacekeeping operations to United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the Central African
Republic and Mali.
We take particular note of the following
recommendations. First, there is the conduct of the
lessons-learned exercise aimed at reviewing and
assessing the various mechanisms available to improve
the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of the
financing for African Union peacekeeping operations,
authorized by the Security Council. Secondly, there is
the joint identification of context-specific benchmarks
that could be used to determine the conditions under
which a transition should take place, given the needs
in the country and the situation on the ground. Thirdly,
there is the development of a creative and flexible
transition tool box, embodying a common vision that
the African Union and the United Nations would
employ, when and where appropriate, to inform future
transition processes.

15-30802

12/10/2015

We once again express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his wisdom in establishing such
a high-profile panel with the requisite mandate.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the group of countries made
up of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand (CANZ).
We thank the Secretary-General for his candid
assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the
United Nations peace operations architecture. Let
me also acknowledge today the presence of President
Ramos-Horta, Ms. Ameerah Haq and other members
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations, and to thank them for their excellent work.
As the peace operations review report (see A/70/95)
makes clear, the nature of global conflict has changed.
United Nations peace operations are operating in
increasingly difficult environments and must adapt
to meet those new challenges, with the protection of
civilians remaining the core priority. The CANZ group
agrees with the Secretary-General’s assertion that
political solutions must be paramount in the design
of peace operations. Comprehensive approaches that
utilize all of the United Nations conflict prevention and
resolution tools are needed if political solutions and
sustainable peace are to be achieved. The recent leaders
summit on peacekeeping has provided much-needed
focus on, and new commitments aimed at, the enhanced
capability of United Nations peace operations.
The CANZ group strongly supports the initiatives
within the Secretariat, outlined by the SecretaryGeneral today, to tangibly improve the performance
of United Nations peace operations. The CANZ
group supports improved strategic force generation
and capability development, better operational and
strategic planning, enhanced safety and security
assessment and management tools, strengthened United
Nations policing and the use of new technologies for
effective mandate implementation. The CANZ group
encourages the Secretariat to continue its efforts to
improve contingent training and performance through
measurable, effects-based and performance-focused
measures.
Consistent with the High-level Panel’s report,
we also support improved systems, approaches and
structures in the Secretariat with a view to becoming
more field-oriented in its peace operations preparation
and supporting better operability in the field. We
believe that involving women in peace operations

A/70/PV.29

greatly contributes to missions’ performance and
success. Accordingly, we strongly support the
ongoing efforts to promote women’s participation
in peace and security, in particular participating
in the brokering of ceasefires, peace negotiations,
conflict resolution and monitoring of peace. Women’s
participation must be central to all processes, not just
on women’s issues. Operational effectiveness will be
enhanced through the implementation of the review’s
recommendations, such as the call to conduct gendersensitive analysis throughout the mission-planning,
mandate-development, implementation, review and
mission-drawdown processes. The CANZ group also
encourages the Secretariat to continue to forge ahead
with its implementation of a robust, transparent and
accountable zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse.
Member States are key to the effective
implementation of the review’s recommendations.
To that end, we must all engage constructively in
United Nations negotiating forums to make that a
reality, including in the Fourth Committee and the
Fifth Committee negotiations and within the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations.
As others have mentioned, the parallel reviews of the
United Nations peace operations, the peacebuilding
architecture and Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
provide an opportunity for broader and transformative
change in the United Nations engagement in fragile
and conflict-affected States. The CANZ group urges a
coherent and the holistic approach to implementing the
reviews and initiatives already under way, as outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report (A/70/357) on the
peace operations review, and we look forward to the
high-level thematic debate that will be convened by the
President in May.
We all provided substantial support over the course
of the peace operations review. It will now be important
for Member States to collectively reach an early and
clear understanding of what we wish to achieve. More
than ever, we must ensure that our work reflects a
realistic and contemporary understanding of United
Nations peace operations and of the ever-evolving
challenges faced in the field to help those who need us
most.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt): Egypt aligns itself with
the statements made by the representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the

15-308029/29

A/70/PV.29

representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the African
Group.
We thank the President for conducting this
important debate on the report of the Secretary-General
on the future of peace operations (A/70/357). We thank
the Secretary-General for his initiative in setting up the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, and
we take note of the Panel’s report (see A/70/95) and its
recommendations. We believe that this is an opportunity
to develop a common understanding of peacekeeping
and create an effective coordination mechanism among
the main stakeholders in peacekeeping, including
regional actors and troop-contributing countries. As
we deliberate on the future of peacekeeping, let me
highlight the following points.
First, it is crucial to re-emphasize the three main
pillars of peacekeeping, namely, consent, impartiality
and limiting the use of force. Secondly, peacekeeping
should ordinarily follow the signing of a peace
agreement. Peacekeeping forces are not universal armed
forces that are entitled to impose peace agreements on
parties to the conflict. Thirdly, it is crucial to ensure
the robust nature of peacekeeping operations so as to
ensure sufficient deterrence and achieve the necessary
level of protection of civilians.
The lessons of history have taught us that
peacekeeping, and the use of force for that matter,
cannot on their own achieve everlasting peace. The
international community needs a holistic approach to
tackling threats to international peace and security.
Therefore, peacekeeping efforts should be closely
coordinated with other peace missions, starting with
the necessary efforts prior to peacekeeping, such as
prevention, mediation and conflict management, all the
way to post-conflict efforts to sustain peace, including
peacebuilding, State-building and tackling the root
causes of conflict. It is also necessary to consider any
possible nexus between peacekeeping operations and
sanctions regimes.
It is important, however, to distinguish between
prevention and premature intervention. Our discussions
should draw the fine line between them. While
prevention efforts are recommended at an early stage,
foreign intervention could, in many instances, be
premature and sometimes worsen the situation rather
than resolve it, especially when some parties to the
conflict use international attention and pressure to
reach political goals.

10/29

12/10/2015

We commend efforts to establish global regional
partnerships for peacekeeping. It is important to
recognize regional peacekeepers as the first responders
when conflicts erupt in the region. It is therefore
imperative to establish concrete mechanisms for
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
and subregional actors on peacekeeping. We look
forward to a thorough discussion in the relevant General
Assembly committees on the implementation report
of the Secretary-General, which should be a starting
point for further developing ideas to strengthen United
Nations peacekeeping efforts.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
initiative to reform the United Nations peace operations.
That effort comes at a critical time, with over 125,000
personnel deployed and 27 peacekeeping, political
and peacebuilding missions. United Nations peace
operations remain an indispensable tool for preventing
and responding to conflict.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
As we know, peacekeeping operations and the
essential prevention and peacebuilding work performed
by special political missions face immense challenges
today. They are deployed in increasingly dangerous
environments, as demonstrated most starkly by the
number of casualties among peacekeepers in Mali.
They are performing diverse mandates and complex
operations, such as protecting civilians in the midst of
South Sudan’s civil war, supporting Liberia during the
Ebola crisis and assisting Haitians after the earthquake.
Amid those challenges, the United Nations systems,
policies and procedures are again straining to keep
pace.
We welcomed the widely consultative process of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
its efforts to complement parallel reviews on the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture and on women and
peace and security, as well as its inclusion of strategic
as well as tactical-level recommendations. Building on
the High-level Panel’s recommendations, the SecretaryGeneral’s implementation report (A/70/357) identifies
proposals to address long-standing, chronic challenges
facing peace operations, including a renewed focus
on prevention and mediation, stronger regional-global
partnerships and new ways of planning and conducting
United Nations peace operations. Let me briefly
highlight three priorities for the United States:
15-30802

12/10/2015

First, on the protection of civilians, we welcome the
Secretary-General’s emphasis on the need for United
Nations peace operations to protect civilians, one of the
mission leadership’s critical responsibilities. Essential
to that are mission-wide strategies to assess civilian
insecurity and to make use of all available tools, from
mediation and non-military means to the use of force,
where appropriate and necessary, to support protection.
In addition, we welcome the establishment of an
assessment and planning cell in the Executive Office
of the Secretary-General, and we urge the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that strategic assessments and
planning incorporate protection and atrocity risks in an
effective and systematic way.
Secondly, on empowering missions in the field,
administrative and financial policies and procedures
must be configured to support dynamic field
environments. That will require a change of culture,
policies and approaches, including aligning authorities
with responsibilities and empowering missions, while
ensuring accountability. That includes enabling
missions to recruit and rapidly deploy the right
expertise at the right time, giving force commanders
more control over medical and casualty capabilities and
ensuring that planning is aligned with capacities.
Thirdly, on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse, which is the collective
responsibility of the United Nations and all its Member
States, we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent
initiatives to combat such behaviour. We urge him to
continue his efforts on sexual exploitation and abuse
prevention, while enforcing the zero-tolerance policy,
transparency, accountability and remedial measures.
The Secretary-General’s implementation report
focuses on reforms that can be implemented over the
coming 12 months. Some of the reforms he sets out
have already received prior authorization from the
General Assembly. Others will require Member States’
approval, and still others call upon the membership
to act. In that regard, I would ask that the General
Assembly consider early action to acknowledge the
Secretary-General’s initiative before consideration in
the relevant bodies.
The United States stands ready to work with the
Secretary-General and Member States to ensure that the
momentum generated by the High-level Independent
Panel’s review is not lost. As the Assembly knows,
and as President Obama said at the United Nations
peacekeeping summit on 28 September,

A/70/PV.29

“We know that peace operations are not the solution
to every problem, but they do remain one of the
world’s most important tools to address armed
conflict.”
For peace operations to remain an effective and efficient
means of addressing threats to international peace and
security, we must seize this opportunity together.
Mr. Mukerji (India): I wish to thank the President
of the General Assembly for organizing this plenary
meeting on the report of the Secretary-General entitled
“The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of recommendations of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations” (A/70/357).
It is significant that this meeting has been organized
by the President among the first agenda items on the
important issue of United Nations peace operations.
We align our statement with that made by the
representative of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement earlier today.
My delegation’s views on today’s topic are based
on our experience in both the peacekeeping and the
peacebuilding operations of the United Nations. India
is the largest cumulative troop contributor to United
Nations peace operations, with over 185,000 troops
having served in 48 of the 69 missions mandated so far.
The recommendations of the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, appointed by the SecretaryGeneral in October 2014, carry great importance for
us. We have expressed our satisfaction with the report
(see A/70/95) earlier and warmly welcome the presence
here today of the High-level Panel’s Chair, Mr. RamosHorta, and the Vice-Chair, Ms. Ameerah Haq.
The most important issue — the elephant in the
room — is the big picture, namely, the way in which
mandates for peace operations are formulated by the
Security Council. We are dismayed at the opaque
manner in which the Council continues to mandate peace
operations without any accountability or transparency.
The human costs of that failing are evident in both
the rising number of casualties among United Nations
peacekeepers and the alarming growth in the number of
civilians — now reaching, according to the SecretaryGeneral, 60 million — whose lives are being disrupted
by conflicts that an ineffective Security Council is
powerless to resolve. As a declared advocate of human
rights, we believe that the President of the General
Assembly must take the lead to prioritize agreement on
an early reform of the Council during the seventieth

15-3080211/29

A/70/PV.29

session of the General Assembly in order to bring hope
to millions of ordinary men, women and children.
The Secretary-General has proposed three pillars
for conducting United Nations peace operations. Of
them, primacy must be given to the pacific settlement
of disputes as the core objective of United Nations
peace operations, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, which will enable every peace operation to
have a clear implementation time frame. The SecretaryGeneral has recommended that sustained dialogue
among the Council, the Secretariat and troop and police
contributors is essential for shared understanding of
appropriate responses and their implications for the
mandate and conduct of a peace operation. He has
further stated that such a dialogue should begin before
a mission is established, something that we strongly
support.
The Secretary-General, in his report, and the
High-level Panel have rightly recognized that United
Nations peace operations are not designed or equipped
to impose political solutions through the sustained use
of force, and that United Nations peace operations are
not an appropriate tool for military counter-terrorism
operations. We endorse that view, since United
Nations peacekeepers are not deployable for targeted
offensive action against armed militias, non-State
actors or terrorists. We should not abandon the cardinal
principles of United Nations peacekeeping, which have
withstood the test of time, namely, the consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except
in self-defence and defence of the mandate. We urge
that the current allocation of resources within United
Nations peace operations be reviewed with the aim of
supporting political efforts to bring about a peaceful
settlement of conflicts, which would considerably
mitigate the growing resource constraints facing United
Nations peace operations.
The Secretary-General has reaffirmed his
commitment to informing and briefing the Security
Council about situations where there is an escalating
risk for civilians or a serious shortfall in a mission’s
ability to fulfil its protection mandate. That is a welcome
step. As a troop-contributing country, we look forward
to participating in such briefings in an interactive
manner. United Nations peacekeepers are not only the
Organization’s boots on the ground, they are its eyes
and ears, and by interacting directly with Member
States, the Security Council can only benefit from the
ground-level assessments that the troop-contributing

12/29

12/10/2015

countries can provide. Such interaction will contribute
to more effective implementation of the mandate for the
protection of civilians. That is why we are calling for
Article 44 of the Charter to be implemented in letter
and spirit.
The Secretary-General has reported that sexual
exploitation and abuse by a small minority of United
Nations personnel continue to shame our Organization.
Such abuse scars the lives of men, women and children,
and we take such cases extremely seriously. The United
Nations must apply one standard, that of zero tolerance,
when dealing with all cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse in its field operations, whether peacekeeping,
peacebuilding or others.
We request that all issues referred to in our
debate today be referred to the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations for consideration along with
the High-level Panel’s report.
During the recently concluded leaders’ summit
held in New York on 28 September, the Prime Minister
of India announced a 10 per cent increase in our
troop contributions to existing and new operations,
which is already more than 8,000; an additional three
police units, with a higher representation of female
peacekeepers, and a commitment to providing critical
enablers, deploying technical personnel in United
Nations missions and providing additional training for
peacekeepers, both at our facilities in India and in the
field. Such commitments show that India is willing
to walk the walk when it comes to supporting United
Nations peace operations.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.
Peace is a shared aspiration and noble goal of all
humankind. United Nations peacekeeping operations
were born of the desire for peace, and they continue
to exist for the same reason. Sixty-seven years have
passed since the first United Nations operation was
established. Such operations have brought about peace in
regions of conflict, and hope for the people living there.
Peacekeeping operations were an innovative aspect of
multilateralism for the international community and
have become an important way of maintaining peace
and security around the world.
Today, people continue to suffer severe hardships
as a result of conflicts and wars in many parts of the
world, and their desire for peace and their hopes and
15-30802

12/10/2015

expectations of the United Nations and its peacekeeping
operations are all the more anxious and intense. At the
same time, issues such as the threat of terrorism, the
expansion of peacekeeping operations’ mandates and
the absence, in some cases, of a peace to maintain are
posing new challenges for peacekeeping operations.
United Nations peacekeeping operations must innovate
if they are to evolve.
China supports the Secretary-General’s initiative in
launching a review of the Organization’s peacekeeping
operations and his report (A/70/357) based on the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see A/70/95). It is China’s hope
that the review will enable us to further improve the
philosophy behind peacekeeping operations, optimize
their mandates, strengthen their capacity-building and
enhance their efficiency. In that regard, I would like to
stress the following four points.
First, the basic principles for peacekeeping
operations should be observed. Peacekeeping
operations should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
espoused by Dag Hammarskjöld. They should respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries
concerned, have due respect for their leadership and
take great care where the use of forceful measures is
concerned. The Security Council should be realistic
and avoid overreaching, make clear the priorities and
focus at various stages of peacekeeping missions,
and adjust the mandates and scale of peacekeeping
operations according to the realities on the ground. In
implementing Security Council resolutions, operations
should not exceed their mandates and should formulate
and implement exit have withdrawal strategies in a
timely fashion based on local circumstances and needs.
Secondly, the peacekeeping operations system
should continually be improved; it should be connected
vertically to the processes of preventive diplomacy
and peacebuilding and horizontally to the exercise of
political good offices and the institution of the rule of
law, national reconciliation processes. and improvement
of people’s lives. The Council should hear the views
of the countries concerned and troop-contributing
countries more often, and should be better coordinated
with regional organizations and take the best possible
advantage of the assistance of the World Bank, the
African Development Bank and other relevant financial
institutions in order to create synergies.

A/70/PV.29

Thirdly, we should increase the rapid-response
capabilities of operations, shorten the deployment
cycle and speed up the rate of deployment, which
may improve operations’ image and credibility, with
a view to improving the efficiency and effectiveness
of the implementation of Security Council provisions.
Considerable efforts should be made to improve the
process of establishing and deploying peacekeeping
and special political missions and optimize logisticssupport systems in order to ensure a force’s timely
deployment, as well as the transfer of the necessary
resources so as to avoid waste. We should improve
peacekeepers’ discipline. China welcomes the efforts of
the United Nations to establish the new Peacekeeping
Capabilities Readiness System, and we call on other
Member States to participate in it.
Fourthly, we should give greater support to Africa,
where more than half of United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed. The Organization should give
greater attention to the important role that regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
play in the maintenance of peace and security in Africa.
The United Nations and international community
should strengthen their coordination and cooperation in
peacekeeping with regional organizations in Africa, and
help Africa build its peacekeeping capacity. We should
give full play to the strengths of regional organizations,
such as the African Union, in peacekeeping operations
and help Africans solve African issues in African ways.
As one of the permanent members of the Security
Council and the world’s largest developing country,
China has always provided appropriate support to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and has duly
contributed to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Last month, when President Xi Jinping
attended the United Nations summit on peacekeeping
operations, he made six commitments aimed at
supporting and enhancing United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
First, China will participate in the new United
Nations peacekeeping standby mechanism and, in
addition to a regular peacekeeping police force, will
build an 8,000-strong standby peacekeeping force.
Secondly, at the request of the United Nations, China
will favourably consider sending more engineers,
as well as transport and medical personnel, to
peacekeeping operations. Thirdly, during the next five
years, China will train 2,000 peacekeepers for other
countries and will engage in 10 de-mining assistance

15-3080213/29

A/70/PV.29

projects, including through the provision of training
and equipment. Fourthly, over the next five years,
China will provide $100 million in cost-free military
assistance to the African Union to support the building
of regular forces and rapid-response crisis forces in
Africa. Fifthly, China will deploy its first helicopter
contingent to a peacekeeping mission in Africa.
Sixthly, part of the China-United Nations Peacekeeping
Development Fund will be earmarked for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. United Nations
peacekeeping operations have become an important
means of maintaining peace and security at the global
level. They must be strengthened, not weakened.
China will make every effort to implement the
six commitments made by President Xi Jinping. We
are ready to work unremittingly with the Secretariat,
the countries concerned, the troop contributors, the
African Union and the other stakeholders to make a
greater contribution to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the African Group and
the Non-Aligned Movement.
We also join in welcoming the report (A/70/357)
of the Secretary-General on the future of peacekeeping
operations based on the recommendations of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations, led by
former President José Ramos-Horta. As noted by
the African Group, the issues raised in both reports
should be accorded ample space for discussion in the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and in
the Fourth and Fifth Committees. We shall state our
positions further in the deliberations of those bodies.
In the meantime, it is beyond doubt that the demands
for fulfilling the promise and vision of the Charter
of the United Nations, namely, to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, are proving more
challenging today than at any other time in the history of
the Organization. It is therefore not surprising that the
limitations of the Organization’s global engagements
are increasingly reflected in its peace operations.
Those limitations or shortcomings are not attributable
solely to the Organization. As Member States, we bear
the larger responsibility. Consequently, the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an urgent change in the way peace
and security instruments are conceived and applied to
maximize impact is an appeal that should be heeded
with the urgency it deserves.
14/29

12/10/2015

We support the primacy of politics over military and
technical engagements. We have underscored on several
occasions, including in our statement (see A/70/PV.17) in
the recent general debate of the Assembly, the essential
role of increased investment in conflict prevention.
We therefore agree with the Secretary-General and the
Panel on the importance of early engagement by the
Security Council, of supporting national and regional
prevention and mediation efforts and of bolstering the
Secretariat’s prevention and mediation capabilities.
The three core pillars that the Secretary-General
proposes in his action plan — focusing on prevention and
mediation, strengthening regional/global partnerships
and devising new ways of planning and conducting
peace operations to make them faster, more responsive
and more accountable to the needs of countries and
people in conflicts — require priority attention. We
view those three pillars as the main supports of a
framework that corresponds to Africa’s peacebuilding
landscape, which has undergone a dramatic evolution
in terms of conflict dynamics and the emergence of
new conflict actors.
It is often pointed out that Africa has served
as the laboratory for many of the United Nations
peacebuilding initiatives since the end of the Cold
War. That also holds true with respect to the post-2005
peacebuilding architecture, which has increasingly
focused on State-building and technocratic capacitybuilding in post-conflict situations. In addition, the
focus on holding so-called democratic elections,
without addressing the root causes of conflicts, is not
conducive to successful undertakings. The lack of
resources and political will for long-term peacebuilding
have also undermined its sustainability. Better and
more innovative ways of tackling those challenges need
to be developed and supported.
We must also be modest enough to concede that, in
certain circumstances, there are limits to what can be
achieved by foreign intervention and global institutions,
despite their best intentions. In that regard, the African
Union (AU) is striving to become a more prominent
actor in the crises that afflict the continent. We believe
that there are situations where regional and subregional
institutions may prove to be the best first responders.
Credible partnerships with such institutions and actors
must be central to our common effort.
That is the essence of the appeal launched by
the African Union Peace and Security Council at
its high-level meeting held at the United Nations on
15-30802

12/10/2015

26 September. In welcoming the Panel’s report (see
A/70/95), the meeting reaffirmed the importance of
strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in the context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. We are encouraged that that constitutes
a vital component of the Secretary-General’s plan of
action. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s intent
to carry out, jointly with the AU and in consultation
with other partners, a review and assessment of the
various mechanisms currently available for financing
and supporting the AU peace operations authorized by
the Council. We are confident that the outcome of the
review will bridge one of the critical gaps that the AU
has often brought to our collective attention.
We note with great concern that peacekeepers
are operating in hostile environments with little or no
peace to keep. Attacks against peacekeepers and other
United Nations personnel in the field are perpetrated by
nefarious elements that perceive them as an obstacle to
their objectives. We must ensure the safety and security
of United Nations personnel. We welcome the proposals
put forward by the Secretary-General in that regard.
While strengthening United Nations peace operations,
we must also endeavour to ensure that peacekeepers are
held accountable for their misdeeds. We must not allow
the transgressions of a few to sully the reputation of the
Organization and the courageous work of many other
valiant peacekeepers.
Finally, as a country with several contingents in
the field, we wish to recognize the valuable work being
done by the Secretary-General and the Secretariat,
especially through the Department of Field Support
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Their work and timely responses have been a source of
valuable operational support and backstopping for our
forces.
We are therefore delighted to note the SecretaryGeneral’s directive to undertake a comprehensive
review of issues related to in-mission mobility, as well
as command and control of military-enabling assets, by
the spring of 2016. We strongly encourage actions to
ensure greater effective performance in the field.
Mr. Pedersen (Norway): This important debate
is timely, as it is taking place just after the high-level
week, during which a main theme was the proliferation
of violent conflicts and their grave humanitarian
consequences.

A/70/PV.29

A clear message that came from our leaders at the
seventieth anniversary of the Organization is that a
strong United Nations is more vital than ever in tackling
critical global challenges to international peace and
security. The diverse range of United Nations peace
operations has become an essential means of upholding
the Charter of the United Nations. As we speak, United
Nations peacekeepers are in stronger demand than
ever before, and they operate in increasingly hostile
environments. Millions of people count on them to
provide a minimum of protection and stability and to
lay the foundations for a better life.
In addition to the uniformed peacekeepers,
the United Nations has developed a whole range
of tools for conflict prevention, mediation support
and peacebuilding that have become indispensable.
However, as important as those instruments are, they
have proved incomplete and unable to meet the growing
needs in ever more complex situations on the ground.
The Secretary-General’s initiative last year to launch a
process to reform United Nations peace operations was
therefore timely and important, and Norway has been
a strong supporter of the initiative from the very start.
The High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations, under the able leadership of Mr. RamosHorta — and let me also pay a compliment to the other
members of the Panel here — has been widely praised
for its consultative approach. The Panel travelled
extensively and received input from Governments,
regional organizations, think tanks and civil society
from all regions of the world. Through that inclusive
process, it has vastly increased our collective
understanding of the challenges confronting United
Nations peace operations.
There seems to be broad consensus on the urgency
of reform, adequately summed up as the four essential
shifts: first, the need for a political strategy in all
missions; secondly, the need for more responsive and
tailored operations; thirdly, the need for stronger
partnerships; and, fourthly, the need to make United
Nations peace operations more field-focused and
people-centred. The strong commitments to United
Nations peacekeeping demonstrated during the recent
summit on United Nations peacekeeping is also a sign
of that political momentum. That is good news as we
now move forward to implementation.
The Panel’s report (see A/70/95) and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/70/357) together represent a

15-3080215/29

A/70/PV.29

unique opportunity. We now need to discuss them in
detail and to act on the proposals. The two reports are
complementary: together they constitute a whole. Their
relationship is explained in the Secretary-General’s
report, which focuses on reforms that can be enacted
over the short term. Other proposals require a longerterm perspective. Both are equally important. Together
the reports give us the best opportunity in a long time
to implement necessary changes. We are responsible
for making the United Nations peace operations fit for
purpose for the coming decades. The General Assembly
and its committees have a crucial role to play. We agree
that the time has now come to establish a clear procedure
and a road map for the follow-up phase in the General
Assembly, and our support can be counted on as we
move ahead under the leadership of the presidency.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Brazil has a
long history in peacekeeping operations. Since 1948,
we have participated in more than 50 United Nations
peacekeeping missions through the deployment of
troops, police and military experts and have provided
more than 46,000 Blue Helmets in four continents. Our
experience has shown us first-hand the value of United
Nations peacekeeping operations as one of the main
instruments available to the international community
to address threats to the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Brazil welcomed the intiative by the SecretaryGeneral to appoint a High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations to conduct a comprehensive review
of the peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. I take this opportunity to commend the Panel
and its Chair, Mr. Ramos-Horta, for their serious work.
There is no doubt that nowadays peacekeeping
operations are more complex than they were when the
first missions were established by the Organization.
The Security Council is resorting to peacekeeping
in ever more volatile environments, while conferring
increasingly ambitious mandates. Against that
background, we must learn from the past and build on
positive experiences.
We welcome the strong emphasis placed by the
Panel on the primacy of politics and on preventive
diplomacy, as they are approaches that Brazil has long
supported. Those recommendations must be translated
into concrete strategies. We also congratulate the
Panel on addressing crucial funding issues. The
establishment of a special account for special political
missions separate from the regular budget would boost
16/29

12/10/2015

efficiency and alleviate budgetary pressures on other
critical activities financed under the regular budget,
such as development and human rights. However, we
are concerned about the flexible interpretation given
to the basic principles of peacekeeping operations,
as paragraph 9 of the Secretary-General’s report
seems to imply. It is true that innovative solutions are
required to cope with the challenges of contemporary
conflicts, but they cannot come at the expense of the
fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and underpinning United Nations
peacekeeping practice.
The United Nations should not deviate from its
central goal, which is to promote peace and development
through diplomacy and cooperation. Brazil endorses
the Panel’s conclusion regarding peacekeeping missions
and counter-terrorism activities. It is not the role of
peacekeeping missions to perform such activities, and
they are not equipped to do so. The militarization of
peacekeeping operations would deflect the United
Nations from its purpose, which is to promote peace
through peaceful solutions. It will therefore be
necessary to examine how to conceptualize counterterrorism tasks, not only in pragmatic terms but also in
their doctrinaire and political implications.
Brazil believes more emphasis should be placed on
the interdependence between security and development
and its impact on peacekeeping operations. Progress
in the area of economic and social development can
help foster a greater and more lasting commitment to
stability on the part of the local population, which in
turn is crucial to achieving conditions for sustainable
peace allowing for the successful drawdown of a
peacekeeping mission.
Brazil favours the institutionalization of consultations
among the Secretariat, the Security Council and the
troop- and police-contributing countries before the
renewal of the mandates of peacekeeping missions. The
experience of the Friends of Haiti is one to be borne in
mind in that respect. We need to overcome the illusion of
sequencing between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
At the earliest possible stage of the drafting of a
mandate, the Security Council should look into the
root causes of the conflict, including its economic and
social dimensions, and incorporate key peacebuilding
objectives into the mission’s mandate. In that context,
we encourage the Assembly to undertake the review
of peacekeeping operations in conjunction with the
review of the peacebuilding architecture, with a view to

15-30802

12/10/2015

their increased synergy. It is of the utmost importance
that the recommendations of the Panel be discussed in a
comprehensive manner by the broad membership under
the auspices of the General Assembly.
The Secretary-General’s recently released report
on the Panel’s recommendations, entitled “The future of
United Nations peace operations: implementation of the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations” (A/70/357), reiterates points made
by the Panel and mentions initiatives to be undertaken
by the Secretariat during the remainder of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon’s term. The report suggests that
the initiatives to be favoured are those which may, in
the opinion of the Secretariat, be implemented without
the need for the express authorization of the Member
States, namely administrative endeavours aimed at
improving the methods, planning and overall efficiency
of the system.
In our view, the general membership, and the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34) in
particular, should be given the opportunity to pronounce
themselves on those opinions. At the same time, we
are disappointed to note that the Secretary-General’s
report gives scant attention to a key administrative
recommendation contained in the Panel’s report (see
A/70/95) that a significant majority of Member States
endorses. I am referring to the creation of a separate
account for the financing of special political missions.
In sum, improving efficiency is a collective effort
that depends on the collaboration of all 193 Member
States. We look forward to discussing all aspects of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the Secretary-General’s reports within the framework
of the C-34 and the Fourth and Fifth Committees.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his briefing this morning and
acknowledging the presence of several Panel members
at this important debate.
The work of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations was seminal in nature. The
Secretary-General’s initiative in convening the Panel
to review peacekeeping did not come a day too soon.
Peacekeeping operations have been a critical instrument
in the toolkit of the United Nations. Blue Helmets have
become the most significant and visible contribution of
the United Nations to international peace and security.
Over the years, they have adapted to the changing
nature and dimensions of conflict, and that process of

A/70/PV.29

change continues. We hope that the report of the Panel
(A/70/95) and the Secretary-General’s implementation
report (A/70/357) will take that process forward.
These reports outline key priority areas for United
Nations peacekeeping, along with an agenda for action.
The recommendations provide a pathway for muchneeded reform endeavours, including assessments of
planning capabilities, leadership and training, as well
as more focused mandates. Let me briefly put forward
Pakistan’s view on the reports.
The overall tone of the reports is rightly
optimistic and forward-looking. We are gratified to
see several of our ideas find resonance in the reports.
They include the importance of consultations with
troop-contributing countries, the provision of better
resources for peacekeeping missions, a two-phased
mandate formation process and the non-deployment
of peacekeepers for counter-terrorism operations. We
believe the principles of peacekeeping should retain
their primacy. The edifice of peacekeeping has been
built on those principles. Adherence to them should
remain the norm. Reform has taken place in the past
without affecting the fundamental principles of
peacekeeping, and so it should in the future.
We agree that political processes should take
pre-eminence in conflict prevention. Peacekeeping
must be accompanied by a clear political track and
political objective, on whose successful pursuit should
rest the success of the peacekeeping mission. Increasing
the Secretariat’s capabilities in the fields of prevention
and mediation should be supported, as that would
enhance its conflict prevention role. Complex mandates
can be implemented only if peacekeeping operations
are provided with adequate resources. Where mandates
and capabilities are out of sync, the Secretariat should
candidly counsel the Security Council on remedial
measures, and those proposals should be given due
weight by the Council.
On the issue of the protection of civilians, the Panel
has proposed laying down requirements for reporting
and accountability to the Security Council. That
concept needs to be explored and further clarified, as it
is not entirely certain what would be entailed. The core
principles of peacekeeping are not an impediment to the
protection of civilians mandate. The Security Council
frames those mandates, and the use of force in defence
of the mandate is an integral part of the principles.
Adequacy of resources is critical to the fulfilment of
mandates. When mandating enforcement tasks, caution

15-3080217/29

A/70/PV.29

is needed, as such operations should be on an exceptional
and a time-limited basis. In that regard, mandates need
to be carefully crafted to retain the distinction between
peacekeeping and peace enforcement. The concept of
proactive defence needs further elaboration.
Rapid deployment and standby capabilities need
resources and the streamlining of Secretariat
procedures, some of which cause delays. Compensation
and the reimbursement of troop costs should continue
to get the focus they merit. A periodic mechanism for
that purpose needs to be established. We do not support
morphing the concept of peacekeeping into peace
operations. We believe that is a recipe for confusion
and ambiguity.
The safety and security of peacekeepers remains
an absolute and overriding priority for my delegation.
Pakistani troops serving in peacekeeping operations
are highly motivated, trained and professional. They
certainly do not shy away from mandated tasks. The
cautious approach that we advocate is merely that
the United Nations carefully study the impact of
those changes, including with regard to international
humanitarian law, the immunity of United Nations
peacekeepers and the safety and security of
peacekeepers when their neutrality is compromised.
We believe that the reports need thoughtful
examination and careful study. For that purpose, we
believe that the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34) is the most appropriate body to
deliberate on the issue. The idea of convening a special
session of the C-34 to discuss the finer details and chart
out an implementation plan might also be considered.
Pakistan has not only consistently been among
the world’s top troop-contributing countries to United
Nations peacekeeping, but is also at the forefront of
norm-setting on the subject. By way of reinforcing and
reiterating our enduring commitment, Prime Minister
Nawaz Sharif co-hosted the leaders’ summit on
peacekeeping last month and announced a series of new
pledges to support future endeavours. Let me assure
Member States that our commitment to peacekeeping
is as strong as our commitment to peace itself. Despite
challenging circumstances at home, we will continue
to provide peacekeepers, as we consider it our sacred
duty to do so. We will continue to support that common
cause.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

18/29

12/10/2015

I join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report (A/70/357) and the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, led by Mr. Ramos-Horta, for its
work.
As the Panel’s report (see A/70/95) clearly highlights,
the global security challenge has dramatically changed
over the years. We need renewed partnerships and
updated tools to face today’s challenges. As the foremost
Blue Helmet contributor among Western countries,
Italy has a strong and direct interest in contributing to
the future of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Thanks to our presence in the field, we have gathered
considerable experience in peacekeeping through the
years, which we are ready and willing to share.
Before addressing the more detailed aspects, I want
to stress the need for the United Nations as a whole
to continue to work towards political responses to
crises. We need to engage much more in mediation and
prevention. The report on peacekeeping operations, the
report of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review
of the Peacebuilding Architecture (A/69/968) and the
global study on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security
all have a common denominator: the reinforcement
of the tools pertaining to preventive diplomacy. We
think that we need to return such activities to the core
business of the United Nations.
Conflict prevention, confidence-building measures
and mediation instruments must be given the necessary
space and resources. At the same time, those building
tools are key to ensuring reconciliation and lasting
peace and security and therefore must receive the
proper political and financial support. We are of the
opinion that as the United Nations reviews its tools
with a view to being more fit for purpose in addressing
the challenges, those three tracks must proceed in
an integrated, coordinated way, encouraging every
possible synergy.
The Italian contribution to peacekeeping is not
limited to supplying troops, as it is complemented
by providing training, naval vessels, air assets and
intelligence resources, integrated by an experienced
military leadership. Italy is not only engaged abroad;
it is also providing training, education and logistical
support to United Nations operations on Italian
territory, through the United Nations logistical base in
Brindisi, which is the first permanent logistical base
to support peacekeeping operations and has been in
operation since 1994.
15-30802

12/10/2015

Training is crucial to ensure the success and
reputation of the missions. Italy has a strong record
in training national personnel for peace operations.
Respect for human rights, protection of civilians and a
gender perspective are embedded in national military
training curricula. Since 2005, the Centre of Excellence
for Stability Police Units, in Vicenza, run by our
Carabinieri, together with the United States and other
African and European countries, has offered training
programmes and developed standards and common
operating procedures to be applied during robust police
activity. Twenty countries have already sent personnel
to be trained at the Centre.
Italy is also ready to strengthen its engagement
in capacity-building, to support police and military
units of Member States willing to contribute to United
Nations missions. Our focus will be on predeployment
training and other sectors where Italy’s expertise is
well established, such as civil military cooperation,
countering improvised explosive devices and protection
of civilians. We are all conscious, of course, of the
importance of predeployment training.
I confirm Italy’s full support for the zero-tolerance
policy against sexual abuse. Italy, as one of the major
troop-contributing countries and one of the original
signatories of the Kigali Declaration, has reaffirmed its
commitment to working to prevent abuse, from the level
of the training phase in which we are involved, to the
deployment of more female peacekeepers. Italy can also
count on the specialized units within its contingents.
The Carabinieri units, acting as military police, are
able to monitor and investigate any wrongdoing.
The protection of civilians is a growing challenge
for United Nations missions when the security context
remains volatile and the reconciliation process is fragile.
As a relatively new task of the United Nations and its
missions, the review offers an opportunity to provide
a strategic vision on such a crucial topic. In order to
deliver the effective protection of civilians, strong unity
of intent among the United Nations membership is
needed. Furthermore, greater effort should be invested
in supporting regional organizations, especially on the
African continent, through training and assistance. The
United Nations should seek closer synergies with the
European Union in that respect.
There is an emerging dimension to which I would
like to briefly draw attention. It concerns Italy’s belief
about what should be done to protect cultural heritage
in a crisis situation and may provide a substantial

A/70/PV.29

contribution to the prevention and reconciliation efforts
led by the United Nations. The cultural dimension, which
has already been integrated into the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, could represent an additional capability of
United Nations peace operations. Based on our national
experience, we stand ready to promote that approach.
We live in challenging times and are confronted
by the legitimate expectation, as expressed by public
opinion on behalf of the most severely affected people,
that the international community should be able to
implement comprehensive policies, accompanied by
effective tools. We must live up to that expectation
while ensuring the credibility of the United Nations in
the maintenance of peace and security.
Ms. Rodríguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me begin by thanking the President of the
General Assembly for convening this important debate
and for his leadership in initiating a process that will
mark the starting point of the work to be carried out
in the coming months. I also express my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comments.
As we have said on other occasions, Guatemala
welcomes many of the recommendations proposed by
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
in its report (see A/70/95) on the modernization of those
operations. We have also taken note of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the implementation of the Panel’s
recommendations (A/70/357). We hope to be able to
discuss and to implement the recommendations and
proposals contained in both reports; we believe that
they are mutually complementary and should therefore
be examined as a whole.
We have taken note of the differences between the
two reports and hope to have a substantive dialogue
on all of the issues, particularly regarding regional
partnerships, innovative approaches to planning and
leading peacekeeping operations, the focus on the
ground and the involvement of individuals, and the
establishment of a separate fund for the financing
of special political missions. In that regard, it will
be necessary to discuss the question of terminology
that is acceptable to all Member States, including the
definition of a peace operation.
We must all address the fundamental challenges
faced by United Nations peacekeeping operations
today. We recognize that peacekeeping is not an end
in itself, but rather a process. We must bear in mind

15-3080219/29

A/70/PV.29

all stages of a conflict, because the end of a conflict
does not necessarily signal the establishment of peace.
The review process also provides an opportunity to
reduce the fragmentation evident in the activities of the
various United Nations bodies endowed with peace and
security mandates.
In addition, we must achieve greater coordination
and cohesion with other review processes to be
undertaken this year. We hope to better harmonize
the three agendas. Unlike in the process to review the
United Nations peacekeeping architecture, where two
facilitators have already been appointed and where a
road map on moving forward already exists, we are not
quite sure about how to proceed with the two reports
before the Assembly. In that regard, we believe that
in each of the spaces that exist to examine the various
issues addressed in both reports, we can achieve the
agreements necessary to advance the work of the United
Nations peacekeepers.
We recognize the value of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations in providing a forum
for countries such as mine to join in the discussion
on ways to improve and increase the effectiveness of
the peacekeeping operations. We also recognize the
relevance of the discussions in the Fourth Committee
on political issues associated with the special political
missions and in the Fifth Committee on budgetary and
administrative matters. This does not mean that we will
settle for any agreement, but we hope that it will be the
type of agreement that will lead to significant reforms
for a new collective vision of the Organization and what
the United Nations should be doing in the maintenance
of international peace and security.
My delegation is ready to actively participate to
advance the work of the United Nations.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
Secretary-General took the initiative to launch a
strategic review of peacekeeping operations, and today
we are considering his proposals on the basis of the
work done by the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations, led by Mr. Ramos-Horta, to whom
I am pleased to pay tribute. France is grateful to the
Secretary-General for having taken this initiative and
congratulates the Independent Panel and the Secretariat
for carrying out this major undertaking under tight
deadlines. Allow me to make three observations.
First, we support the conceptual framework
proposed by the Secretary-General. France agrees that

20/29

12/10/2015

priority should be given to seeking political agreements
in order to achieve lasting solutions to crises. That is
the very raison d’être of peacekeeping. Similarly,
France welcomes the fact that the protection of civilians
and human rights are recognized as fundamental goals
in peacekeeping. In this connection, we support the
Human Rights Up Front initiative and the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to promote an active and early
engagement by the United Nations where there is a
threat to civilians.
These two requirements call for dynamic, engaged
and sometimes, when necessary, robust peacekeeping.
We believe the Secretary-General has found the right
balance in this regard. A United Nations peacekeeping
operation cannot impose solutions by force, but must
know how to use force in support of the search for
political solutions and the imperative of protecting
civilians when circumstances require it.
My second point is that France supports the main
principles, such as the immediate measures identified
by the Secretary-General, as a guide for United Nations
action in crisis situations. First of all, there is the
principle of being exemplary. The Blue Helmets embody
the values ​​of the Charter of the United Nations and our
shared conscience. They serve the people. In this regard,
the recent cases of sexual abuse are unacceptable.
France supports the proposals of the Secretary-General
to further strengthen the zero-tolerance policy applied
to the Blue Helmets and ensures that the same principle
applies to our national troops when they are abroad.
We should also support the principle of
accountability. It must be applied at all levels, from the
local level of operations on the ground to the strategic
level of the decisions taken by the Security Council. We
believe it is important to strengthen the accountability
of the heads of missions. France will continue to ensure
that this principle guides the decision-making by the
Council, in particular in the development of targeted,
coherent and sequenced mandates. The principles
of partnership and coordination are also compasses
for United Nations action. Partnership with regional
organizations, on the basis of Chapter VIII, must be
strengthened. The principle of coordination should
allow the various United Nations funds and agencies on
the ground to work together more effectively.
Thirdly, our main concern, ultimately, is that the
United Nations be more effective and proactive on
the ground, as the Secretary-General has just stated.
This imperative of efficiency can be achieved quickly
15-30802

12/10/2015

through simple and inexpensive reorganization and
procedural reform measures. The first of these, in the
spirit of the report before us, is to empower the actors
on the ground and make them accountable and to adapt
the procedures to enable the necessary flexibility.
Competencies and capacities should be in place at
Headquarters and on the ground, and we count on the
mobilization of the Secretariat on this subject. In the
same spirit, the Secretariat’s internal procedures must
be thoroughly reviewed. Some rules for hiring civilian
personnel are too cumbersome and slow. Similarly,
some rules allowing for the provision of support and
equipment to troops should be improved in order to be
more responsive.
Finally, as the Secretary-General has stated and as
is indicated in the report (A/70/357), we must protect
the security of the staff of the peacekeeping operations
and that begins with better governance of health-care
issues in the operations. Better supervision and an
accountability framework must be established. There
are other priorities we could mention, such as the use
of new technologies and a strengthening of intelligence
capacities, which also lead to important improvements
in peacekeeping.
France will continue to participate and support
United Nations peace operations and participate fully
in order to enhance their effectiveness.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I thank the President for
organizing this important meeting.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union, and I will make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.
First, we thank and commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/70/357) on the future of the
United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is a very
timely report not only because it comes as we mark
the seventieth anniversary of our Organization, but
even more so because it comes at a time when we are
faced with unprecedented challenges — more armed
conflicts, terrorism and violent extremism, more than
60 million refugees and internally displaced persons,
migration and humanitarian crises.
For many years United Nations peacekeeping
operations have helped to maintain international peace
and security around the world. Croatia can bear witness
to that. In the early 1990s, Croatia was the theatre of one
of the largest United Nations peacekeeping operations
in history. Important lessons were learned during that

A/70/PV.29

time, and we must constantly remain mindful of them,
especially when it comes to the clarity of mandates and
the means of implementing them.
Today, with the growing complexity of challenges
in the international order, United Nations peacekeeping
is as important to international peace and stability as
ever. Nothing short of a comprehensive and thorough
analysis is needed in order to help United Nations
peacekeeping adapt to the realities of a globalized world
and its regional specificities. For that reason Croatia
strongly welcomes and commends the excellent work
done by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations led by Mr. Ramos-Horta, as well as the
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the recommendations of the Panel.
We are confident that the report will provide a strong
basis and guidance for increasing the effectiveness
of United Nations peace operations and enhancing
synergy between all the components of United Nations
peacekeeping. I would like to reiterate in particular
the following points that were raised by Croatia at the
highest level earlier this month. Rapid-deployment
capacity should be efficiently ensured. Mandates should
be clear, precise and realistic. They should be designed
according to specific circumstances in a given context.
There must be no ambiguity concerning the tasks that
should be accomplished.
Creating more clarity in mandates is a way to
improve their outcome. Mandates must be focused
on protecting civilians and those most vulnerable in
conflicts, namely, women, children and the elderly. In
our view, the protection of civilians is one of the crucial
dimensions of peacekeeping and is often decisive for the
success and legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The failures and successes of the past must
serve as lessons for the future. What happened in
Srebrenica 20 years ago is a poignant example that must
not be repeated under any circumstances.
We stress the need for the active and meaningful
participation of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peace processes, including the need to
increase their role in decision-making in all areas. We
all need to increase our efforts to mainstream gender
aspects into peace operations. Promoting respect for
human rights also has to be an essential part of conflict
prevention and peacekeeping and, as such, should be
reflected in the mandates. One of our priorities should be
the prevention of sexual and gender-based violence. We
are particularly concerned about accusations of sexual

15-3080221/29

A/70/PV.29

exploitation and abuse by several of the peacekeeping
troops. It has to be clearly stated that such conduct is
unacceptable, that those cases should be thoroughly
and rapidly investigated, that such actions must be
publicly denounced and that their perpetrators must be
held accountable. United Nations personnel are there to
protect and help, and any misuse of that noble role must
be condemned unequivocally.
The link between security and development should
constantly remain in our focus. Once a conflict is
contained and the peacekeeping mission proves to
be operative in practice, it must be accompanied by
timely and clearly defined development efforts. In that
context, we see a clear linkage between the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/70/357) and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution A/70/1), as well
as other review processes. We believe that the parallel
review processes of the peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, will provide strategic and
operational recommendations that should be read
together to create constructive synergy.
Peace operations today encompass a range
of operations that take place in all phases of the
conflict cycle, including prevention, peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peacebuilding, and reconstruction
and development roles. There is a clear linkage between
all of those roles, all of which require our attention.
Nevertheless, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
call urging that prevention and mediation be put at the
centre of international peace and security efforts and
that United Nations tools to prevent and mediate crises
be strengthened in order to help create faster and more
cost-effective responses to conflicts.
In conclusion, let me say that the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations is the
responsibility of all Member States. On our behalf, I
can reiterate Croatia’s readiness and determination to
continue to actively contribute to making United Nations
peacekeeping even more effective and efficient. Croatia
recently participated in the peacekeeping summit
hosted by President Obama, where we announced
our new contribution to United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, to which we remain committed.
Lastly, let me reiterate our words of gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his leadership in preparing the
United Nations to rise to the challenges of the future.

22/29

12/10/2015

Mr. Menelaou (Cyprus): Cyprus aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union, and would like to add the following in
its national capacity.
We express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/70/357) and to the members of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
chaired by Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for their invaluable
work and the inclusive and transparent way, in which
they accomplished their task.
Cyprus has served as host to a United Nations
peacekeeping mission for over 50 years. We therefore
have first-hand experience of the evolving nature of
United Nations peacekeeping. We are also aware of
the fact that for every dimension of the work of the
Organization, peacekeeping needs to be harmonized
with contemporary challenges in order to effectively
respond to present-day needs, while upholding its
purposes as defined in the Charter of the United Nations.
From that angle, we wish to reflect on several aspects
that were identified and then developed in the report,
which in our view, should be among the fundamental
components of effective peacekeeping.
First, we fully share the position advanced in the
report that negotiated political settlements should be
the fundamental objective of United Nations peace
operations and that such political solutions to conflicts
depend ultimately on a country’s people and leaders.
The United Nations role is, as the report also states,
to assist parties to arrive at sustainable political
agreements. Let us underline, in that regard, that in
discharging that role, the United Nations must be
neutral but not neutralized, and that impartiality is not
the same as being equidistant between the Charter and
resolutions, on the one hand, and illegality, on the other.
In the same vein, we consider that sequenced mandates
constitute an innovative notion that can strengthen the
adjustability of peace operations without outweighing
political primacy or overemphasizing methodological
considerations.
Secondly, Cyprus fully agrees that human rights,
gender equality and the participation of women in
peace operations, as well as the humanitarian role of
peacekeeping, should be placed at the heart of peace
operations and the security agenda. Specifically, with
regard to the humanitarian aspects, efforts must be
redoubled and resources increased in the area of truth
and reconciliation for the purpose of discovering and
revealing past wrongdoing.
15-30802

12/10/2015

In conclusion, let me once again express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his efforts
and reassure him of our support for more coherent,
transparent and effective United Nations peacekeeping.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation for the President’s
leadership in convening today’s timely meeting. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his report (A/70/357) and his briefing today. My
gratitude also goes to Mr. José Ramos-Horta, Chair
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peacekeeping
Operations, who is present among us today, and to the
other Panel members for their excellent report (see
A/70/95).
Two weeks ago, leaders of more than 50 countries
and organizations, including my own, discussed United
Nations peacekeeping operations at the United Nations,
under the chairmanship of President Obama of the
United States. My hope is that the momentum created
by the leaders’ summit on the issue will give a strong
impetus to our upcoming intergovernmental discussion
on the two reports on United Nations peace operations
currently before of us. Before discussing the reports, let
me say a few words about United Nations peacekeeping
operations.
Although this is not stipulated in the Charter of the
United Nations, peacekeeping operations have been
an integral part of United Nations activities on peace
and security. Because of their excellent results, and
the high expectations placed in them, their roles and
responsibilities have been expanded. In fact, over the
past decade, the number of deployed peacekeepers has
doubled, from 65,000 to 123,000. The peacekeeping
budget has also increased. For the biennium 2004-2005,
it was approximately $4 billion; the budget 10 years
later has hit a historic high of $8.5 billion. While we can
acknowledge the excellent work done by peacekeeping
operations in the maintenance of international peace
and security in places like Cambodia and Timor-Leste,
the challenge we now face is how to make peacekeeping
operations sustainable with the limited financial and
human resources available.
Fifteen years ago, we were all involved in finalizing a
very comprehensive review of peacekeeping operations
known as the Brahimi report. I took part in that review.
I believe that the most important sentence of the report
is the one that says, “But force alone cannot create
peace; it can only create the space in which peace may
be built” (A/55/305, p. viii). The primary role of military

A/70/PV.29

operations is to create space for the political process to
achieve a viable peace.
We should conduct a thorough review of peacekeeping
operations that examines the need for each mission
based on that criterion. In that context, military missions
that have been deployed for a long time should be called
into question. I would like to point out that six of the
current 16 peacekeeping missions have had military
troops deployed for more than a decade; three of those
missions have had troops deployed for more than three
decades. We all know which missions they are. Are so
many years of military presence not sufficient to give
the political leaders of the parties to those conflicts the
space in which to build peace? If not sufficient, then
for how many more years do the peacekeepers need to
continue their work? We should continuously check
whether the current configuration of peacekeeping
missions and other United Nations instruments for
international peace and security, including special
political missions, are the most effective means for
achieving sustainable peace.
The two reports before us today urge that each
mission be more adaptive to the situation and needs
on the ground. To that end, we need to ensure that the
mission’s mandate is elaborated in accordance with the
reality on the ground and that it is responsive to the
changing field situation. The Secretary-General should
keep a close eye on developments on the ground and
should make timely and realistic recommendations
to the Security Council. The Security Council should
review each mission’s mandate in a timely manner to
ensure the effectiveness of the mission’s activities.
The automatic renewal of mission mandates should
be avoided, and the mandates of prolonged missions
should be thoroughly reviewed.
We also need to enhance our human resources.
Even though highly qualified personnel are necessary
for today’s peacekeeping operations, we all too often
struggle to meet that requirement. There is a pressing
need to increase the number of qualified personnel.
Training is an indispensable tool for creating qualified
peacekeepers. The two reports welcome capacitybuilding initiatives through so-called triangular
partnership arrangements between the Secretariat,
troop contributors and third-party countries with
specific capabilities. The Department of Field Support
and Japan jointly launched a pioneering project for
African troop-contributing countries, to which Japan
contributed approximately $40 million for funding

15-3080223/29

A/70/PV.29

the project and for trainers. In September, the project
started trial training in Kenya; full-scale training will
follow next year.
Before closing, I regret having to touch on one
negative aspect of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Recent allegations of reprehensible sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers, particularly the
latest allegations in the Central African Republic, have
damaged the Organization’s integrity and credibility.
The bad news is that this is neither the only nor the first
such case. Such unacceptable misconduct tarnishes
the noble contributions of the more than 100,000
peacekeepers being deployed today. Concrete and
robust measures against such unacceptable behaviour
are necessary. To that end, Japan strongly supports the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy and calls
for the immediate implementation of the measures
recommended in his report.
Finally, I would like to mention one point regarding
the budgetary issues with respect to all categories
of United Nations peace operations, including
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Although the two reports include numerous important
initiatives, we are concerned about their possible cost
implications. Every single dollar spent by the United
Nations comes from the taxpayers of the Member
States. We therefore urge the Secretariat to absorb
any add-ons, to the greatest extent possible, within the
existing resources.
In line with the points that I have raised today, my
delegation will proactively contribute to subsequent
discussions on the recommendations of the two reports
in the relevant bodies of the General Assembly, such
as the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Fourth and Fifth Committees.
In closing, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to all field personnel serving in United
Nations peace operations and to offer my deepest
condolences for those personnel who have made the
ultimate sacrifice.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with the
statement made this morning by the observer of the
European Union.
Sweden warmly welcomes the opportunity to
discus the very timely review of United Nations peace
operations. It has set out important steps, not just
towards strengthening United Nations peacekeeping

24/29

12/10/2015

capabilities, but also towards reforming United Nations
responses to challenges to peace and security as a
whole. That review, together with the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and the global study on
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), has created a
real momentum for reform, an opportunity that should
not be missed.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (A/70/357) on the future of United
Nations peace operations, which takes up many of the
recommendations of the excellent work of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We find
the report balanced, constructive and operational. In
that regard, we would like to highlight three aspects as
we move forward.
First, we particularly welcome the focus on the
entire conflict cycle of planning and executing peace
operations. Operations should be designed not only
to keep the peace but also to facilitate post-conflict
peacebuilding, to help prevent lapses and relapses into
conflict and to assist with progress towards sustainable
peace and development. Also, peacebuilding activities
need to be given adequate resources to work effectively.
We support the concept of a continuum of peace
operations, thereby moving away from the increasingly
artificial distinction between traditional peacekeeping
operations and special political missions.
Secondly, it is crucial that a gender perspective
and the conclusions of the review of resolution 1325
(2000) be integrated into all aspects of United Nations
peace operations, throughout mission life cycles and
across mandated tasks. Unfortunately, we have a long
way to go to achieve that objective, but we nonetheless
welcome the Secretary-General’s resolve to increase
accountability and root out sexual exploitation and
abuse among the ranks of United Nations personnel in
the field.
Thirdly, partnerships with regional organizations
are central to effective international peace and security
engagements. As recent history has shown, not least in
Africa, regional forces are often faster to deploy and
better able to act swiftly and decisively. The African
Union (AU) has led the way with its efforts to fully
operationalize its African Standby Force. Sweden is
already a major supporter of institution and capacitybuilding endeavours within the African Union and
remains fully committed to facilitating further
integration between United Nations and AU capabilities.

15-30802

12/10/2015

In conclusion, we must be realistic about the
challenges ahead but ambitious in our responses, and
we all have a responsibility to see the process through.
The Secretary-General’s leadership in implementing
the recommendations in his report that fall within his
remit is crucial, but we would also like to call on the
States Members of the United Nations to seize this
opportunity to reform the United Nations peace and
security architecture in all relevant forums and make
it fit to tackle the security challenges of today and
tomorrow. Sweden stands ready to do its part in that.
Mr. Toro-Carnevali (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We align ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
are very grateful for the convening of today’s meeting
to discuss the two reports before us.
The report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see A/70/95) — the “Nyakhat
report” — provides us with a profound reflection on the
future of the United Nations peacekeeping architecture.
While the report makes specific recommendations on
how to reform and improve the work of the Organization,
its greatest contribution lies in having put on paper the
complexity, challenges and the contradictions that face
any agenda for reform in this area.
Turning to some concrete examples of such
challenges, the report stresses the importance of
giving priority to political solutions in the design and
deployment of peacekeeping operations, but at the same
time recognizes that most conflicts today are more
intricate and less conducive to political resolution than
formerly. The report urges that peacekeeping operations
leave behind the culture of white sport utility vehicles
and armoured trucks and focus more on people, on
showing a more human face and interacting more with
local communities in order to better understand their
needs and aspirations. At the same time, however, the
report stresses that 90 per cent of political missions and
two thirds of peacekeeping operations are deployed in
high-risk situations where conflicts are still ongoing
and there are serious security concerns for personnel.
The report sees prevention and mediation as playing
a key role, with an emphasis on discreet preventive
diplomacy that by its nature will go unrecognized if
it is successful. At the same time, the report stresses
that precisely because such preventive mediation and
diplomacy is discreet and quiet, it does not attract

A/70/PV.29

donors’ attention and suffers from chronic budget
shortfalls.
The report agrees with the view of humanitarian
workers that peacekeeping operations must be
committed to an maintaining an open dialogue with
all parties to a conflict, State and non-State actors
alike, and should explore all alternatives to violence.
However, it indicates that at times some peacekeeping
operations with exceptional mandates can themselves
become parties to a conflict, with serious consequences
for their impartiality and for the Organization’s
humanitarian tasks. There are many examples such
as these that highlight the deep complexity of peace
operations. The Secretary-General’s report (A/70/357)
makes a significant effort to take the more operational
aspects of the Panel’s report and translate them into
concrete policies, although it does not always follow the
Panel’s recommendations and sometimes introduces
new elements. Both reports are important and should
be carefully considered. Privileging one report over
the other as the sole source for intergovernmental
negotiation processes would be a serious error. Both
have much to contribute.
The work on the High-level Panel’s report was
done transparently and was the product of extensive
regional consultations, but its legitimacy, and that of
the Secretary-General’s report, will depend on the
decisions to be adopted by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the only body charged with
designing the policies and doctrines that govern those
operations, and by other relevant committees of the
General Assembly.
Mr. Alday González (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is grateful for the convening of this
meeting to discuss the Secretary-General’s report on the
future of United Nations peace operations (A/70/357).
The recommendations of the Secretary-General and of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
skilfully led by Mr. José Ramos-Horta, along with
the seventieth anniversary of the Organization, have
given us a unique opportunity to reflect on the role we
believe the United Nations should play in international
relations in the future. Mexico sees it as a test of the
will and commitment of Member States to finding
solutions to the multidimensional problems we face,
and to formulate and implement solutions to political,
security, development, human rights and humanitarian
issues.

15-3080225/29

A/70/PV.29

The world increasingly demands more of the staff
of our peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, and we the Member States have not been able
to agree on providing the Organization with all the
resources it needs to discharge its mandate. We believe
that, in order to be effective and efficient, the future of
peacekeeping operations cannot continue to be subject
to unpredictable resource allocation. We therefore
urge that immediate steps be taken to improve the
situation. We strongly support the clear and convincing
recommendation of the High-level Independent Panel
for the immediate adoption of measures to set up a
special separate account for special political missions,
and we regret that the Secretary-General has not placed
more emphasis on that proposal in his report (A/70/357).
In our collective efforts, we must acknowledge
the growing importance of the role that regional and
subregional organizations play in conflict resolution, as
well as the relevance — emphasized by the Independent
Panel and the Secretary-General — of prevention,
providing mediation and favouring political over
military solutions, which has been one of the historical
pillars of Mexican foreign policy. The General
Assembly, the Fourth Committee, the Fifth Committee,
and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
should, in Mexico’s opinion, play an important role in
the discussion of all proposals presented in efforts to
define any implementation process.
We believe that the innovative solutions referred
to by the Secretariat should not contravene the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and
in that regard, we strongly support, for example, the
Independent Panel’s recommendation that the mandates
for peacekeeping operations not include anti-terrorist
activities. At the same time, we cannot allow current
conflicts to continue to wreak havoc and past conflicts
to return with renewed violence. For my delegation,
there is no better investment than to invest in the peace
and security of our societies; we all have a global
responsibility.
In our discussion, as we carry out an analysis of the
future of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, it is essential that we take every possible
measure to prevent the recurrence of sexual abuse
perpetrated by United Nations personnel and bring to
justice all those who have committed it. The most visible
face of the United Nations around the world cannot
serve as a cover-up for that minority. Accountability
must be an imperative, not just an aspiration or a goal.

26/29

12/10/2015

It is essential that the civil and military personnel of
the United Nations behave in a manner consistent with
the values of the Organization and that all States that
contribute personnel to United Nations operations
assume our responsibilities in that matter.
The exercise on which we are embarking today
ought to help us to clearly define the road map that
will enable us to strengthen the performance and
the influence of the Organization in confronting the
challenges to international peace and security so that
we can save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. The delegation of Mexico will continue to
participate constructively in the review process
as well as in other areas that are being conducted
simultaneously, such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000). We
hope that those processes generate synergies and will
reinforce each other so as to enable the United Nations
system to offer the best possible response.
Ms. Faizunnesa (Bangladesh): Bangladesh aligns
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The consultation process carried out by the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations kicked
off in the capital of Bangladesh, Dhaka. Today, we are
indeed pleased and encouraged to see that its report (see
A/70/95) has been issued in a timely manner. We wish
to thank the High-level Panel and welcome its report.
We are also particularly thankful for and welcome the
Secretary-General’s report (A/70/357) presented this
morning.
We look forward to the recommendations of the
High-level Panel being implemented in an effective
way. Bangladesh remains committed to supporting
the Secretary-General’s initiative in implementing the
High-level Panel’s report and in addressing the existing
and projected gaps in United Nations peace operations.
As one of the largest troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs), we
consider the High-level Panel’s report very important.
The Secretary-General has provided a pragmatic
road map for implementing the recommendations in
the report. We would like to see a full and effective
implementation of those recommendations in a
transparent manner through the due involvement of the
relevant United Nations committees and bodies.
On 28 September, Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina,
Prime Minister of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh,

15-30802

12/10/2015

in her capacity as a host of the 2015 leaders’ summit
on United Nations peace operations, underscored
Bangladesh’s strong and steadfast commitment to United
Nations peace operations. We shall support efforts
aimed at bringing into effect the recommendations of
the High-level Panel. We are ready to further engage
on the constructive ideas that the Secretary-General
has put forward in his report. We would also like to
urge that all the TCCs and PCCs be taken on board to
participate in discussions and consultations during the
implementation process.
We reiterate our full support for the effort to
strengthen the hands of the United Nations by providing
capable, well-trained and equipped peacekeepers to fulfil
the mandated tasks. In that regard, let me share with the
Assembly that Bangladesh has a state-of-the-art centre
in situ for peace-support operations and training, which
is called the Bangladesh Institute of Peace Support
Operation Training. We are developing it as a centre
of excellence for training peacekeepers, particularly
female peacekeepers. With the evolving nature of
peace operations, Bangladesh has constantly updated
its deployment capabilities. We have demonstrated the
capacity to respond to the needs of missions in highrisk conflict nations on very short notice. In Mali,
the eastern Congo and the Central African Republic,
Bangladesh was the quickest to deploy troops under
the Blue Helmets. We aim to promote the protection of
civilians and the mainstreaming of gender and human
rights issues, as well as to offer language skills to our
peacekeepers, through training.
There is an imperative need to have a better
system in place to ensure the safety and security of
peacekeepers. As the Secretary-General’s remarks
indicated this morning, we must show zero tolerance
for sexual misconduct by peacekeepers.
Lastly, we wish to highlight that Bangladesh
looks forward to the high-level thematic debate to be
convened in May 2016 by the President of the General
Assembly. We reiterate our full commitment to the
implementation of the High-level Panel’s report.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At
the outset, I would like to thank the President for
convening this meeting on an issue of importance to the
international community, namely, that of strengthening
the United Nations system, and for enabling Member
States to express their views on the outcome of the
Secretary-General’s High-level Independent Panel on

A/70/PV.29

Peace Operations. My thanks also go to Mr. RamosHorta, Chair of the High-level Panel, and to the
Secretary-General for their valuable reports, contained
in documents A/70/95 and A/70/357, respectively.
I align myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
While we are grateful to the troop- and
police-contributing countries of the United Nations
for their efforts to assist countries in crisis, we should
not ignore the shameful actions of some individuals
that have tarnished the efforts of tens of thousands
of United Nations peacekeepers and other personnel.
We must do more to tackle such profound challenges,
and we therefore need new approaches, solutions and
initiatives to deal with those problems. We appreciate
the initiative of the Secretary-General in establishing
a high-level panel to review the past practices of the
United Nations in its peace operations.
While we attach great importance to the SecretaryGeneral’s report and respect his views on how to
implement the recommendations in the High-level
Panel’s report, the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran would like to emphasize the following points.
First, we should avoid hasty implementation of the
recommendations. Giving them sufficiently careful
thought in an appropriate forum is a must if we want to
have successful peacekeeping operations in the future.
Second, we stress the importance of the General
Assembly’s role as the most democratic organ of the
United Nations where peacekeeping operations are
concerned. The Assembly has the primary role and
responsibility for formulating concepts, policies
and budgetary decisions relating to peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, I would like to point out
that, in accordance with paragraph 20 of the report of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/68/19), the Special Committee is the only United
Nations forum mandated to review comprehensively
the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all
their aspects.
Third, the Government of the Islamic Republic
of Iran fully supports strengthening and enhancing
the capacity of the United Nations in the fields of
peacemaking, peacebuilding, peacekeeping, mediation
and so forth, with the aim of maintaining international
peace and security.

15-3080227/29

A/70/PV.29

Fourth, in all United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we must respect the principles of the
sovereign equality, political independence and
territorial integrity of all States and of non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within States’ domestic
jurisdiction.
Fifth, it is vital that we observe the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in all
peace operations, along with the basic principles for
such operations that have guided them thus far, namely,
the consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use
of force except in self-defence. They remain valid and
relevant, and must be fully preserved.
Sixth, we must take great care when considering
the adoption of any new concepts aimed at addressing
emerging needs and demands emanating from the
complexity of peacekeeping operations. Any such
concepts should be formulated and agreed on by the
entire United Nations membership through a relevant
intergovernmental process.
Seventh, any contribution in support of a host
country in its restoration or establishment of the rule of
law should take into account national ownership as well
as the cultural diversity and specificity of each country.
Eighth, the role of host countries in formulating and
implementing activities relating to the peacebuilding
process should be fully recognized.
Ninth, the protection of civilians is the primary
responsibility of the host country and should not be
used as a pretext for military intervention in countries
that are in a state of conflict or emerging from conflict.
Tenth, primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security rests with the
United Nations, and the role of regional arrangements
and agencies in that regard should accord with Chapter
VIII of the Charter.
Eleventh, we need to take full account of the
principle of equitable geographical distribution
in the staffing and structure of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support.
Twelfth, the United Nations should use the
available capacities of the whole membership in peace
operations, including in the areas of the military,
police, civilians and logistics. Any requests from the
Secretariat for contributions from Member States to
peacekeeping missions should, therefore, be transparent
28/29

12/10/2015

and be extended to all current and potential troop- and
police-contributing countries.
Thirteenth, the Islamic Republic of Iran fully
supports efforts to restore the quest for peaceful
political settlements to the centre of United Nations
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts.
Lastly, it is also essential that we give full attention
to the root causes of conflicts, since it is clear that
prevention is possible only if the root causes are known.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
delegation’s commitment to supporting any endeavour
aimed at peacemaking, peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and mediation and to fully cooperating and working
constructively with the President of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General and all Member
States in that regard.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the President for organizing this
important debate. In the wake of the work of the Highlevel Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see
A/70/95) and the publication of the Secretary-General’s
report on the recommendations of the High-level Panel
(A/70/357), it is essential that we maintain the current
momentum in order to strengthen the United Nations
peacekeeping and conflict-prevention architecture.
At this point, instead of deeply into the rich subject
matter before us, Switzerland we will simply make
some general remarks on the two reports and on the
way forward.
Switzerland welcomes the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations and looks
forward to the implementation of its recommendations.
The High-level Panel was able to provide a balanced
analysis and a set of recommendations that should
be carefully examined. That was made possible, in
particular, by extensive consultations among all of the
stakeholders involved in peace operations, including
Member States.
Switzerland also welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General, which further elaborates the
fundamental challenges that often significantly impede
the effective functioning of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, which include, inter alia,
the lack of resources in certain areas and the lack of
adequate structures and procedures. We welcome the
conclusion of the Secretary-General expressed in his
three priorities. They pave the way forward for both
political solutions and improved administration.
15-30802

12/10/2015

To implement the recommendations effectively, it
is advisable to develop a road map that appropriately
sets out the tasks of the various United Nations bodies,
including the Secretariat, and the areas of responsibility
of the Security Council and Member States in the
implementation of the recommendations. Such a road
map would outline the various stages of implementation
of the recommendations.
In that context, Switzerland shares the view
expressed in the report that only a joint approach

A/70/PV.29

will lead to the effective implementation of the
recommendations. Indeed, no single entity will be able
to address the current challenges to peace and security.
Close cooperation throughout the United Nations
system and the establishment of ongoing partnerships
between the various competent agencies and actors is
essential.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

15-3080229/29
