UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/100
30 January 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

1.
In accordance with the Security Council’s primary responsibility, under the
United Nations Charter, for the maintenance of international peace and security,
and emphasizing the importance of comprehensive compliance with all relevant
resolutions, the Security Council continues to discuss options which would lead
to the full implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions
regarding Iraq. While pursuing these discussions, the Security Council has
decided that it would be useful to establish three separate panels and to
receive recommendations from them no later than 15 April 1999.
2.
The Security Council invites the current President of the Council,
Ambassador Celso Amorim of Brazil, to chair each of the panels. In an effort to
maintain continuity, his chairmanship would run beyond his current tenure as
President of the Security Council in order to complete this work.
3.
The Chairman would maintain close liaison with the Secretary-General and
the Security Council President on the composition and work of the panels. The
Chairman, in consultation with panel participants and members of the Security
Council, would adopt appropriate working methods and plans of work. The
Chairman could invite a variety of views and experts, including those from
United Nations agencies in the field, to participate in the work of the panels
and could authorize such travel, to obtain information concerning the situation
on the ground in Iraq, as he deems appropriate in order to provide the Council
with the best possible advice.
4.
The first panel, on disarmament and current and future ongoing monitoring
and verification issues, would involve the participation and expertise from the
United Nations Special Commission, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations Secretariat, and any other relevant expertise. The panel would
assess all the existing and relevant information available, including data from
ongoing monitoring and verification, relating to the state of disarmament in
Iraq. The panel would make recommendations to the Security Council on how,
taking into account relevant Security Council resolutions, to re-establish an
effective disarmament/ongoing monitoring and verification regime in Iraq.
5.
The second panel, on humanitarian issues, would involve the participation
and expertise from the Office of the Iraq Programme, the Secretariat of the
Committee established by Security Council resolution 661 (1990), and the United
99-02395 (E)

300199

/...

S/1999/100
English
Page 2

Nations Secretariat. This panel would assess the current humanitarian situation
in Iraq and make recommendations to the Security Council regarding measures to
improve the humanitarian situation in Iraq.
6.
The third panel, on prisoners of war and Kuwaiti property, including
archives, would involve the participation and expertise from the United Nations
Secretariat and any other relevant expertise. The panel would make an
assessment, in consultation with relevant experts, of Iraqi compliance relating
to prisoners of war, Kuwaiti property, including archives, as stipulated by
Security Council resolutions. The panel would make recommendations to the
Security Council with regard to these matters.

-----
