S/PV.8462

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8462nd meeting

Wednesday, 13 February 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Esono Mbengono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-first report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2019/78)
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2421
(2018) (S/2019/101)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-03896 (E)
*1903896*

S/PV.8462

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Government programme has made little headway. As
we speak, the Iraqi Parliament is in a one-month recess
and will reconvene only in early March.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
Twenty-first report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2019/78)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2421 (2018)
(S/2019/101)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/78, which contains the twenty-first
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), and
document S/2019/101, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2421 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert: I am honoured to brief the
Council today for the very first time in current capacity.
As Council members know, the collaborative spirit
between the leading parliamentary blocs four months
ago allowed the consensual nomination of Mr. Adil Abd
al-Mahdi as the Prime Minister-designate. However,
to date the Government of Iraq remains incomplete.
Four ministerial positions are still vacant, with three
of them — Interior, Defence and Justice — being
subject to fierce disagreements among political parties
and political blocs. Within this context, multiple
parliamentary sessions have been adjourned, interrupted
or boycotted, and as a result the implementation of the
2/12

13/02/2019

Long Government formation processes are not new
or unique to Iraq. However, in the Iraq context there is
a real sense of urgency to complete the process without
delay and to focus on rebuilding the country after
years of conflict. Therefore, I would like to call upon
the political actors once again to overcome political
infighting and to demonstrate that political compromise
can prevail in the greater interests of the Iraqi people.
And in doing so, I would also like to remind them that
there are excellent and experienced Iraqi women who
are well-qualified to perform the job.
Ultimately, the people of Iraq are bearing the
brunt of the political stalemate — bearing the brunt
at a time when it is critical to address their needs and
demands for better services at a time when the Iraqi
citizens ought to be able to rely on strong democratic
governance and viable state institutions. So yes, it is
high time to shift focus from factional politics and to
invest efforts in addressing the immediate needs of
Iraqi citizens, as further delays could give space to
significant repercussions on the stability of the country.
On a more positive note, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the 2019 federal budget law was approved
by Parliament on 23 January. Prior consultations, as
well as effective cooperation, made this achievement
possible. The good news is that it demonstrates
that space for constructive political dialogue and
partnership is out there, and I truly hope that we will see
lots more of it in the months to come. The 2019 budget
allocations for some key development sectors, such as
electricity, reflect the Government’s efforts to improve
the delivery of basic services. But still, allocations for
reconstruction in liberated areas are far less than the
actual needs. Moreover, Iraq’s State finances remain
strongly reliant on oil-sector revenues and thus very
vulnerable to fluctuations in oil prices.
Another positive step was last week’s decision of
the Council of Ministers to convert the Government
programme into an implementation plan. This will
allow for close monitoring of progress, as well as
accountability. Additionally, I would like to welcome
the steps taken by the Government to address corruption
by putting in place preventive measures. Within the
past month, the Prime Minister has chaired three
meetings of the Supreme Anti-Corruption Council with
19-03896

13/02/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

a view to unifying efforts to combat corruption by any
party or person, regardless of their post or position.
The fight against corruption will not be an easy one,
but it is a much-needed one as corruption is vast and
pervasive at all levels in Iraq. It is a much-needed fight
in order to revive public-trust. During our meeting in
Najaf last Wednesday, Grand Ayatollah Al-Sistani also
underlined once again, among others, the urgent need
to show progress in fighting corruption.
Turning to relations between Baghdad and Erbil,
I would like to welcome the agreement reached on
16 January to unify customs duties. The speedy
implementation of that agreement should now be a
priority for both sides. Moreover, the finalization of
the 2019 federal budget guaranteed federal funding for
salary payments to the Kurdistan region civil servants
and Peshmerga forces. I would like to call upon both
Baghdad and Erbil to capitalize on this positive
momentum and to overcome their differences.
At this very moment, there is little to report on the
Government formation within the Kurdistan region,
as to date negotiations continue. In my meetings with
Kurdish leaders, both in Erbil and Sulaymaniyah,
I emphasized the need to expedite Government
formation in order to serve the needs of the people
of the Kurdistan region as soon as possible. Some
developments seem to be unfolding, however, with a
possible session of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament
to be held on 18 February.
During the reporting period, Iraq’s leadership
made significant efforts in recalibrating its external
relationships, reaching out to many international,
regional and neighbouring partners. That is important,
as strength abroad and strength at home are a package
deal indeed. During this period, Iraq has also received
high-level international delegations seeking to engage
with the new Iraqi leadership, and I truly hope that
support for sustainable stability in Iraq will continue
to be on top of the regional and international agenda,
building upon mutual interests and in accordance with
the principles of respect for Iraq’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Security remains a concern. Although terrorist
activity has decreased, during the past month attacks
have been carried out against both civilians and the Iraqi
security forces. In short, despite its military defeat, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continues to
pose a security threat to Iraq and the region.

S/PV. 8462

Another concern relates to armed groups operating
out of State control and/or expanding their economic
and social control in Iraqi daily life. Regardless of
their affiliation, the Government needs to take quick
measures to reform its security sector and act resolutely
against these groups and their activities.
As council members are also aware, Turkish
military airstrikes near the Iraqi-Turkish border in
northern Iraq have been condemned by the authorities
of Iraq as violations of its sovereignty. Turkey maintains
that these airstrikes are against targets linked to the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party. I regret the loss of civilian
lives and livelihoods during these operations. It is
important that the Governments of both Turkey and
Iraq accelerate their efforts to resolve this through
bilateral dialogue.
With respect to election, the Independent High
Electoral Commission has formally recommended
that Iraq’s provincial council elections take place
on 16 November. UNAMI will continue to provide
technical assistance and support to the Commission.
However, in preparation for these elections a number of
steps will need to be taken urgently by the Government
of Iraq and the relevant institutions.
In speaking of human rights accountability, I would
like to emphasize that promoting a more consistent
adherence to international standards of due process and
fair trial is of the greatest importance, as an impartial
and transparent process of judicial accountability
for the gross violations of human rights committed
by ISIL will prove crucial in rebuilding peaceful
coexistence and social cohesion. Equally important
is the need to strengthen community cohesion and
to counter collective community blame. Moreover,
the marginalization of one group over another leaves
communities vulnerable to extremist messaging.
As part of UNAMI’s efforts to advance equal
opportunities, on 24 January I launched the Women’s
Advisory Group on Reconciliation and Politics. With
that in mind, I would like to renew UNAMI’s call on
political leaders to fulfil the many pledges made during
the time of the elections, and therefore appoint women
to senior decision-making positions.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners
have finalized the 2019 humanitarian needs overview
for Iraq and will soon launch the humanitarian response
plan, in close cooperation with the Government of Iraq
and the Kurdistan Regional Government. This year

19-038963/12

S/PV.8462

The situation concerning Iraq

the humanitarian community will focus on meeting
the needs of 1.75 million vulnerable Iraqis, including
internally displaced persons, living both in and out of
camp settings, returnees in areas of severe need as well
as host communities that have been strained by several
years of armed conflict. The needs are vast indeed. The
2019 humanitarian response plan seeks $700 million
from donors and includes specialized programming
to address protection needs. Of course, humanitarian
programming will be implemented alongside recovery
and stabilization efforts.
While significant efforts are under way to rebuild
infrastructure and restore basic services, it will take
many years and billions of dollars to rebuild the
country. Iraq will undoubtedly need the continued
attention of the international community to make the
transition successful and sustainable. Thanks to the
generous support of the international community, the
United Nations Development Programme Funding
Facility for Stabilization exceeded $1 billion at the end
of 2018; however, a gap of $338 million still exists. In
other words, additional funds are needed, including
contributions by the Government of Iraq — which, by
the way, acknowledges the quick impact and efficiency
of the programme.
It goes without saying that the United Nations
country team continues to assist the Government of
Iraq in meeting the needs of its citizens. I could give
many examples, but some from the past few months
include the provision of medical kits and supplies to
save lives, the digitization of Iraq’s largest social safety
net, the provision of food entitlements, the clearance
of explosives, and, importantly, the finalization of
a reconstruction plan for Mosul. The United Nations
system also continues to support the Government of
Iraq in the implementation of some key reforms, such
as in the security sector. During my visit to Mosul,
a couple of weeks ago, I witnessed the important
contribution of the country team in assisting the
Government in the rehabilitation of houses and the
restoration of water plants, both of which are essential
needs for the return of life to that war-torn city. As
the Council knows, mine action organizations manage
the threat of improvised explosive devices on a daily
basis. That is of great importance. However, it has to be
said that further action is required by the Government
of Iraq to overcome certain challenges in facilitating
those activities.
4/12

13/02/2019

Since the Kuwait International Conference for
Reconstruction of Iraq in February 2018, the Iraq
Recovery and Resilience Programme has been rolled
out. With its national coverage, the Programme has a
two-year budget of $1 billion. Resource mobilization
efforts are ongoing, with over $300 million pledged so
far for projects. I would like to encourage other donors
to contribute.
With your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to turn now to the twenty-first report (S/2019/78) of the
Secretary-General on the issue of missing Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives. First of all, let me
emphasize my determination to engage on this issue.
I emphasized that once again during my first official
visit to Kuwait, 10 days ago. While UNAMI continues
to assist the Governments of Iraq and Kuwait on this
important humanitarian issue, I would like to call
upon Member States to strengthen their support — for
example, through the procurement of field equipment,
the provision of forensics and capacity-building
for Iraqi and Kuwaiti technical teams. The return
of valuable Kuwaiti property last November was a
positive and long-awaited step. I encourage the Iraqi
Government to continue its search for the still missing
national archives.
I would like to underline that, yes, the atmosphere
of despair during the period of ISIL’s occupation has
given way somewhat towards hope and optimism for the
future in Iraq. However, one cannot shy away from the
fact that the road to well-deserved long-term stability
will be long and far from easy. Realism and great
determination will be necessary in facing the challenges
ahead, including on our side. Obvious ownership and
engagement by all Iraqi components will prove crucial,
political will be a precondition and taking pride in a
shared history and a common future will be a necessity.
And, yes, continued support from the international
community will be of paramount importance.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to UNAMI and the staff of the United
Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment. I am truly delighted to be working with
them. I look forward to reporting back to the Council
on — I hope — some substantive achievements over
coming months.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing.
19-03896

13/02/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for the
efforts of the United Nations to help the Government
and the people of brotherly Iraq at this important
juncture. We also appreciate the work and coordination
with the Iraqi Government pursuant to resolution
2421 (2018) through the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate Ms. Jeanine HennisPlasschaert on her appointment as Head of UNAMI and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq. I thank her for her valuable and comprehensive
briefing and appreciate her efforts, as well as those of
her predecessor, Mr. Ján Kubiš, to whom we wish every
success in his future endeavours.
With regard to the situation in the brotherly Republic
of Iraq and the responsibilities entrusted to UNAMI,
allow me to express my gratitude for the efforts of
the Mission and the United Nations in Iraq to build a
bright future for the country, beginning with creating
conditions conducive for security and stability, meeting
humanitarian needs and providing the prerequisites for
sustainable development. I should like to reiterate the
full continuing support of the State of Kuwait and our
cooperation with UNAMI and the country team in the
proper discharge of their functions.
We recognize that the upcoming phase is important
for Iraq in order to overcome the difficult conditions it
is experiencing, especially following the defeat of the
terrorist Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Iraq now requires international efforts to support, assist
with and meet the humanitarian needs of the affected
Iraqi people and ensure their security. That is also our
responsibility as one of Iraq’s neighbours, as well as
of other countries in the region and the international
community at large — especially as we know that we
must make greater efforts so that Iraq can enjoy unity,
security and stability, free from crises and division
Since Iraq began its rebuilding phase after the
previous regime, the State of Kuwait has provided
assistance to its brothers in Iraq in order to help the
country maintain its independence, sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity. We also welcome the
comprehensive national dialogue and hope it will make
it possible for Iraqis to achieve national reconciliation,
combat extremism and terrorism, enhance the rule of

S/PV. 8462

law and provide welfare and security for all segments of
Iraqi society without exception. We wish our brotherly
and neighbourly Iraq all progress and prosperity.
Since the emergence of the terrorist Da’esh group in
Iraq — and recognizing the scope of the destruction the
country has suffered — the leadership, the Government
and the people of the State of Kuwait have provided
assistance to the Iraqi people and have spared no effort
to stand by them. I would like to refer to the initiative
of His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, to host the Kuwait
International Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq,
held in February 2018, to help alleviate the suffering of
the Iraqi people so that they can move towards stability
and reconstruction. We hope that countries that pledge
to provide assistance during the conference will honour
their obligations.
We share the concerns of the Secretary-General, as
set out in his report (S/2019/101), that sleeper terrorist
cells remain a threat to the stability and security of Iraq
and the region as a whole. We must all make additional
efforts and take further decisive measures to eradicate
terrorist activities and practices and hold accountable
those who have perpetrated such heinous crimes. They
must be brought to justice, in cooperation with the
United Nations mechanism established by the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017).
Concerning
international
obligations
and
remaining humanitarian issues pertaining to the
missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives, today’s meeting takes place as we mark the
twenty-eighth anniversary of the liberation of the State
of Kuwait from Iraqi aggression. However, we cannot
fully commemorate that anniversary so long as the
fate of our missing people remains unknown. That
humanitarian issue will remain our top priority. We
will make every possible effort to determine the fate
of our martyrs now that we have almost lost all hope
of finding them alive. We appreciate the concern of
the members of the Security Council and the fact that
they have kept this humanitarian issue on the agenda
for all these years, as well as their follow-up with
respect to the implementation of all commitments set
out in relevant Council resolutions, in particular those
pertaining to the main remaining obligations that have
not been honoured since the liberation of the State of
Kuwait in 1991.

19-038965/12

S/PV.8462

The situation concerning Iraq

We commend the serious and genuine desire of
brotherly Iraq to meet all its remaining international
obligations towards the State of Kuwait. We have
been able to identify the remains of 236 individuals of
the 605 missing persons, which would not have been
possible without Iraq’s cooperation. We hope that we
will continue to cooperate and work in the same spirit
with Iraq. However, we have been unable since 2004
to find the remains of any other missing persons.
We reiterate our readiness to support and assist
Iraq in order to expedite the implementation of the
remaining obligations, as set out in relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We appreciate the efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, through its chairmanship
of the Tripartite Commission, as it seeks to honour
its obligations to complete the humanitarian dossier,
as appropriate. We believe that tangible progress is
possible if we scale up efforts and implement agreed
plans and programmes within the framework of the
Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee.
The State of Kuwait will spare no effort to support
endeavours to determine the fate of missing Kuwaiti
and third-country nationals.
At the same time, we urge UNAMI to continue to
implement its mandate regarding the issues of detainees,
missing persons and the return of property, including
Kuwait’s national archives, pursuant to resolution 2107
(2013). We call on Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert to adopt a
new approach to ensure that we achieve progress on
the issue.
Other obligations to which I would like to draw the
Council’s attention include Kuwaiti property, including
our national archives. They are just as important as
other obligations because our archives and property
represent true historic wealth — important heritage
for the national memory of the State and the people of
Kuwait. It is unfortunate that the fate of the archives
has remained unknown since the liberation of Kuwait
in 1991. We share the disappointment of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait realizes that the
new Iraq has nothing to do with the Iraq of the past. It is
high time that the international community supported
the efforts of Iraq to recover and play its role in the
region and the world — following the painful events it
has endured over the past few years in fighting terrorist
6/12

13/02/2019

Da’esh — and build on the victories of its people. They
can overcome that difficult phase.
We hope that the formation of the Iraqi Government
can be completed in order to build the Iraq of the future.
We wish the Government every success in meeting the
aspirations of the Iraqi people. They deserve to live
in a stable, prosperous and safe country. The State of
Kuwait reiterates its solidarity with the leadership, the
Government and the people of Iraq in any step they take
to consecrate Iraqi national unity, roll back terrorism
and maintain their sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, let me thank
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her very informative
and comprehensive briefing. I also congratulate her on
her appointment.
Since this is the first meeting on Iraq for Indonesia
as a Council member, I would like to congratulate the
Government and the people of Iraq on the completion
of their national election last year. We have observed
the situation in Iraq very closely and hope that our Iraqi
brothers and sisters will soon achieve what they fully
deserve — enduring peace, stability and prosperity.
Indonesia is certain that the new Government can build
on the important progress made in recent years in order
to achieve durable harmony and peace. Allow me to
highlight some key issues from the briefing.
First, with regard to the political situation, Indonesia
commends Iraq on the formation of the new Government
within the constitutional time frame and looks forward
to the appointments to the remaining ministerial
positions. We are confident that the appointments to
the Cabinet will be completed soon. We commend
the sustained efforts made under three presidencies
to facilitate compromise and work constructively to
that end. We also welcome the election held last year
in the Iraqi Kurdistan region and the progress made in
relations between Baghdad and Erbil. We encourage
Iraq to capitalize on that positive trend and to resolve
all outstanding issues through dialogue and consensus,
based on the Iraqi Constitution.
Secondly, security challenges must be addressed
effectively. Despite the remarkable progress made
recently, we note that terrorism remains a serious
challenge. The members of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) remain active in a number of
Iraqi provinces, hiding in areas that are hard to reach.
We laud the tireless work of the Iraqi security forces in
their ongoing clean-up of areas that have been cleared of
19-03896

13/02/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV. 8462

explosives and other dangerous materials, as well as for
their persistent search for ISIL remnants, who threaten
security and advancement in the country. There is a
need for a comprehensive approach to addressing the
security challenges and ensuring durable peace. In that
regard, enhanced regional and international cooperation
is critical. We commend the Iraqi Government for its
continued efforts to reach out to neighbouring countries
and other international partners to strengthen relations
and advance mutual political and security interests.

First, we should continue to adhere to the general
direction of seeking a political solution to the Iraqi issue.
Achieving inclusive reconciliation and harmonious
coexistence among the Iraqi parties is in line with the
fundamental interests and development needs of all
Iraqis. The international community should earnestly
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq, support the good offices of
the United Nations, and provide constructive assistance
in achieving an inclusive political solution.

Thirdly, the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) remains vital.
We applaud the essential work conducted by UNAMI,
which is perceived positively and favourably in various
areas of Iraqi society, such as the public sector, electoral
assistance, human rights and the rule of law. We also
welcome UNAMI efforts to help enhance bilateral
relations between Iraq and countries of the region, such
as Kuwait, on the settlement of remaining bilateral
issues. The proper discussion and completion of the file
on the missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property will further strengthen the
already very good bilateral relations between the two
brotherly countries.

Secondly, we should continue to support Iraq in its
fight against terrorism. Iraq is at the forefront of this
fight and terrorist remnants continue to pose a threat.
All parties concerned should strengthen their counterterrorism cooperation, unify standards, crackdown on
all terrorist organizations listed by the Security Council,
consolidate the achievements of counter-terrorism
efforts and resolutely curb the return of terrorist forces
and the spread of their activities. The international
community should support Iraq in its efforts to bring
terrorists to justice, in accordance with relevant
domestic laws. We support the efforts of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, in close consultation with the
Government concerned, to actively carry out its work
based on its mandate.

It is very important that UNAMI continue to lend
and enhance its support to the new Government of Iraq
as it embarks on implementing its new programmes
to resolve the many complex and difficult challenges
it faces and put the country firmly on the path to
sustainable peace and development. Indonesia stands
ready to support the brotherly country of Iraq in
achieving that goal.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert
on her appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and thank her
for her briefing. I would also like to commend the work
of her predecessor, former Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Jan Kubiš.
China welcomes the progress made in forming the
Iraqi Government and commends the efforts of Iraq’s
leaders to resolve their differences through consultations
and dialogue, while promoting economic development,
improving people’s living standards and accelerating
the reconstruction process. Iraq is at a critical stage in
promoting peace, stability and reconstruction. I would
like to underscore the following points.

Thirdly, we should actively promote the economic
recovery and accelerated reconstruction of Iraq.
The Iraqi Government should focus on developing
infrastructure, promoting economic reconstruction and
progress, enhance its capacity to provide public services
and improve people’s living standards. The international
community should continue to provide support and
assistance to Iraq, help ease its humanitarian situation,
assist in its economic recovery and create a favourable
environment for its reconstruction.
UNAMI has played an important role in supporting
the Iraqi Government in promoting inclusive political
dialogue, national reconciliation and reconstruction,
and it has continued to support Iraq’s efforts to improve
its bilateral relations with countries of the region,
such as Kuwait, and to resolve historical issues. China
supports the efforts of UNAMI to carry out its work in
accordance with its mandate.
In recent years, the Chinese Government has
provided Iraq with multiple deliveries of humanitarian
supplies and economic assistance, some of which have

19-038967/12

S/PV.8462

The situation concerning Iraq

been used in areas affected by terrorism. In addition,
the Red Cross Society of China has also provided
medical-facility assistance to the Iraqi Red Crescent
Society, which has been used to alleviate the difficulties
faced by the Iraqi people.
As always, China supports any effort aimed at
achieving a political solution to the Iraqi issue and
combating terrorism. It will actively participate in the
economic reconstruction of Iraq and will continue to
provide assistance to the best of its ability.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We welcome and thank
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, for
her briefing. We look forward to working with her on
her assignment. We would also like to welcome our
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Iraq.
South Africa would like to highlight the following
three areas in our intervention today: the political
situation, the security situation and the role of the
region in assisting Iraq.
First, with regard to the political situation, South
Africa commends the Iraqi authorities on the progress
achieved in forming a national Government. We
encourage all stakeholders to work together to finalize
the Cabinet. All political forces should close ranks and
reach an agreement on the outstanding Cabinet posts
so that the Government is able to start delivering on
its promises to the public for better security and the
dignified return of internally displaced persons,
rehabilitated public services, a revitalized economy
and the implementation of reconstruction and
development projects.
Additionally, it is very important for the
Government of Iraq to promote the meaningful
inclusion of women in the political process and their
representation at all levels of political structures. We
welcome the announcement by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert of
the launch, on 24 January, of the Women’s Advisory
Group on Reconciliation and Politics. That is a very
positive development indeed.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation, we
note with concern the assessment in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/101) that the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) remains a threat in Iraq. This
threat must be addressed, as the continued presence of
8/12

13/02/2019

ISIL has ramifications not only for the instability of
Iraq, but also for the entire region. We support Iraqi
efforts to hold those accountable for crimes committed
in the country, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), which
established the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to support
domestic Iraqi efforts to that end.
Furthermore, South Africa reaffirms its support
for the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq. We encourage all stakeholders to
continue to support and engage in the efforts initiated
by UNAMI in an effort to achieve effective postconflict reconstruction and sustainable peace in Iraq.
We are particularly concerned about the increase in
violence against women and children, as highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s report. In this regard, we
support the efforts of UNAMI and UNICEF to address
this scourge.
Thirdly, with regard to the role of the region,
we welcome the increased involvement of regional
organizations in the political process and reaffirm
their role in assisting the Government of Iraq in the
reconstruction of the country. We also welcome the
renewed cooperation and talks between the central
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, and encourage both parties to continue to
reach consensus on areas of concern. We also share the
views of regional actors that Government formation in
Iraq is an important step towards building a stronger
and more balanced relationship among the countries of
the Middle East region.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its support
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in
line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, and will continue to support UNAMI in
the implementation of its mandate. Furthermore, we
continue to support the work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, as part of UNAMI’s mandate, and
emphasize the importance of the independence and
impartiality of the mechanism, while working in line
with the principles of the United Nations Charter,
United Nations policies and best practices.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation extends its sincere congratulations to
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert on her appointment as
19-03896

13/02/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and wishes her every success in her new
mission. It also thanks her for her detailed briefing on
the developments in Iraq. In the light of that update,
my delegation would like to comment on the political
process, humanitarian and human rights situations and
security issues.
With regard to the political process, my country
notes with regret that dissension among the country’s
various political forces persists, thereby preventing
the formation of a new Government by Prime Minister
Adil Abd Al-Mahdi. However, after Da’esh’s military
defeat, the establishment of an inclusive Government
would have made it possible to implement the urgent
reforms that are needed to address the many challenges
facing Iraq, namely, finding sustainable solutions to
the issue of the return of internally displaced person
by providing them with basic administrative and social
services; accelerating the reconstruction of conflictaffected areas; creating the conditions for genuine
reconciliation among Iraqis, with due respect for the
unity of the country and sociopolitical and ethnic
diversity; and ensuring an equitable representation of
women in institutions and decision-making structures.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges all political actors
to prioritize the national interest by overcoming their
differences with a view to the early formation of a new
Government. Furthermore, Côte d’Ivoire encourages
the continuation of a constructive dialogue between
the central Iraqi authorities and the authorities of
the Kurdistan autonomous region in order to find a
peaceful solution to the dispute on the organization
of the referendum on the self-determination of that
autonomous region on 25 September 2017. In that
respect, it welcomes the negotiations between the two
parties, which in 2018 made it possible to reopen the
Erbil and Sulaymaniyah airports to international flights
and to reach an agreement on oil exports from Kirkuk
province. My country hopes that the forthcoming
meetings between Mr. Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, Prime
Minister of Iraq, and Mr. Nechirvan Barzani, Prime
Minister of the Kurdistan region, will resolve the
remaining points of disagreement.
The humanitarian situation is characterized by
extreme poverty, including insecurity, in which more
than 1.8 million people have been displaced since 2014.
Côte d’Ivoire urges the Iraqi authorities, with the help
of the international community, to find solutions to

S/PV. 8462

the plight of those people, improve their security and
include them in local reconciliation initiatives with the
view to their full integration in the host regions.
With regard to the question of human rights, my
country notes with satisfaction that, at the request of
the Iraqi authorities, our Security Council adopted
resolution 2379 (2017), on 21 September 2017, on the
effective implementation of the principle of Da’esh
accountability. In that regard, our Council followed with
interest the briefing in December 2018 (see S/PV.8412)
delivered by Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special
Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team established
pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017), on his first report on
the steps that the Team intends to take for the effective
implementation of resolution 2379 (2017).
The acceleration of the investigations of the
Team led by Mr. Khan is all the more urgent as 202
mass graves with more than 12,000 bodies have been
discovered in the northern and western provinces of
Iraq. Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support for Mr. Khan
and calls on the international community, including
our Council, to provide him with all the assistance
necessary for the success of his mission.
On the security front, despite its recent military
setbacks in Iraq, Da’esh continues to pose a serious
threat to the stability of the country and to international
peace and security. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls on
the international community to pursue its efforts by
providing the necessary assistance and training to the
Iraqi armed forces with a view to putting an end to
the activities of that group as soon as possible. In that
respect, it welcomes the rise of the Iraqi armed forces
and anti-terrorist forces, which are playing a major role
in the fight to eradicate Da’esh.
In conclusion, my country urges the international
community, including our Council, to continue to
support the efforts of the Iraqi authorities to restore
security and peace, which are essential for lasting
stability in Iraq.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
I would like to begin by joining others in
welcoming Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We thank her for her clear and informative

19-038969/12

S/PV.8462

The situation concerning Iraq

briefing and wish her success in her new responsibility.
We have no doubt that her political and diplomatic
experience will be useful to the Security Council and
UNAMI in making positive progress in the process.
She can count on the full support of the delegation of
Equatorial Guinea.
My delegation congratulates the Iraqi people who,
despite the disagreements following the local and
parliamentary elections last May, were able to peacefully
elect their new President, His Excellency Mr. Barham
Salih, in October, who in turn appointed his new Prime
Minister, His Excellency Mr. Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, who
presented an ambitious political programme that enjoys
much popular support, meets the basic needs of the
country and facilitates transparency and the reforms
that the country so badly needs. We believe that those
events of 2018 represent an important step towards
democracy, political stability and the promotion of a
sustainable, secure environment for Iraq. In that regard,
it is important to highlight the importance of the work
of UNAMI, which has always been available to support
local authorities in various aspects of the Iraqi State
reconstruction process.
However, we are concerned about the difficulties
being experienced in the process of forming the new
Government. We had believed that the easy acceptance
of the appointment of the Prime Minister by the main
political blocs would facilitate the composition of
the rest of the executive branch, submitted to the
Council of Representatives. In that regard, and in
order to avoid impacting the political and economic
reconstruction process that is already under way in the
country, it is urgent and necessary for the parties to
try to bring their positions closer together in order to
facilitate the formation of the Government, the work
of which is essential to promoting and advancing the
development process.
We welcome last November’s tour by the new Iraqi
President to the countries of the region. We hope that
Iraq’s rapprochement with neighbouring countries will
focus on establishing good cooperation in strategic
areas, such as the fight against terrorism, which would
facilitate information-sharing among Governments.
That would help the Iraqi security services, which
remain on alert given that there are still remnants of
radical extremists of the Islamic State, who continue
to pose an asymmetrical threat in the north and
centre of the country. In the light of that situation, it
is appropriate that, on the basis of the principles of
10/12

13/02/2019

good-neighbourliness and respect for sovereignty, the
Governments of Iraq and Turkey urgently address the
security situation in the northern part of the country,
which evidently also poses a danger to Turkey.
We welcome the statement issued by the Iraqi
Ministry of Finance in January, in which he indicates
that the central Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government have agreed to unify customs duties at all
border crossing points in the country and eliminate
customs checkpoints between the Kurdistan region
and the rest of Iraq. Similarly, we welcome Kirkuk’s
agreement on the resumption of oil exports, as well
as the important meetings held in November by the
authorities of both parties. All that demonstrates the
good will of the political leaders, who are working to
unify and integrate all parts of the country.
Finally, we encourage the efforts of the Iraqi
Government, which in November handed over to the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait a number of
assets appropriated during the invasion of Kuwait,
including books, an archive of Kuwait television video
tapes, a sword and a valuable painting. We look forward
to the full cooperation of the Government of Iraq in
meeting that important requirement.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea and express our
thanks for the efforts that you have made as President
of the Security Council. We also thank the Dominican
Republic for its efforts during its presidency of
the Security Council last month. We congratulate
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), and
wish her every success during her stewardship. She
has demonstrated a distinguished presence from the
early days in office. We also thank her predecessor,
Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his work. We thank the Special
Representative as well for her briefing and look forward
to strengthening our bilateral cooperation to serve the
interests and needs of Iraq, within the framework of the
UNAMI mandate. She can count on our full support.
On the political level, Iraq has done an enormous
amount of work in the preceding period. The legislative
19-03896

13/02/2019

The situation concerning Iraq

elections were transparent and characterized by
integrity. That was followed by the formation of the
three presidencies within the deadline stipulated by
the Constitution. The different political blocs are now
working to overcome every obstacle so that they can
reach agreement on the completion of the Government
through national partnership that puts Iraq’s highest
interests first, make progress, ensure stability and
guarantee social peace, which will also contribute to
the stability of the entire region.
On the economic level, the Parliament adopted a
national budget for 2019 within the time line stipulated
by the Constitution. The federal Government plans to
pay salaries to all officials in the Kurdistan region in
2019, including the Peshmerga. Furthermore, Iraq has
set up a development plan for the period 2018-2022, so
as to achieve a rate of growth of 7 per cent and reduce
rates of poverty and unemployment, all in line with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A high
anti-corruption council has also been established to
implement a strategy in that area.
On Iraq’s cooperation with United Nations agencies,
we have worked recently with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as with United Nations
Children’s Fund in order to implement the provisions
of the joint statement in accordance with the executive
plan launched during the visit to Iraq by Ms. Pramila
Patten in 2018. Furthermore, in cooperation with the
United Nations Population Fund, Iraq opened its first
shelter for women victims of sexual violence. A United
Nations team on implementing the pertinent laws also
visited Iraq to work with our Supreme Judicial Council
to help align Iraqi laws with United Nations provisions.
Iraq’s competent bodies are working to complete
the second report on the national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). We were among the first
States in the Middle East and North Africa to have
promulgated a national plan of action to implement
that resolution. The plan is focused on increasing
the representation of women in political, social and
economic spheres and protecting them against genderbased violence. Similarly, we are working to integrate
resolution 1325 (2000) into all of our national strategies
and development plans.
In addition, the Iraqi Government has begun to
implement joint projects with the United Nations Office
on Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism

S/PV. 8462

Committee (CTC) Executive Directorate. They include
measures for capacity-building and work opportunities
for young people, countering the financing of terrorism,
and the fight against violent extremism. We are also
working to contain the threat posed by weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) by responding to four of
the 16 priorities outlined by the CTC in 2015, which
Iraq adopted. We have also appointed a representative
to develop a national counter-terrorism strategy. Last
week we received a visit by a CTC representative and
carried out a workshop on WMDs.
I have just brought to the Council’s attention a
number of our achievements and told it about the
path followed by the new Government in the recent
period. The Iraqi Government is working to address
the challenges posed by reconstruction so that we can
ensure sustainable development for future generations.
That requires a safe and healthy environment. In
that regard, my Government believes in the role to
be played by the international community in support
of our efforts. We endeavour to cooperate with the
international community in the following areas.
First, strengthening the education sector whereas in
the 1970s we had an exceptional education system. We
want to undertake real efforts to develop a clear vision
of the reality of education in Iraq, so as to allow us to
put forward options in this area and develop that sector.
Second, we want to achieve development that
guarantees access to psychosocial and psychological
services. The wars that have been waged against Da’esh
have left deep psychological scars on women and girls,
in particular those who have been displaced or were
victims of violence, as well as people with special needs.
Third, we call on friendly and brotherly countries
to keep the commitments they undertook during the
conference on Iraq’s reconstruction that took place
last year in Kuwait. We encourage the international
community to support Iraq and its Government
in rebuilding infrastructure throughout every
Iraqi town and city. That is essential for achieving
economic prosperity.
Fourth, we call on Member States to help rehabilitate
archaeological areas destroyed by Da’esh terrorists. We
call, as well, for support in placing the Babylon site on
UNESCO’s list of World Heritage Sites.
Fifth, capacity-building is also important to
guarantee a criminal justice system that is viable.

19-0389611/12

S/PV.8462

The situation concerning Iraq

We call for the principles of sound governance to be
respected in combating corruption, which is one of the
main obstacles to good-governance in Iraq.
Sixth, the national plan to implement resolution
1325 (2000) faces a number of challenges. The initial
implementation period for the plan coincided with
the terrorist gangs of Da’esh taking certain regions in
Iraq. Although the ministerial and institutional teams
took training courses in the areas of monitoring and
assessment of women and peace and security, the
national team still needs greater capacity and support
so that it can be more effective.
Seventh, we call on Member States to strengthen
their cooperation on intelligence for counter-terrorism
and organized crime. We also need to build the capacity
of the Iraqi armed forces in all categories, including the
army, police, counter-terrorism apparatus, the popular
mobilization forces and the Peshmerga.
On 10 December 2018, Iraqis celebrated the first
anniversary of the victory against the terrorist gangs
of Da’esh and the liberation of all Iraqi cities from
the control of those terrorist groups. Since then, my
country has turned the page on the battlefields so that
the era that cost so many lives can end.
We are now in the phase of a security challenge.
That requires eradicating the breeding grounds for
terrorism and rooting out any residual terrorism, but
there is also an intellectual battle that must be waged so
that we can put an end to extremist thinking.
Furthermore, my country’s Government is working
to ensure the security of our borders and to restore
the normalcy that prevailed before Da’esh gangs took
control of areas in Iraq. We are trying to reconstruct
the areas that were damaged so that displaced persons
can return to their homes and receive financial
compensation and reparations for mental harm.
On Iraq’s relations with the neighbouring countries,
there have been repeated Turkish attacks in Kurdistan,

12/12

13/02/2019

northern Iraq. They represent a blatant violation of
Iraq’s sovereignty. We vehemently condemn and reject
such attacks regardless of the justification. They are
a violation of the rules of international law and are
contrary to the principles of good-neighbourliness.
In that regard, we reiterate our commitment to
rejecting any notion that our territory be used to
carry out actions that could undermine the security of
neighbouring countries.
The relations between Iraq and the State of Kuwait
have significantly developed. My country notes that
there is potential for further brotherly relations between
the two States. We can reinforce peace, security and
stability in the region. We are therefore working to
develop and to strengthen sustainable development so
that we can achieve positive results for the two brotherly
peoples and for the region. We hope that we will be an
example for the future if we achieve that.
In that regard, I wish to reiterate the importance
that we attach to finding and repatriating the remains
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals who went
missing, in addition to the repatriation of the Kuwaiti
property that was lost. We have recently returned part
of such property to Kuwait, including certain Kuwaiti
national archives.
Iraq is a rich country. It has many material and
human resources. That puts it in an ideal position to play
its role in ensuring stability and security in the region.
Our policies are based on economic openness and on
cooperation with all brotherly and friendly countries.
In conclusion, we once again thank the Special
Representative and wish her every success in her task of
supporting Iraq in the context of the UNAMI mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

19-03896
