184

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

6. Further requests the Secretary-General to convene
the first session of the Advisory Committee in early
1981, to provide it with all necessary assistance and to
submit its first report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
7. Invites the Advisory Committee to pay particular
attention to regional and international meetings dealing
with youth or related to youth questions and requests
the Secretary-General to provide every means to assist it
in this regard;
8. Calls upon the Advisory Committee, when applying paragraph 7 above, to seek information about the
activities of regional and international meetings dealing
with youth or related to youth questions;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide a list of
relevant meetings for the first session of the Advisory
Committee and invites the Committee to consider the
question of being represented at such meetings in consultation with the bodies concerned;
I 0. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to take concrete measures, through all the communications media at his disposal, to give widespread
publicity to the activities of the United Nations system
in the field of youth and to increase the dissemination of
information on youth;
11. Appeals to all States, to international governmental and non-governmental organizations and to the
public to make in due time generous voluntary contributions to supplement funds provided under the United
Nations regular budget for the costs of the programme
of the International Youth Year and requests the
Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures for
obtaining such voluntary contributions;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session the item entitled "International
Youth Year: Participation, Development, Peace" and to
grant it high priority.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/127.

Preservation and further development of cultural values, including the protection, restitution and return of cultural and artistic property

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
31 /39 of 30 November 1976 and 33 /49 of 14 December
1978,
Profoundly convinced of the continuing need to
develop and strengthen international cultural relations,
based on mutual respect for cultural integrity and on the
principles of equality and sovereignty of States,
Recognizing that the future of international cultural
relations is closely interrelated with the preservation,
development and promotion of cultural values as important factors of the identity and diversity of all nations.
Considering that the preservation and development
of cultural values, which form part of mankind's cultural
heritage, have a great role to play in the process of
preparation of societies for life in peace and in the furtherance of the ideals of peace, humanism and freedom,
A ware of the importance of cultural values as a
catalyst of world progress and national development.
particularly in the social and economic fields.

Conscious of the role of the cultural dimension in
plans and actions aiming at the establishment of the new
international economic order.
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization 50 on the preservation and further development of cultural values, including the protection. restitution and return of cultural and
artistic property;
2. Commends the United Nations Educational.
Scientific and Cultural Organization for including on a
continuing basis the problem of the preservation and
further development of cultural values in its mediumterm and long-term plans and for the significant results
already accomplished in that field;
3. Calls upon the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue pursuing active efforts with a view to promoting the preservation and further development of cultural values, including the inscription of the subject on the agenda of
the World Conference on Cultural Policies, to be held in
1982.
92nd plenary meeting
I I December I 980

35 / 128.

Return or restitution of cultural and artistic
property to its countries of origin

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December I 973,
3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973, 3391 (XXX) of
19 November 1975, 31/40 of 30 November 1976, 32/18
of 11 November 1977, 33/50 of 14 December 1978 and
34/64 of 29 November 1979.
Recalling also the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property,' 1 adopted
by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on
14 November 1970,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, ' 0
A ware of the importance attached by the countries of
origin to the return of cultural property which is of fundamental spiritual and cultural value to them, so that
they may constitute comprehensive or single collections
representative of their cultural heritage,
Reaffirming that the return or restitution to a country
of its objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts, documents and any other cultural or artistic
treasures constitutes a step forward in the strengthening
of international co-operation and the preservation and
further development of cultural values,
Deeply concerned at the persistence of the illicit traffic
in cultural property, which continues to impoverish the
cultural heritage of all peoples.
Supporting the solemn appeal launched on 7 June
1978 by the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
the return to those who created it ofan irreplaceable cultural heritage,
''' A/35/349, annex.
' United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference. Sixteenth Session, vol. 1,
Resolutions, pp. l 3.'i-141
