United Nations

A/RES/57/70

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 66 (u)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the First Committee (A/57/510)]

57/70.

Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small
arms and collecting them

The General Assembly,
Considering that the illicit proliferation and circulation of and traffic in small
arms impede development, constitute a threat to populations and to national and
regional security and are a factor contributing to the destabilization of States,
Deeply disturbed by the magnitude of the illicit proliferation and circulation of
and traffic in small arms in the States of the Sahelo-Saharan subregion,
Noting with satisfaction the conclusions of the United Nations advisory
missions dispatched by the Secretary-General to the affected countries of the
subregion to study the most appropriate way of halting the illicit circulation of small
arms and collecting them,
Welcoming the designation of the Department for Disarmament Affairs of the
Secretariat as a centre for the coordination of all activities of United Nations bodies
concerned with small arms,
Thanking the Secretary-General for his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, 1 and bearing in
mind the statement on small arms made by the President of the Security Council on
24 September 1999, 2
Welcoming the recommendations resulting from the meetings of the States of
the subregion held at Banjul, Algiers, Bamako, Yamoussoukro and Niamey to
establish close regional cooperation with a view to strengthening security,
Welcoming also the decision taken by the Economic Community of West
African States concerning the renewal of the Declaration of a Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in
West Africa, adopted at Abuja on 31 October 1998, 3

_______________
1

A/52/871-S/1998/318.
S/PRST/1999/28; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1999.
3
A/53/763-S/1998/1194, annex.
2

02 54268

A/RES/57/70

Recalling the Algiers Declaration adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-fifth ordinary
session, held at Algiers from 12 to 14 July 1999, 4
Emphasizing the need to advance efforts towards wider cooperation and better
coordination in the struggle against the illicit proliferation of small arms through the
common understanding reached at the meeting on small arms held at Oslo on 13 and
14 July 1998 5 and the Brussels Call for Action adopted by the International
Conference on Sustainable Disarmament for Sustainable Development, held at
Brussels on 12 and 13 October 1998, 6
Bearing in mind the Bamako Declaration on an African Common Position on
the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons, adopted at Bamako on 1 December 2000, 7
Recalling the millennium report of the Secretary-General, 8
Welcoming the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted by the
United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, 9 and calling for its expeditious implementation,
Recognizing the important role that the organizations of civil society play in
detection, prevention and raising public awareness, in efforts to curb the illicit
traffic in small arms,
1.
Notes with satisfaction the Declaration of the Ministerial Conference on
Security, Stability, Development and Cooperation in Africa, held in Abuja on 8 and
9 May 2000, 10 and encourages the Secretary-General to pursue his efforts in the
context of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 49/75 G of
15 December 1994 and the recommendations of the United Nations advisory
missions, aimed at curbing the illicit circulation of small arms and collecting such
arms in the affected States that so request, with the support of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa and in close cooperation with
the African Union;
2.
Encourages the establishment in the countries of the Sahelo-Saharan
subregion of national commissions to combat the illicit proliferation of small arms,
and invites the international community to lend its support wherever possible to
ensure the smooth functioning of the commissions;
3.
Welcomes the decision to renew the Declaration of a Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons in
West Africa, adopted by the heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States in Abuja on 31 October 1998, 3 and encourages
the international community to support the implementation of the moratorium;

_______________
4

A/54/424, annex II, decision AHG/Decl. 1 (XXXV).
See CD/1556.
6
A/53/681, annex.
7
A/CONF.192/PC/23, annex.
8
A/54/2000.
9
See Report of the United Nations Conference on Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, New York, 9–20 July 2001 (A/CONF.192/15), para. 24.
10
A/55/286, annex II, decision AHG/Decl. 4 (XXXVI).
5

2

A/RES/57/70

4.
Encourages the involvement of organizations and associations of civil
society in the efforts of the national commissions to combat the illicit traffic in
small arms and their participation in the implementation of the moratorium on the
importation, exportation and manufacture of small arms and light weapons in West
Africa as well as in the implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects;9
5.
Encourages also cooperation among State organs, international
organizations and civil society in combating the illicit traffic in small arms and
supporting operations to collect the said arms in the subregions;
6.
Calls upon the international community to provide technical and
financial support to strengthen the capacity of civil organizations to take action to
combat the illicit trade in small arms;
7.
Takes note of the conclusions of the meeting of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Economic Community of West African States, held in Bamako on 24
and 25 March 1999, on the modalities for the implementation of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and Development, and welcomes the
adoption by the meeting of a plan of action;
8.
Takes note also of the conclusions of the African Conference on the
Implementation of the United Nations Programme of Action on Small Arms: Needs
and Partnerships, held in Pretoria, South Africa, from 18 to 21 March 2002;
9.
Invites the Secretary-General, and those States and organizations that are
in a position to do so to provide assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in
small arms and collecting them;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to consider the matter and to
report to it at its fifty-eighth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the item entitled “Assistance to States for curbing the illicit traffic in small arms and
collecting them”.
57th plenary meeting
22 November 2002

3
