S/PV.8526

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8526th meeting

Thursday, 16 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2019/371)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14273 (E)
*1914273*

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (S/2019/371)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Burkina Faso to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant Secretary-General for Africa, Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Department
of Peace Operations; Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African
Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel;
Mr. Angel Losada Fernández, European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel; and Mr. Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.
Mr. Buyoya, Mr. Losada Fernández and Mr. Fedotov
are joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Bamako, Luxembourg and Vienna, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/371, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Council
today in the presence of His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso; the African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, President
Buyoya; and the European Union Special Representative
for the Sahel, Mr. Angel Losada Fernández, to provide
an update on the standing-up of the Joint Force of the
2/27

16/05/2019

Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel); the international
support provided in that regard, including by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA); and the difficulties
faced and possible measures that could be taken in the
future, as requested by resolution 2391 (2017).
The situation in Mali and the Sahel in the broad
sense remains extremely worrisome. The region faces
serious problems, ranging from climate change and
drought to growing insecurity, violent extremism,
the illicit trafficking in persons, weapons and drugs.
As always, it is the civilian population that pays the
highest price. Terrorist groups continue to evolve and
to spread beyond borders, including in Burkina Faso,
the Niger, Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Togo. The
humanitarian crisis in the Sahel is deteriorating, with
an unprecedented number of schools and health centres
that have been closed owing to insecurity. Countless
farmers have missed yet another planting season in the
Niger delta. As a result, more and more people will now
depend on cereals and other food products provided
by the international community. That is compounded
by poor governance and a lack of resources and
employment opportunities for young people, which
create a breeding ground for violent extremism.
The major cross-border initiatives taken by the
region’s political leaders to jointly develop solutions to
that security situation demonstrate their willingness to
unite and address the many threats facing their region.
In the same spirit, the G-5 Sahel has taken additional
measures to operationalize the Joint Force after the
devastating terrorist attack on its headquarters last
June. I am particularly encouraged by the resumption
of the Joint Force’s operations in January this year.
To date, it has carried out four operations in the three
sectors since the beginning of the year. That is a truly
encouraging development and I commend the Force
Commander, Brigadier General Hanena Ould Sidi, for
his leadership and all the units of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force for their commitment and sacrifices in the service
of this important cause.
It is now essential to maintain that momentum. I
have urged the G-5 Sahel member States to urgently
accelerate the full operationalization of the Joint
Force so that it can finally reach its full operational
capacity. Effective operations will send a strong signal
to terrorist groups that their encroachment on the lives
of the population will no longer be tolerated and will
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

be rejected through the collective determination of the
Member States in the region.
Many security operations are currently under way
in the Sahel, often simultaneously. They are being
conducted by the armed forces of the G-5 Sahel countries,
either alone or bilaterally, jointly with international
forces or as part of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. In the
future, in order to strengthen command and control
and ensure ownership, it will be important to clarify
the framework within which the various operations of
the G-5 Sahel member States are conducted. In that
connection, I call on the leaders of the Joint Force, in
close collaboration with the Governments of the G-5
Sahel countries, to further clarify the strategic concept
of operations of the Joint Force. I also encourage them
to accelerate the planning process and to develop a clear
strategic plan for the months and years ahead. That will
also facilitate international support.
The establishment of the human rights compliance
framework is another encouraging development.
The few cases of alleged violations that have already
been committed by the Force are detrimental to the
achievement of its military objectives. However, they
also demonstrate the need for such a framework and
for a collective effort of the national armies of the G-5
Sahel member countries, as well as the Joint Force
itself, to actively contribute to its implementation.
Over the past 12 months, the Joint Force has
significantly stepped up its efforts to combat such
behaviour. That cooperation should continue to be
strengthened so that the Joint Force can achieve its
goals in terms of security and protecting the population.
I welcome the initiative taken by the European Union
to play a key role in organizing and coordinating
international support for the establishment of the police
component of the Joint Force. Ensuring compliance
with legal norms, including with regard to detention,
will help to strengthen trust and relationships with
local communities. It is also an essential element in
establishing the rule of law in the region.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations continues to provide
international operational and logistical support to the
Joint Force. I commend MINUSMA for its efforts
undertaken in support of the Joint Force so far and its
swift action and flexibility in responding to requests
for support. However, the Mission’s support to the Joint
Force has been limited by a number of factors, including

S/PV. 8526

the hiatus in the Joint Force’s operations until January,
but also certain limitations imposed by resolution 2391
(2017). In particular, geographical restrictions imposed
on MINUSMA’s support have prevented the five other
battalions of the Joint Force that operate outside of
Mali from benefiting from life-support consumables.
That has proved to be one of the obstacles to the full
operationalization of the Joint Force.
As such, I reiterate the Secretary-General’s call
for the lifting of the geographical restrictions on
MINUSMA’s support. I also reiterate his call for a
caveat; obviously, MINUSMA’s main focus should and
will remain support to the peace process in Mali and,
as such, support to the Joint Force should not add any
additional strain on the Mission’s resources or supply
chains. Consequently, the geographical limitations
on MINUSMA’s support to the Joint Force should
be removed only for the provision of life-support
consumables and only as long as the Joint Force or a
third party can guarantee the pick-up and transport of
rations, fuel and water procured by MINUSMA.
That proposal notwithstanding, it is evident that
in the long run a different support model for the Joint
Force needs to be envisaged. I call on the members
of the Security Council to consider other options that
will allow for more predictable financial support and
facilitate more effective long-term planning.
I would like to extend my gratitude to the European
Union for its extensive and consistent support for
the Joint Force and for managing the coordination
hub. I also welcome the decision to move parts of
the coordination hub to the Sahel region to enhance
visibility and ownership by the G-5 Sahel as soon as all
the necessary requirements are in place.
I thank all donors that have so generously come
forward in support of the Joint Force, and I urge those
that have made pledges but not disbursed them yet to
follow through without delay. Every contribution makes
a difference, and the predictability of financial flows
will greatly enhance the Joint Force’s planning capacity.
In concluding, let me say that even once fully
operational, the Joint Force cannot shoulder the burden
of fighting terrorism and stabilizing the region on
its own. A security-driven approach alone will not
be sufficient to combat violence in the region in a
sustainable manner. It must go hand in hand with our
collective and coordinated efforts and a broader strategy
encompassing poverty reduction, good governance,

19-142733/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

development and humanitarian assistance, and security
interventions. The United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel remains a valid framework for such
coordinated action, and I call on partners to support its
operationalization, in particular for climate adaptation,
the empowerment of women and youth, and crossborder initiatives for peace. I also call on the G-5 Sahel
member States to implement their priority investment
plan without further delay.
The African Union can play an important role in
providing an umbrella for the various security initiatives
in the region, and I welcome the recent resumption of
the Nouakchott process.
Finally, the time for action is now. We all have a
shared responsibility for the Sahel, and we must each
deliver on our part of the promise to help provide muchneeded relief and empowerment to the populations
across the Sahel that need it most.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Barry (spoke in French): I should like at
the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you, on
behalf of all of my colleagues from the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month and
for having convened this important meeting devoted
to considering the report of the Secretary-General
on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force (S/2019/371). I take this
opportunity to congratulate Germany on its presidency
in April and France on its presidency in March, the
month when the Security Council visited Burkina Faso
and Mali.
Following the report that the Assistant SecretaryGeneral has just presented to us, I would like, on
behalf of all of my colleagues from the G-5 Sahel,
to congratulate the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, on the high quality of his report. The relevant
recommendations therein are evidence, as if such
evidence were still necessary, of his backing for and
determination to find ways and means of setting up a
support mechanism for the Joint Force.
For two years now, the Heads of State of the G-5
Sahel, based on their deep wisdom and sense of realism,
have deemed it necessary to equip themselves with
a force that can counter the attempts made by armed
terrorist groups to destabilize our States. The Council
has understood this and lent its support owing to its
4/27

16/05/2019

conviction that the threat of destabilization looming
over the G-5 Sahel is a serious one and poses a genuine
threat to international peace and security.
We note with satisfaction that in the two years of
existence of the Joint Force, although it is still a long
way from having reached its full operational capacity,
some progress has been made. The Joint Force is now
in existence and is 90 percent operational in Sector
West, in terms of the battalion component; 74 per cent
in Central Sector; and 75 per cent in Sector East. It has
gone from the concept phase to the implementation
phase and has a number of major operations under its
belt. Since the beginning of 2019, the Force has already
carried out seven operations, two in Sector East, three
in Central Sector and two in Sector West. The technical
cooperation agreement between the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the Joint Force has allowed the Force to
successfully carry out Operation Sanparga, parts I and
II, in Central Sector since January 2019.
Through these operations, the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force has created an optimal operational cycle aimed
at setting in motion a dynamic that can neutralize
terrorist and criminal groups of all stripes. Of course,
these actions are undertaken with full respect for the
compliance framework through mechanisms aimed at
safeguarding respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Here I wish to commend the active solidarity
expressed by the Security Council with regard to the
G-5 Sahel countries, notably through the adoption of
resolution 2359 (2017), which authorized the deployment
of the Joint Force, and of resolution 2391 (2017), calling
for the conclusion of a technical agreement between the
United Nations, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel
States, with a view to providing specific support to the
Joint Force in its operations on the territory of Mali.
Despite this encouraging progress, the situation
remains worrisome and continues to deteriorate. Even as
we speak, the Sahel is still experiencing the shockwaves
from the attack perpetrated this past Sunday against a
church in north-central Burkina Faso, which caused six
deaths, including that of the priest conducting mass.
The latter was specifically targeted and gunned down
in cold blood by a group of terrorist attackers who had
entered the village. Yesterday we learned of the attack
against a column of the Nigerian army that killed 28
people. Exactly two weeks previously, a Protestant
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

church in the north of Burkina Faso was attacked,
taking the same grim death toll of six lives, including
that of the pastor of the church. During the night of
13 to 14 May, an imam and his son were killed in cold
blood. In between these killings, we saw the abduction
of French tourists in Benin. Although Benin is not in
the Sahel, the destination of the abductors and their
hostages, before they were stopped by a coordinated
military intervention between French forces and those
of Burkina Faso, makes clear that this is the work of the
same terrorist groups that are breaching the peace in
the Sahel. There have also been numerous other attacks
in Mali, in the Niger and other countries — proof of the
persistent terrorist threat in the Sahel.
Just the day before yesterday, on 14 May, the
Nigerian army, as I mentioned earlier, once again
faced a large-scale attack resulting in the deaths of 28
military personnel on the border with Mali. Likewise,
12 Fulani civilians were killed Monday in the Segu
region, in central Mali. Terrorist groups financed by
artisanal gold mines or various forms of trafficking
remain strong and are exerting great pressure upon
our States. The threat is gaining traction everywhere.
It is no longer contained within the north of Mali,
in Sahelian Burkina Faso, or far from the borders of
Mauritania; it is spreading and taking other forms
whose consequences are equally tragic.
The Sahel today is seeing dozens of victims every
month, killed in ambushes, abductions, targeted or mass
killings, or attacks using improvised explosive devices.
Community conflicts and killings are the primary
consequence of that situation. The worst extremes of
horror have been surpassed by the community killings
in Inates, in the Niger; Yirgou and Arbinda, in Burkina
Faso; and Koulognon and Ogossagou, in Mali. Since the
beginning of 2019, at least 300 people have died as a
result of community conflicts alone.

S/PV. 8526

Burkina Faso and 600,000 in Chad. Along the borders,
thousands of refugees have joined the tens of thousands
of Malian refugees who have fled to Burkina Faso and
Mauritania since 2012.
As we can see, the Sahel countries are facing a
humanitarian situation that is spiralling out of control.
I would like to thank all our partners who are helping us
to cope with the humanitarian emergency, starting with
the United Nations. Given the magnitude of the crisis,
however, we need assistance on a much larger scale.
In addition to the humanitarian emergency, it
appears that the security challenge will also remain a
major emergency for a long time to come if we are to
avoid the failure of our States and prevent widespread
chaos on our continent, with many foreseeable
global repercussions.
To meet that security challenge, the G-5 Sahel States
have invested heavily in security. Security expenditures
account for 18 to 32 per cent of the national budget,
depending on the country — a tremendous burden
on our economies and a drain on our basic social
services, whose portion of the State budget diminishes
significantly every year. It is in the context of all
those emergencies and enormous challenges that we
appeal to the Security Council and all our partners to
further support the invaluable efforts of the G-5 Sahel
member States.
Such support should lead to the full
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force as soon
as possible. The Force is up and running today, but it
is still being equipped. Although it has mounted some
operations, the lack of equipment, particularly heavy
equipment, remains a real handicap for the Force to
reach its full operational capability.

The Sahel today is also seeing attacks on schools in
the form of arson, the looting of buildings and threats
against teachers. We are seeing attacks on State symbols,
looting of markets and cattle theft, and on top of that the
killing of teachers. As a result, public administrations,
health clinics and schools have been closed, depriving
thousands of children of education and causing massive
population and refugee displacements.

In addition, it should be noted that the technical
agreement among the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the European Union and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
which helps support the Force’s operations on the
ground, covers only operations on Malian territory.
The support provided under the agreement therefore
benefits only two of the seven established battalions.
However, as has already been demonstrated, the threat
exists throughout the Sahel.

In Mali and Burkina Faso combined, more than half
a million children are now without schooling, while
about 150,000 people have been internally displaced in

We therefore welcome and take note of the
recommendation of Secretary-General António
Guterres to the Council to explore the possibility of

19-142735/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

providing support through MINUSMA to all battalions
operating within the framework of the Joint Force,
on the condition that the latter or other partners take
responsibility for the delivery of assistance in their
areas of operation, that is, outside Malian territory.
On behalf of the G-5 Sahel, I ask the Security
Council to accede to our current request, endorsed
by the Secretary-General, to establish a new United
Nations approach to support the Joint Force and thereby
enable it to better respond to the security challenge,
which otherwise risks creating a dangerous situation in
the Sahelo-Saharan strip and well beyond.
The fight against terrorism in the Sahel is a
struggle for the survival of the G-5 Sahel States. There
is a real threat of its expansion to coastal regions,
or even the destabilization of the entire region. The
recent abduction of two French nationals in northern
Benin is a serious warning about the risk of such an
expansion, because Benin is not in the Sahel. And that
dangerous environment, owing to the terrorist threat,
could potentially increase the incidence of risky and
clandestine migration.
The fight against terrorism and other related
criminal activities in the Sahel region is a collective
responsibility and should be handled with the same
resolve that was shown in other countries and regions,
such as Iraq and Afghanistan. Given the urgent nature of
the actions that must be taken, the member States of the
G-5 Sahel cannot succeed on their own. It is therefore
time for the international community to consider the
creation of an international coalition to further tackle
the phenomenon of terrorism in the G-5 Sahel area and
throughout the Sahel.
It is also time for the international community to
take a clear position on the resolution of the Libyan
crisis. Libya remains a safe haven and breeding ground
for terrorists and criminals of all kinds and therefore
the main factor of destabilization in our region.
The President: I thank Mr. Barry for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Buyoya.
Mr. Buyoya (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I would like to congratulate
the Indonesian presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May.
6/27

16/05/2019

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting the African Union to this biannual briefing on
the situation in the Sahel, in particular the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I also
commend the Secretary-General for his excellent report
(S/2019/371), which covers all issues in the Sahel.
At the time of this briefing, the security situation
remains difficult in the Sahelo-Saharan region. In
Mali, terrorist acts in the north have persisted and have
spread to central Mali, while intercommunal conflicts
have exacerbated an already worrisome situation. The
attack on the Dioura camp and the massacre of civilians
in Ogossagou, which killed more people than all the
terrorist attacks in 2018 combined, have made headlines
in recent days.
In the Niger, in addition to terrorist incursions into
border areas with Mali and attacks on police stations,
the country also faces insurgents from Boko Haram
in the south, particularly in Bosso and Diffa, where
the many attacks claimed by that group have led to a
massive displacement to the centre of the country.
The 14 May attack in Mangaizé, in the Tillabéri
region of western Niger near the Malian border, which
targeted a military column of the Nigerian armed forces
and killed 28 people, was a reminder that the infamous
Islamic State is still active in the tri-border area. The
African Union once again condemns that despicable act
and offers its condolences to the families, the aggrieved
and the Government of the Niger.
In Burkina Faso we have observed an expansion in
the terrorist brutality from the north to the east, and
even in the centre of the country, with a trend towards
the targeting of churches in recent days. We can see
evidence of that in the heinous attacks perpetrated on
Sunday, 12 May, in a Catholic church in Dablo, in the
centre-north of the country, which resulted in the death
of six people, including the parish priest, and on 13 May,
in the north of the country, where four believers were
kidnapped and then brutally murdered. The expansion
of terrorist attacks to the south-east of the country now
means that the threat is expanding towards Togo, Benin
and Ghana. In Chad, in addition to insecurity linked
to the activities of the terrorist group Boko Haram, the
country fell victim in January to a rebel attack in the
north-east.
The presence of the Malian Armed forces in
Operation Barkhane has not able to prevent the
deterioration of the security situation in the Sahel. It
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

is that continued deterioration of the security situation
that led the leaders of the States of the Group of Five
for the Sahel to establish the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The
African Union commended that extremely responsible
decision, which is in line with the principles of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. The African
Union firmly supported that decision, and its Peace
and Security Council, at its meeting on 13 April
2017, adopted the strategic concept of operations and
authorized the deployment of the Force for an initial
period of 12 months.
The Peace and Security Council renewed the
mandate of the Joint Force at its meeting on 9 April,
while also noting the progress that had been made, the
operations conducted and the support that countries
continue to provide to the Force. The Peace and Security
Council congratulated the countries of the region as
well as the Force Commander and encouraged them to
forge ahead.
The Peace and Security Council addressed a
number of recommendations, namely, that the financing
promised for the Force during the donor conference
organized in February 2018 in Brussels be made
available quickly; that the assistance of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali be expanded to cover the entirety of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force; and that the African Union
Commission consider how it can further support the
Force as part of a comprehensive strategic vision for
stabilizing the Sahel region. I would like to take this
opportunity to recall the regular requests from the
Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel for the Joint Force
to enjoy direct financing from the United Nations
and operate under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, as recommended in the report of the
Secretary-General.
Given the situation prevailing in the Sahel region,
the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has
now become an absolute and urgent necessity. This
is an effort that the entire international community
should support. It is, however, an effort that must be
part of a comprehensive perspective that takes into
account the other challenges of the Sahel region, such
as governance, development and climate change. The
African Union aligns itself with that vision because it
believes that it will provide greater hope for the people.
On the security front, the African Union has
revitalized the Nouakchott process in order to strengthen

S/PV. 8526

regional security. On the political front, the African
Union continues to be engaged in the peace process in
Mali and also in Libya and will continue its efforts to
resolve the crises that are besetting those countries.
In terms of development, the African Union is
supporting the countries of the Lake Chad basin in the
framework of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram.
The African Union continues to support the G-5 Sahel
in advocating for the mobilization of the resources
pledged during the partners and donors coordination
conference in Nouakchott on 6 December 2018 for
the financing of the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment
Programme. The African Union also recently held in
Niamey a regional conference on climate change in the
Sahel and adopted relevant resolutions.
In conclusion, I would like to say that the African
Union firmly supports the report of the SecretaryGeneral and asserts that no effort should be spared in
supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
The President: I thank Mr. Buyoya for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Losada Fernández.
Mr. Losada Fernández (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity given once again to the European Union
(EU) to participate in the discussions of the Security
Council on the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). This meeting is undoubtedly an
important step in increasing the strength of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force, and it is, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/371), imperative to
support to it.
Indeed, we all note the deterioration in the security
situation in the Sahel. Security in the Sahel represents
not only the security of the States in the region as well as
the security of Europe; it represents the security of all.
The European Union therefore supports the SecretaryGeneral’s report and remains strongly engaged, just
as it was in Brussels two days ago, on 14 May, with
the Foreign and Defence Ministers of the EU member
States and the G-5 Sahel.
I also note that stability in the Sahel has a corollary.
There will be no lasting stability in the Sahel without
the full, effective and inclusive implementation of the
provisions of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali. The EU is working to that end and encourages
the Malian parties and the new Government of Mali

19-142737/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

in redeploying the reconstituted security and defence
forces in northern Mali and implementing disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.
Since the establishment of the G-5 Sahel, in 2014, the
European Union has actively supported its increasing
presence, in terms of both security and development, by
helping to mobilize the international community. That
support is one of the priorities of the foreign policy of
the European Union and its member States. I would like
to bring three points to the Council’s attention.
First, the European Union will continue to support
the operationalization of the Joint Force of the G-5
Sahel in its various components, including its police
component. Continued support must be accompanied
by greater involvement by the G-5 Sahel States in
achieving objectives on the ground. That was the main
message conveyed at the ministerial meetings held
in Brussels earlier this week and is the condition for
rebuilding international support.
Efforts must remain focused on the implementation
of the compliance framework on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law for the Joint
Force operations and on the judicialization of the Force.
Nearly 800 European experts from three Common
Security and Defence Policy missions — the European
Union capacity-building mission (EUCAP) Sahel Niger,
EUCAP Sahel Mali and the European Union Training
Mission in Mali — are present alongside defence and
security forces in the Sahel and are providing advice
and training.
Together with our Sahelian partners, we have
embarked on a process of adapting and regionalizing
those missions in order to better support the Joint Force
and meet the needs of the security and defence forces
of all G-5 Sahel countries. A regional advisory and
coordination cell will soon be deployed in Nouakchott
to better support the Permanent Secretariat.
Those experts remain at the disposal of our
Sahelian partners to help them, in particular, refine and
revise the Force’s concept of operations in order to first,
prioritize the most unstable areas; secondly, allow for
the increased mobility of the Force in those areas; and,
thirdly, ensure rapid transfer to internal security forces
to ensure the prosecution of persons arrested — all
with strict respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.
8/27

16/05/2019

With regard to the police component, the EU is
working to respond to the needs expressed by the various
States of the G-5 Sahel for the operationalization of their
national police components in order to enable them to
fulfil three designated tasks: investigation, intelligence
and supervision. That support will of course be provided
in coordination with the United Nations.
The EU has provided robust support for the
development and operational implementation of
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel in the amount of
€100 million, which covers equipment, services and
infrastructure — €75 million; support for the peace
and security structures of the G-5 Sahel — €5 million;
support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to provide operational and logistical support for the Joint
Force in Mali — €10 million; and support for the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for the establishment and implementation of a
compliance framework for respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law for Joint Force
operations — €10 million. The latter two categories of
support are provided under the EU-United Nations-G-5
Sahel technical arrangement signed on 23 February
2018 in Brussels.
With regard to support for the Joint Force through
MINUSMA, it should be noted that resolution 2391
(2017) allows the Mission to provide operational and
logistical support only on Malian territory and not in
all G-5 Sahel countries; as noted previously, that could
regrettably limit support to battalions in operations in
third countries. The EU also supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation that MINUSMA be
authorized to provide life consumables to all battalions
operating within the framework of the Joint Force
and the compliance framework on respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law for the Joint
Force operations.
Secondly, with respect to the compliance
framework on respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law, it should be noted that the first
pre-financing tranche of €5 million was paid to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in June 2018 and that initial activities
have begun, such as the deployment of a technical
assistance team to the Joint Force to assist military staff
in reviewing key documents and providing training for
military officers. It is a very positive system and is
unprecedented for an African operation. It must now
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

be applied and extended so as to prevent all forms
of unacceptable and disreputable abuses that would
discredit an operation in the eyes of the international
community and civilians on the ground.
Thirdly, and lastly, the European Union plays a
leading role in coordinating international support for
the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and welcomes the
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel trust fund. The
coordination hub, an ad hoc body set up by the European
Union and recognized by resolution 2391 (2017),
facilitates the coordination of bilateral assistance to the
Joint Force by focusing donor support on the needs of
the Force.
Following the establishment of the support
committee of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, based
in Mauritania, initial exchanges were conducted
between the Force and the coordination hub. The
establishment of the regional advisory and coordination
cell in Nouakchott in July will also strengthen the
support committee of the Joint Force and the transfer
of the coordination hub to Nouakchott to establish
full ownership of the process by the countries of the
G-5 Sahel.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU is
on an excellent footing, in particular the cooperation
between the EU security and defence missions — both
civilian and military — and MINUSMA on the ground.
The EU fully supports the excellent and indispensable
work of MINUSMA and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mahamat Annadif.
The European Union and its member States are
determined to continue to build a partnership with the
countries of the G-5 Sahel, which is vital for the region’s
security and development. The European Union is
ready to continue its support in 2019 and 2020, subject
to greater involvement by the States of the G-5 Sahel in
achieving objectives on the ground. Such support also
entails remobilizing the political and financial support
of other international partners, as we have just done at
the European level with the Ministers of the G-5 Sahel
in Brussels.
Those mutual efforts must be shared by both sides
and based on frank and effective dialogue between
the EU and the G-5 Sahel and concrete progress on
the ground. We must continue that momentum if we
want our efforts to be maintained and strengthened. We
count on the support of the Security Council, which is

S/PV. 8526

essential if such efforts are to continue, both politically
and in terms of logistical and financial support for the
G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force.
The President: I thank Mr. Losada Fernández for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: May I commend you, Mr. President,
on bringing this very important and urgent matter
to a meeting of the Security Council. I also thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, Mr. Barry, for joining us.
I thank the Council for this opportunity to
discuss how the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) is supporting, and can further
support, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
countries to work together for security, stability and
sustainable development.
UNODC is proud to have been a trusted partner
of the G-5 Sahel since its inception, namely, through
our programme contributing to the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. The UNODC Sahel
programme is focused on enhancing the accessibility,
efficiency and accountability of criminal justice
systems to counter drug trafficking, as well as other
forms of trafficking and organized crime, terrorism
and corruption. That responds directly to the security
and governance objectives set forth in the regional
integrated strategy and is being implemented with
neighbouring Maghreb countries, namely, Algeria and
Morocco. UNODC puts great stock in our strategic
partnership with the G-5 Sahel, which remains a top
priority of our work in the field.
The G-5 Sahel secretariat and member States
requested in 2017 that UNODC support development
of a police component for the Joint Force to promote
transparent, efficient and accountable judicial
proceedings in the fight against organized crime and
terrorism. Working with our G-5 Sahel partners, as well
as with other countries and international organizations,
we held consultations that resulted in the agreement of
a conceptual and organizational framework, as well as
principles for operationalizing the police component.
As a result, investigative units have been established
across the region.
UNODC has held numerous training workshops
for the military, law enforcement and the judiciary
to strengthen coordination between the Joint Force

19-142739/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

and the Sahel criminal justice systems, safeguard
human rights and prevent violations. The G-5 Sahel
countries have achieved some notable results with our
support, addressing, in particular, regional judicial
cooperation and mutual legal assistance, firearmsmarking, investigation of terrorism financing, illicit
trafficking at airports and the resolution of backlogged
cases involving terrorism suspects in overdue
pretrial detention.
The results were made possible thanks to support
from the Governments of Germany, Japan, the United
States, the Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Belgium
and France, as well as the European Union. Our G-5
Sahel partners deserve a great deal of credit for their
commitment to advancing efforts through the Joint
Force in a fragile security environment.
Looking forward, in view of the Burkina Faso
presidency of the G-5 Sahel, UNODC seeks to further
develop its support to the country and its neighbours.
Nonetheless, we must be clear that many daunting
challenges remain. There are, in particular, three areas
where we urgently require the support of Member States
to implement the police component of the Joint Force.
First, in the field of forensics, we need to provide
equipment and training for law enforcement officers
on crime scene investigation, addressing, in particular,
evidence gathered by military personnel.
Secondly, we need support to further promote
integrity measures within the Joint Force and national
justice systems, with the ultimate objective of
reinforcing trust between people and their defence and
security forces.

16/05/2019

Predictable funding and the determined political
commitment of the G-5 Sahel and the international
community remain prerequisites for effective action.
The UNODC is committed to working with all our
partners to strengthen governance, security and
development towards a safer, healthier and more
prosperous Sahel.
The President: I thank Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank all
the briefers for their especially enlightening remarks.
I particularly welcome the presence around this table
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Barry, in his capacity as current President of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We truly appreciate
the Minister’s presence and once again extend a warm
welcome to him.
I would like to begin my statement by expressing
our heartfelt condolences to the Nigerien authorities
following the tragic human toll of the terrorist ambush
that struck the armed forces of the Niger along the
Malian border, and I would like to reassure them that
France stands in complete solidarity with them.
I would also like to pay tribute to the memory
of all the civilians, national staff and members of
Government and international armed forces alike who
have lost their lives during intercommunal and terrorist
violence, which unfortunately strikes the countries of
the Sahel on an almost daily basis.

Thirdly, we need to increase support to integrate
women into the security structures of the G-5 Sahel
member States and do more to enable and highlight the
contributions of women in the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime in the Sahel.

Lastly, I would like to make a heartfelt mention of
the two French soldiers who died a few days ago in an
operation to free hostages in Burkina Faso, following
the national tribute that was paid to them yesterday.
We especially appreciated the Minister’s words in
that regard.

The police component of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel recognizes that in order to be sustainable
and effective, security responses must respect human
rights and promote justice. It represents an important
and innovative mechanism to combat terrorism and
transnational organized crime, and, at the same time,
restore trust. I am grateful to the Council for bringing
attention to the challenges we face in achieving those
important objectives.

In order to make progress, we must be clear about
what we are seeing. The deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation in the Sahel is being fuelled
by the spread of the terrorist threat and the increase in
intercommunal violence. Such a deterioration poses an
unprecedented risk to the stability of West Africa as a
whole. The G-5 Sahel countries are now the first to be
affected, but others will soon face the same challenges
if adequate responses are not urgently provided.

10/27

19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

We are therefore collectively engaged in a real
race against time to stabilize the Sahel. It requires
the urgent implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, a merciless fight against
terrorist groups operating in the region, as well as good
governance and the creation of sustainable economic
opportunities for the people. As we all know, we will
succeed only if we proceed simultaneously along the
security and development tracks.
The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a key element
of the security component of those efforts, which
complements the other security presences deployed in
the region, each of which has its added value. The Joint
Force is unique in its nature, without any real precedent
or equivalent on the continent. It demonstrates the
shared will of the G-5 Sahel States to coordinate the
response to a threat, let us make no mistake, that has
consequences for us all. Our shared responsibility as
the international community is to provide them with
support commensurate to what is at stake.
The latest — and significant — gains made have
enabled the Joint Force to take a major step in its
operationalization. In that regard, I would mention the
resumption of operations, sending a strong signal of
resilience, following the attack on the headquarters in
Sévaré. I am also thinking of the full operationalization
of the human rights compliance framework,
demonstrating awareness that the Joint Force’s activities
can be effective only if it has the full support of the
people. Lastly, I am thinking of the progress made
in the deployment of the police component, which is
essential for the proper functioning of the Force.
In this context, the full mobilization of the G-5
Sahel States is more crucial than ever so that the Joint
Force is able to deliver on its full potential. Judicial
proceedings against alleged perpetrators of any kind
of infraction must also be brought to completion. The
deployment of officers with provost duties as part of the
Joint Force and the judicialization of the Force’s action
must be finalized, with the support of the various
partners, including the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the European Union Common Security
and Defence Policy Sahel and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
Beyond the commitment of the G-5 Sahel States,
the success of the Joint Force will depend on the
provision of effective and appropriate international

S/PV. 8526

support. Much has already been done, notably thanks to
the unprecedented mobilization of the European Union,
which has already been mentioned, in liaison with the
Permanent Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel. The Permanent
Secretariat, whose activities I commend, should
eventually become the sole interface for international
aid and the needs on the ground.
We also wish to continue improving the
effectiveness of the existing international arrangements.
In this context, we will, at the forthcoming renewal
of MINUSMA’s mandate, propose clarifying the
modalities for the use and delivery of support provided
under the technical agreement to ensure that it better
meets the needs of the Force. Our ultimate aim remains
to strengthen multilateral support to the Joint Force by
equipping it with a robust mandate and implementing
a logistics package, because we know that only with
predictable and sustainable support can we ensure the
success of G-5 Sahel efforts in the medium term. The
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2019/371) remain our compass in this regard.
We are ready to take them to the Council as soon as
the Joint Force makes its first significant progress on
the ground.
In this difficult regional context, the situation in
Burkina Faso deserves our full attention. The recent
Security Council mission to the Sahel provided an
opportunity to observe the mobilization of the Burkina
Faso authorities on the ground but also the need for
significant international support to enable them to
restore stability. France fully supports the process
begun at the initiative of the Secretary-General to adjust
the United Nations presence on the ground, in the light
of the needs generated by the deteriorating situation in
the region. We hope that the United Nations response
will be ambitious and meet the expectations of the
Burkina Faso authorities in the fields of humanitarian
aid and development, training of the security forces,
respect for human rights, the promotion of the rule of
law and support for the fight against terrorism. In our
view, the Peacebuilding Commission is the appropriate
entity to support this process, on which we expect the
Secretariat to provide regular briefings.
The threats weighing upon the Sahel call for
redoubled commitment and the full attention and
mobilization of the Security Council. I assure the
Council of France’s steadfast determination in this
regard, and we will propose a press statement to that
effect at the end of this meeting.

19-1427311/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the Indonesian presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this briefing on
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I welcome
the presence among us this morning of Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso
and President of the Council of Ministers of the G-5
Sahel. My delegation also thanks Mr. Pierre Buyoya,
African Union High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, Ms. Bintou Keita, Mr. Angel Losada Fernández
and Mr. Yury Fedotov for their informative briefings
and the pertinent recommendations contained therein.
The West African subregion is the target of terrorist
acts of horrific and growing violence, carried out by
jihadist hordes, whose members demonstrate each
day their choice to renounce their humanity. This can
be seen in the numerous attacks against populations
and places of worship, followed by the massacre of
worshippers at prayer and mass carnage in Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger, countries very close to mine,
both geographically and emotionally. Only a few days
ago, two French tourists were abducted from Pendjari
National Park in Benin and taken to Burkina Faso,
then, thankfully, later liberated by commandos from
contingents of the Burkina Faso Armed Forces and
French Special Forces, whose professionalism has been
unanimously recognized. Côte d’Ivoire would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the two French
soldiers and the Beninese tour guide who lost their lives.
This tragic event has three major lessons for us:
the transnational nature of the terrorist threat, the
potential links between cross-border criminal networks
and terrorist groups and, above all, the urgent need
for all involved in the fight against terrorism to join
efforts so as to respond in a manner commensurate with
these phenomena. In this respect, the meeting recently
convened in Accraby the President Nana Akufo-Ado,
which brought together Burkina Faso, President of the
Conference of Heads of State of G-5 Sahel, Ghana, Côte
d’Ivoire, Benin and Togo, reflected the acute awareness
of that need. It is therefore reasonable to welcome this
new awareness and hope that it continues to grow.
Indeed, we welcome the significant progress that the
meeting has already generated.
Despite these complex challenges and in a context
of weak national economic performance, the G-5 Sahel
States have to date spared no effort to bring about
the full operationalization of the Joint Force, which
has undoubtedly added value in the fight against
12/27

16/05/2019

cross-border criminal networks and terrorist groups
in the Sahel. Their ongoing efforts, supported by the
United Nations and bilateral and institutional partners,
including the European Union, have facilitated
encouraging progress in the consolidation of the Joint
Force. Côte d’Ivoire therefore welcomes the positive
trends identified in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/371), including the increase in force strength of
Joint Force to 75 per cent of its operational capacity; the
ongoing efforts to address issues relating to training and
the provision of appropriate equipment; the progress
made in the implementation of the civilian and police
components and, with the assistance of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the human rights compliance framework; the
advances made in defining rules of engagement, a code
of conduct and procedures for interaction with civilian
populations; and the restructuring of the Permanent
Secretariat of the G-5 Sahel. Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
those significant advances and shares the SecretaryGeneral’s views with respect to the persistence of
challenges related to, inter alia, the financing of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force, support for the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017), and humanitarian, economic and social
development issues in the Sahel region.
With regard to the financing of the Joint Force,
my country unconditionally endorses the terms of the
communiqué of the Conference of Heads of State of
G-5 Sahel urging G-5 Sahel partners to honour their
financial pledges. Despite the financial and logistical
efforts already made by bilateral and multilateral
partners, Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that only
predictable and sustainable funding under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations will ensure the
effectiveness of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. My country
is of the view that the Secretary-General’s proposal for
the establishment of a support office funded through
assessed contributions and independent of MINUSMA
would undoubtedly be a useful tool for predictable and
sustainable financing in support of the Joint Force.
Moreover, in view of the difficulties encountered
in conducting operations under way, it is clear that a
review is needed to amend the technical agreement
relating to MINUSMA support for the Joint Force. As
recommended by the G-5 Sahel Council of Ministers,
such a review should allow for determining the
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

possibility of extending the scope of the assistance
provided by MINUSMA.
In order for it to be effective over time, the security
response provided by the G-5 Sahel Joint Force must
be part of a broader approach, taking into account the
structural foundations of the current insecurity and
instability in the Sahel region. Côte d’Ivoire remains
convinced that security initiatives in the Sahel will
have a significant and lasting impact only if the fight
against poverty and the effects of climate change,
improved governance and access to basic social
services and economic opportunities remain our major
priorities. In this regard, my country welcomes the
adoption by the States members of the G-5 Sahel of the
Priority Investment Programme, which will enable the
financing of 40 developmental projects. To that end,
the G-5 Sahel hopes that the financing pledges made at
the Nouakchott donors conference held on 6 December
2018 will be fulfilled as soon as possible, with a view to
bringing the benefits of inclusive economic development
to the people of the region. It is nevertheless necessary
to ensure complementarity and coherence among the
G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme and other
development initiatives, in particular those of the Sahel
Alliance, in order to avoid wasting resources.
Côte d’Ivoire shares the Secretary-General’s
assessment of a deterioration of the security situation
in the Sahel region, with a possible spillover effect
on coastal West African countries. In considering the
full scope of the threat, those countries have agreed to
strengthen their cooperation in combating terrorism and
cross-border organized crime within the framework of
the Accra initiative. Côte d’Ivoire believes that, as part
of a preventive approach, the Accra initiative deserves
support and should be synergized with the work of the
G-5 Sahel by building bridges of cooperation in the
military and intelligence areas.
Cross-border criminal networks and terrorist armed
groups clearly pose constant threats to peace, stability
and development in the Sahel region and throughout
West Africa. In addition, as we confront the hydra’s
head of terrorism, our determination to preserve the
humanist values of peace, fraternity, solidarity and
tolerance, which are the foundations of our societies,
must therefore be firm. Our support for the G-5 Sahel
must be just as strong. The eradication of terrorism is
undoubtedly a long-term shared endeavour, which will
require patience and consistency in our efforts. It will
also require the United Nations and all development

S/PV. 8526

partners to maintain and strengthen the momentum of
support and solidarity with the States members of the
G-5 Sahel.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita, His
Excellency Foreign Minister Barry, African Union
High Representative Buyoya, European Union Special
Representative Losada Fernández and Executive
Director Fedotov for their respective briefings. I
commend Foreign Minister Barry for coming to New
York to brief the Security Council.
At present, the situation in the Sahel region as a
whole is stable despite multiple challenges. In order
to achieve stability and development in the Sahel,
the international community must take an integrated
approach and work in many areas from politics to
security to development. It is necessary to continue
supporting the countries of the region, including the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), so that they can
address regional security challenges in an independent
manner. I wish to highlight the following priority areas.
First, it is important to advance the political
settlement of regional hot-button issues. In order
to bring about peace and stability in the Sahel, it is
imperative to move the peace process forward in the
countries concerned. Military means alone cannot
solve regional security issues. It is essential to continue
supporting the various Malian parties in carrying out
inclusive dialogue and consultations and expediting
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. It is imperative to focus on
tackling problems beyond the region, such as the
Libyan crisis, in order to mitigate their negative impact
on the Sahel.
Secondly, it necessary to step up support for
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The countries of the G-5
Joint Force had to overcome many difficulties, such
as the deteriorating security situation and the lack
of operational capacity and equipment shortages,
when it resumed operations earlier this year, thereby
demonstrating the determination of the countries
of the region to step up the development of the Joint
Force. The international community should provide
continuing support for the Joint Force. In accordance
with the relevant agreements, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali should continue to provide the Joint Force with a
support package.

19-1427313/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

Thirdly, it is essential to take stock of economic
and social development and tackle the root causes of
conflicts. The Sahel faces many problems, ranging
from poverty to unemployment to the deterioration of
the environment. The international community should
help the countries of the Sahel take on the development
challenges and tap into their own potential. It is
necessary to help them formulate a Priority Investment
Programme, support Secretary-General Guterres in
implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel and its support plan and assist the Sahel in
achieving sustainable development.
Fourthly, we must attach importance to the role
of regional mechanisms, support African countries
in finding African solutions to African problems,
encourage the Heads of State of the G-5 Sahel, the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and other regional and subregional
organizations to take the lead in addressing issues
related to the Sahel, and assist the G-5 Sahel Permanent
Secretariat in its capacity-building efforts to secure as
soon as possible the ability to coordinate international
community support for the Joint Force. China supports
the G-5 Sahel in assuming ownership of its security
responsibilities in responding to regional security
challenges, and we support the United Nations in its
efforts aimed at providing necessary financial support
for the Joint Force.
China has been actively implementing the ChinaAfrica peace and security measures announced by
Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Beijing Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. Out of the
assistance package to the AU, a total of 300 million
yuan has been disbursed in order to support counterterrorism actions in the Sahel and the development
of the Joint Force. In addition, a further $1.5 million
in cash assistance will be provided to the G-5 Sahel
Permanent Secretariat. Clearly demonstrating China’s
resolute support for peace and security in Africa, such
measures will play an important role in maintaining
peace and security both in the Sahel and in Africa as
a whole.
China is ready to work with the international
community to do its part in enabling the Sahel and the
African continent to achieve stability and prosperity.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would like
to thank today’s briefers and to give a warm welcome to
Foreign Minister Barry.
14/27

16/05/2019

The past six months in the Sahel have been concerning.
The security situation continues to deteriorate. Radical
elements have driven intercommunal violence to an
all-time high. The massacre in Ogossagou points
towards potential widespread intercommunal violence
throughout the region. Meanwhile, terrorist groups
and criminal organizations continue to thrive, moving
across borders, attacking civilian communities and
Government and international security forces.
Such insecurity impacts all West Africa. The heroic
rescue of four kidnapped civilians last week, during
which the two French soldiers lost their lives, reminds
us all of the danger. The United States honours the two
fallen French soldiers and their families for their loss
and their great sacrifice.
The international and peacekeeping forces alone
will not resolve the security crisis in the region. That is
why it is critical to work on the long-term goal of fully
operationalizing the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). The United States recognizes that
and, thus far, has committed approximately $111 million
to the G-5 Sahel States to fill capability gaps by
providing equipment, training and advisory support.
We are encouraged by the resumption of operations
of the Joint Force and we pay tribute to the sacrifices
that Member States are making in order to bring
stability to the region. We call on the Joint Force and
Member States to continue to take the necessary steps to
become fully operational, including through adherence
to the compliance framework to prevent, investigate,
address and publicly report violations and abuses
of human rights law and violations of international
humanitarian law.
The United States continues to believe that bilateral
assistance remains the best way to support the Force and
is disappointed that other members of the Council and
beyond continue to call for Chapter VII authorization
and United Nations-assessed funding for the Joint
Force. As I noted in my remarks last November (see
S/PV.8402) and as the United States has repeatedly
stated, Chapter VII authorization is not needed to
accomplish the Joint Force’s mission, as the G-5 Sahel
States already have existing agreements in place for
military operations in their respective territories.
We note with regret that, as highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2019/371), the
G-5 Joint Force in Mali is not sufficiently leveraging the
established technical agreement with the United Nations
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the European Union. We call on
the Joint Force, the Malian Government and partners to
find ways to help the Force to use that opportunity more
efficiently. Some of our briefers and Council colleagues
have expressed an interest in exploring possible ways to
deliver reimbursable support to the Joint Force outside
Mali. I urge our colleagues to recall that in resolution
2391 (2017) the Security Council encouraged that the
technical agreement constitute a temporary measure
towards full self-sufficiency of the Joint Force. In
addition, the Council emphasized that any facilitation
of support through the technical agreement should not
adjust or adversely impact MINUSMA’s own operations
or put its personnel at undue risk. The United States
believes that the international community should
focus its collective support on the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force as an African-owned, African-led response to
regional instability.
The dire security situation demands that the
international community focus its collective efforts
in the Sahel in a smart, deliberate and collaborative
way. As others have noted, that requires that the region
and its partners continue to pursue more than security
responses alone and address the root causes of conflict
through coordinated humanitarian, health, agricultural,
governance and development assistance. As I have
stated before, through our effective coordination with
the security and development actors in the region and
the leadership of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States in solving regional
and local disputes, significant improvements in security
are achievable.
The sustainability of those improvements will
depend on the progress of the G-5 Sahel States
towards effective governance, the creation of access to
opportunity and respect for human rights, accountability
and inclusiveness. It is also critical to increase the roles
for women, young people and marginalized groups in
decision-making. Together, such combined endeavours
can achieve durable peace and stability and unleash the
potential of this vital region and its people.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I welcome His Excellency Mr. Alpha
Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Burkina Faso, and wish to thank him for presence
here among us. From this seat and on behalf of His
Excellency Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, allow me to convey

S/PV. 8526

to His Excellency Mr. Roth Marc Christian Kaboré,
Chairman-in-Office of the Conference of Heads of
States of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
our very best wishes for success in leading the fight
against terrorism and its consequences for the SaheloSaharan region. We reiterate our thanks to Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant-Secretary-General for Africa, His
Excellency President Pierre Buyoya, African Union
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Angel
Losada Fernández and Mr. Yury Fedotov for their
enlightening briefings.
The Sahel region is at the heart of the concerns
not only at the level of the West Africa subregion but
also at the continental and international levels. The
climate of insecurity and instability in the Sahel is
increasingly worrying. For several months, communal
conflicts in Burkina Faso and Mali have added to the
security, humanitarian and development problems.
The increasing mobility and sophistication of terrorist
armed groups and ethnic militias operating in the region
have led to an increase in the number of casualties in
recent months.
Allow me to express here the strong condemnation
by the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
of the recent incidents of intercommunal violence and
the asymmetric and coordinated attacks against the
armed forces, United Nations peacekeeping forces
and the defenceless civilian population, particularly
in Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger. We convey our
condolences to the families of the victims, as well as
to the Governments of the countries concerned, and
in particular extend our most heartfelt sorrow to the
Government of the Niger for the more than 20 soldiers
who died yesterday in a terrorist attack and to France
for the two soldiers who fell in the field of honour while
rescuing the hostages kidnapped by the terrorists.
In that context, we believe that there should be
no feeling of impunity and abandonment on the part
of the States of the region. We therefore reiterate the
urgent need for the national authorities to act swiftly
to identify and prosecute those responsible, once
identified and detained, to the fullest extent of the
law. That would reassure the population, restore the
authority and legitimacy of the States and weaken the
sense of impunity that fosters violence.
To end the conflicts gripping the Sahel, it is
necessary to provide rapid responses to the crisis while
proposing a sustainable approach. In other words,

19-1427315/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

we need to reconcile what on the surface may seem
irreconcilable: the most pressing and lasting needs.
Indeed, there are many urgent needs. Due to the
lack of security, 900 schools, for example, had to
close in Mali and in neighbouring Burkina Faso, 440
schools must also remain closed, excluding 66,000
children from the education system in the current year.
But the G-5 Sahel must do more than fight terrorism.
While security investments are necessary, they remain
insufficient. Security pressure has generated significant
macroeconomic and fiscal costs for every country of the
region, including negative effects on social investment.
We must also be aware that military approach
alone will not resolve the security crisis in the
Sahel. We must undertake a reflection on excessive
militarization — in a region in which almost all the
world’s armies are present, which makes it attractive to
extremist and terrorist groups of all kinds — which has
continually dragged the States of the Sahel into a cycle
of exponential increases in military expenditure for
their survival. The cycle is unsustainable and is being
maintained at the expense of the investments needed to
develop the region and offer hope to young people.
Numerous reports have revealed that armed groups
recruit either from helpless and unemployed youth or
from rural communities that feel neglected by public
authorities. It is therefore important that States become
aware of the distress of those millions of citizens
and generate tangible and lasting political responses.
Accordingly, projects within the frameworks of the
Sahel Alliance and the Priority Investment Programme
must remain a priority for implementation by the G-5
Sahel States, with the support of international donors
and partners.
Parallel to that work, in Mali, a country where
extremism has spread, retaking national territory must
also be a priority. The different communities have
always lived in peace and harmony throughout the
country, while conflicts and tensions were managed
through dialogue. The State must restore that tradition
and culture of dialogue, rebuild confidence and promote
reconciliation and cohesion among communities
through coexistence in the context of home-grown
processes, which will involve raising awareness of the
importance of peace for development and the promotion
of positive values, but also of the resolution of land
disputes and the administration of justice.
16/27

16/05/2019

The close collaboration of the G-5 Sahel with
such partners as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and INTERPOL should be
underlined. The joint assessment missions carried out
between July and October 2018 between the Permanent
Secretariat and the UNODC will undoubtedly create a
legal framework for the implementation of the police
component in order to ensure that the Joint Force
can adequately fulfil its mission to combat terrorism
and organized crime by ensuring transparent judicial
follow-up. We also commend the strategic partnership
with INTERPOL, which is essential for the exchange
of information and the use of its database for the
registration of Joint Force investigations.
Furthermore, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes the final communiqué of the fifth ordinary
session of the Conference of the G-5 Sahel Heads of
State, in which they reaffirmed their willingness
to mobilize more domestic resources for the full
operationalization of the Joint Force. In line with the
9 April communiqué of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, we stress the need for the Security
Council to extend support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) beyond Mali to all components
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force as part of an integrated
approach to its work. It is certainly an issue that cannot
be avoided in the next month’s negotiations on the
renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate.
In view of the fact that the situation in the Sahel
is a real threat to international peace and security, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, for its part, expresses
its support for the calls by the leaders of the region to
place the mandate of the Joint Force under Chapter VII
of the Charter, in order to provide it with the additional
political legitimacy that this important initiative and
the critical situation in the region deserve. Moreover,
the critical situation of not taking rapid and decisive
measures could extend to the coastal countries of the
area, such as Côte d’Ivoire, Togo, Benin and Ghana. We
believe that it is necessary, as Minister Barry indicated,
to assemble an international coalition similar to those
assembled for Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya, but this
time with the help of the African Union, so as to stop
this gangrene of insecurity. Without such a coalition,
this scourge would extend beyond West Africa.
In conclusion, allow me to point out that, although
the implementation of all the aspects that we have
highlighted will not return to us the thousands of
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

human lives lost, they are nevertheless likely to create
the conditions for optimism and new hope for peaceful
coexistence, the acceptance of intercommunity
harmony and the return of the authority of States in all its
fullness so that they might assume their constitutional
prerogatives, provide legitimate protection to persons
and property and stand as united and indivisible States. I
would conclude by congratulating each of the G-5 Sahel
States for the multiple efforts they are making within
the framework of the complete operationalization of the
Joint Force.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank today’s briefers, in
particular His Excellency Foreign Minister Barry, for
allowing us to put the situation in the Sahel into context.
At the same time, we commend the progress made with
respect to the operationalization of the Joint Force.
Taking into account the information provided by
the briefers on the security situation, as well as the need
for the creation of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to combat the shared conflicts
in the region, the Security Council is called upon to
support those African countries that are still striving
to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime
at the regional and subregional levels with a view to
restoring peace and security in the Sahel region. We are
concerned about the deteriorating levels of security in
the region, which are reflected in the current escalation
of violence, mostly directed against civilians, as well
as the unprecedented levels of intercommunity violence
aggravated by the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons.
In that regard, we encourage the authorities to
take the necessary actions to address this scourge by
strengthening control measures, including the Plan of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its Aspects.
Furthermore, we encourage States that manufacture
and import arms, ammunition and related materials to
strengthen transfer and control mechanisms in order
to prevent the final destination of those weapons from
becoming conflict zones, and thereby save lives.
The insecurity in the Sahel has resulted in the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation throughout
the area, as well as the internal displacement of large
population groups, and has triggered a food crisis that
will require the treatment of approximately 274,000
children for severe acute malnutrition, an increase

S/PV. 8526

of more than 60 per cent as compared with original
estimates. In Mali and Burkina Faso alone, more than
5 million people need humanitarian assistance. Of
those, over half are children who, in addition to facing
food shortages, are condemned to the misfortune of not
having access to education. Owing to the closure of
schools, they do not have the necessary tools to develop
their abilities or prepare them to be agents for change
in society.
The Dominican Republic is a country that firmly
believes in young people as transformers of society and
supports the recommendations of the fourth report of the
African Union Peace and Security Council with regard
to the implementation of the road map. We therefore
would like to reaffirm that the inclusion of investment
in, and cooperation with, young people in the Sahel is
a possible avenue for them to achieve greater potential.
That also addresses high youth unemployment and
contributes to peace and security in the region.
With regard to the role of women, we see that
the rights of women in the Sahel are systematically
violated by terrorist groups. That is compounded
by their extremely difficult survival in the midst of
poverty, armed conflict, violent extremism, gender
discrimination and sexual violence. All of that is
unacceptable. Therefore, while we have a refocused
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, it is
important to further align that strategy with the 20182022 United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, the
2017-2020 action plan of the Economic Community of
West African States for women and peace and security,
and the road map for the implementation of the activities
of the G-5 Sahel Women’s Platform. In that regard,
we acknowledge the training and capacity-building
measures for the staff of the G-5 Joint Force and the
signing of a new operational procedure applicable to all
those arrested and held by the Joint Force, with specific
and differentiated treatment for women and children,
with a view to protecting civilians caught up in
violence. We welcome the support of the international
community to that end.
Moreover, given the continued threats resulting
from climate change, it is crucial to continue to
strengthen the cooperation mechanisms of the Force
with other regional and subregional initiatives so as
to promote sustainable development in the region. In
that regard, we welcome the efforts to step up the fight
against climate change, in line with the United Nations

19-1427317/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, included in the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.
We must continue to strengthen the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel and hasten the creation of the
G-5 Joint Force trust fund, which will help the Force
to overcome the many difficulties it faces in terms of
equipment, training and infrastructure, among other
challenges. That will allow it to improve its operations
in combating terrorism, illegal migration, trafficking
in human beings and other forms of cross-border crime.
That financing would also provide it with predictable
funds and timely disbursements so that it can fulfil
its mandates.
We commend the European Union, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, Operation Barkhane and the Malian
Armed Forces on the creation of the Mali coordination
body with a view to improving the exchange of
information and coordination among the various
military and security forces present in the country.
We also commend the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on the assistance it provides to the G-5
Sahel countries to address terrorism and organized
transnational crime. We urge the continued disbursement
of pledged contributions to the mechanism for peace in
Africa with a view to amassing the necessary resources
for the stabilization of the region.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic agrees
with the Secretary-General that security initiatives,
although clearly necessary, will not be a panacea for
the Sahel’s problems. In order to combat terrorism
and cross-border crime in the Sahel, in addition to
providing the G-5 Joint Force with the necessary
funding in a predictable manner to increase the capacity,
effectiveness and efficiency of its operations, we must
also do more to solve the underlying problems fuelling
the conflict with a view to building capacities that
contribute to sustainable socioeconomic development
in the Sahel region. Otherwise, the Sahel region will
continue in its spiral of instability and foreign troops
will in all likelihood be there for longer than any of us
can imagine. Statistics tell us that the various factions
of armed groups are expanding their reach in the
Sahel and in neighbouring countries, and violence is
therefore spilling over borders, threatening to weaken
States and fragment populations. Like the SecretaryGeneral, we believe that more must be done to avoid
further deterioration in the security situation. The
18/27

16/05/2019

United Nations and the Security Council are called
upon to seek both national and regional joint solutions
in order to achieve peace and security in the region
and therefore improve the well-being and rights of the
inhabitants of the Sahel.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank all our briefers for their very insightful and
comprehensive statements. I extend a very warm and
special welcome to Mr. Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso.
Germany attaches great importance to peace and
stability in the Sahel region. Chancellor Angela Merkel
underlined that during her visit to the region only two
weeks ago at a Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
summit in Ouagadougou, where she met with the Heads
of State of the G-5 upon the invitation of President
Kaboré. The Chancellor made very clear during her
visit that Germany supports the G-5 Sahel, and the
Joint Force in particular, and is ready to consider
ways to increase support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
by the Council. Because of the pressing challenges,
we expect more rapid progress with regard to the
operationalization of the Joint Force and the political
integration of the G-5 Sahel as a regional organization.
Let me focus on four specific messages in that regard.
First, Germany is a strong partner of the G-5 Sahel
and has contributed about €28 million in support to the
Joint Force so far. The Joint Force must now quickly
increase its operational capabilities, as we have heard
from many of those who briefed us. In that regard, we
expect to see stronger engagement by all G-5 Sahel
countries. We also call on all international partners that
have pledged support to increase the predictability of
funding for the Joint Force.
Secondly, Germany is certain that the Joint Force has
the potential to develop into a key player for achieving
more security in the Sahel, but we are not there yet.
That is why we are convinced that there is a continued
need for an international security presence in the Sahel
region for the time being. That includes the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, which should be equipped with the
necessary resources to implement its mandate.
Thirdly, Germany strongly believes that
safeguarding human rights and building inclusive
societies are in fact prerequisites to successfully counter
terrorism and extremism. The experience of injustice
often is a decisive factor in breeding extremism. When
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

combating terrorism and extremism, there cannot be
any compromise when it comes to respecting human
rights. Therefore, we fully support the human rights
compliance framework of the Joint Force and thank the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for its dedicated work in that regard.
Fourthly, Germany is equally convinced that a
military approach to fighting terrorism and insecurity
will not be successful in isolation. Human security
should be increased through civilian police capabilities
that can remain engaged even when serious threats
of terrorism are gone. We therefore strongly support
police cooperation and training in the context of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
If we take a more strategic, comprehensive, holistic
look at the challenges at hand, we see that what is
needed is a joined-up approach encompassing various
fields — specifically, security, peacebuilding and
development. That also guides Germany’s bilateral and
regional support to the G-5 Sahel countries. In total,
Germany has been providing at least €1.7 billion to
the countries of the Sahel for the period from 2017 to
2020, and €1 billion through development cooperation.
During her recent visit to the region, Chancellor
Merkel announced that Germany will make an addition
€60 million available for regional development. During
his recent visit to the region, our Foreign Minister,
Heiko Maas, announced that Germany will be
providing €46 million for security and stabilization in
Burkina Faso and its border region. In total, Germany’s
support to the G-5 in terms of civilian crisis prevention,
security and stabilization has amounted to more than
€145 million since 2016.
Since we have the honour of having the Foreign
Minister of Burkina Faso with us today, I would also
like to say a few words about the situation in his
country. Burkina Faso is a crucially important partner
in the stabilization of the Sahel region. We are therefore
witnessing the deteriorating security situation there
with great concern. In the past year there has been a
significant increase in terrorist attacks across large
parts of the country, and the reports of recent attacks
in the north and east, as well as the imminent risk of
the further spread of terrorist activities towards the
south, only highlight the fragility of the situation. We
are particularly alarmed about the tremendous surge
in human rights violations and the rising numbers of
civilian casualties, and our thoughts are with all the
victims of terrorist attacks, particularly those soldiers

S/PV. 8526

who recently sacrificed their lives in the fight against
terrorism. In that context, I would also like to express
my condolences regarding the French force members
who recently paid with lives in a hostage situation.
Germany honours their sacrifice. While those who
fight terrorism are a very important factor in our overall
strategy, we all benefit from their efforts to increase
security and stability in the region and beyond.
The proliferation of terrorist networks and
organized crime across the Sahel, resulting from
largely uncontrolled border areas, emphasizes the fact
that we are dealing with regional rather than national
challenges. We therefore encourage our friend and
partner the Government of Burkina Faso to intensify its
efforts to seek regional and international partnerships
aimed at countering such developments. We must do
that together. During the Security Council’s March
visit, led jointly by France, Côte d’Ivoire and Germany,
Council members learned about the security challenges
first-hand, and we would again like to thank the
Government of Burkina Faso for its generous support
to the Security Council mission. I think one of the
most important takeaways from the visit was that
it is important to work together to prevent a further
escalation of the situation. We welcome the fact that
the Secretariat has demonstrated its willingness to shift
gears and adapt the United Nations country office to
the new challenges. We encourage it to make progress
in that regard and to advance the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Before concluding, I would just like to say a few
words about today’s meeting of the Peacebuilding
Commission this afternoon. We feel it is a very
important step in rallying and coordinating international
support in the light of the tremendous challenges that
Burkina Faso is facing. We commend the Government
of Burkina Faso for this timely initiative and hope that
this is only a first step in a longer, fruitful partnership
that will lead to fast results for the country’s people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso, to today’s meeting,
and we thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Africa, and the other briefers for the
information they have given us.
We agree with the alarming views expressed today
about the situation in the Sahel. The level of the threats
to security in this part of Africa is now unprecedentedly

19-1427319/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

high. The geographic area of terrorist activity is
expanding, and extremist ideology is continually
gaining new adherents. We are very concerned about
the attacks on religious shrines and other assaults by
extremists and terrorists. The roots of these issues are
well known, and Mr. Barry just discussed them. In
the Sahel we are reaping the fruits of the collapse of
statehood in Libya, which was the legacy of a crude
foreign intervention. We believe that if the situation
in that country is not normalized — and many of
the people we talked to during the recent Security
Council mission to Mali and Burkina Faso spoke about
this — it will be impossible to reliably stabilize the
region, practically speaking.
We welcomed the initiative of the States of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) to create a Joint Force
to combat terrorism and organized crime. It appears
that in a relatively short period of time it has already
become an important element in regional security. We
were pleased with the information that as of January the
Joint Force had resumed its operations in all its areas
of responsibility, as well as the fact that its deployment
levels have reached 75 per cent. Of course, there are still
many unsolved problems. Last year’s terrorist attack on
the Joint Force headquarters revealed its weaknesses.
As we understand it, the relevant conclusions have been
drawn and work has been done to fix the mistakes. Of
course, for the G-5 Joint Force to function fully, it has
to ensure stable and predictable funding. We see that
the funds promised by foreign donors are gradually
reaching the region. However, many of those who
pledged funds have not provided them in a timely
manner. In principle, we are willing to consider the
possibility of financing the Joint Force from the regular
United Nations budget.

16/05/2019

of countries and training military and police personnel.
In general, we hope that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force will
become an effective tool for restoring and maintaining
peace in West Africa in the very near future.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you for convening today’s meeting,
Mr. President. We also want to thank the invited
speakers for their briefings. We particularly welcome
the presence here today of Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
Peru has been following the fragile humanitarian
and deteriorating security situations in the Sahel with
concern, in spite of the valuable efforts of the Joint
Force of the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), which we witnessed during our recent
visit to Mali and Burkina Faso. In particular we firmly
condemn the continuing terrorist attacks and spread
of violent extremism. It is worrying that this crisis is
spreading to other States outside the region such as
Benin, Togo and Ghana, among others. We express
our condolences to the families of the victims of recent
attacks and to the countries affected, such as France,
which lost two courageous soldiers. In that context, we
stress the importance of redoubling our efforts in three
areas that we believe to be fundamental to addressing
this situation.

We believe it is very important for both Africans
and the international community to take further
coordinated steps aimed at combating terrorism in
the Sahel-Sahara region. It is clearly impossible to
eradicate this evil by military measures alone, and we
also share the concerns of our friends from Equatorial
Guinea about the excessive militarization of the region.
It is essential to start effectively counteracting the
expansion of extremist ideology, tackling the area’s
acute social and economic problems, strengthening
State institutions and ensuring respect for human rights.

The first is security. The Joint Force plays a central
role in the fight against terrorism, armed groups and
transnational organized crime. We welcome the fact that
the Joint Force resumed its activities at the beginning of
this year and that the majority of its military and police
components are deployed. However, we are concerned
about the fact that there are still shortfalls in training,
equipment and capacity-building, as well as limitations
in the technical cooperation that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is called on to provide. We reiterate the urgent
need to ensure that the Joint Force has predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding in order for it to fulfil
its objectives. We also underscore how important it
is that the G-5 Sahel countries remain committed to
the establishment of a human rights and international
humanitarian law compliance framework, with a view
to strengthening the confidence and support of the
international community.

Russia is closely monitoring the developing
situation in the region. We are already providing
appropriate military-technical assistance in a number

The second area is sustainable development.
The Joint Force is part of a comprehensive and
multidimensional strategy aimed at addressing the

20/27

19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

root causes of the conflict. That means building and
strengthening the capacities and institutions needed
to defend human rights, promote the rule of law,
counter the negative effects of climate change and
drive sustained economic growth, in line with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063. We want to highlight the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the G-5
Sahel Priority Investment Programme in that regard, as
central elements in eliminating the structural obstacles
to development, peace and security in the region. In that
context, we emphasize the importance of promoting the
empowerment of women and the creation of more job
opportunities, particularly for young people, which has
a direct impact on stability and development.
The third area is regional and subregional
cooperation. We welcome the increased regional
cooperation between the members of the G-5 Sahel and
its neighbours with regard to information exchange and
the fight against insecurity and the terrorist threat. We
also emphasize cooperation with the various United
Nations offices, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Peacebuilding
Fund. UNOWAS, in particular, offers a preventive and
regional perspective, thanks to its effective coordination
with the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and various regional organizations
and United Nations entities.
In conclusion, we welcome the efforts of the G-5
Sahel as a strong manifestation of the potential and
commitment of African countries to the promotion of
peace and security on their continent. Peru will continue
to support its efforts in all areas with the ultimate goal
of consolidating sustainable peace in that region.

S/PV. 8526

of the Joint Force — Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger — for their excellent regional
cooperation, which should serve as an example for
other regions of the world.
As a number of delegations and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita have already described, the Sahel
is facing some very diverse challenges, from climate
change and irregular migration to trafficking in arms
and drugs and violent extremism and terrorism. All of
them have a transnational and transboundary character,
which means that they can be effectively addressed
only through international and regional cooperation.
In that context, cooperation and coordination
between neighbouring countries and within regional
organizations, particularly African regional and
subregional organizations, is crucial to achieving
tangible and long-lasting progress in conflict resolution
and stabilization efforts. In that regard, the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force remains a critical part of a series of regional
and international security responses addressing crossborder challenges in the Sahel region.
It goes without saying that Poland fully supports
the mandate of the Joint Force and hopes that with the
international community’s necessary assistance it will
soon be fully operationalized. To echo Mr. Barry’s
words, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force cannot fight alone. It
needs the continued assistance of the Security Council,
regional and subregional organizations and the European
Union, as Mr. Buyoya highlighted. The European Union
and Poland, as part of the European Union, are ready to
stand with the Joint Force and to continue supporting
its efforts to tackle its various challenges.

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to join other delegations in expressing our sincere
condolences to the people of Burkina Faso and France
and the families of the victims of the attack on a church
in Dablo, as well as the families of the two fallen
French soldiers.

We also commend the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime — and we thank Mr. Fedotov for
his very informative briefing — for its support to the
operationalization of a police component for the Joint
Force. The restoration of justice will play a fundamental
role in securing peace and stability in the Sahel region,
and its effectiveness will have an impact on the Joint
Force’s capacity to fight terrorism and transnational
organized crime.

I would also like to warmly welcome Mr. Alpha
Barry, the current President of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). His presence
today in the Chamber demonstrates the enormous
importance he attaches to cooperation within the G-5
Sahel Joint Force. Finally, I would like to take this
opportunity to commend all the member countries

Furthermore, we welcome the continued commitment
of the G-5 Sahel to establishing a human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework.
As was highlighted by a number of delegations, as well
as Ms. Keita and Mr. Delattre, respect for human rights
is critical to gaining the trust of the local communities,
which in turn is crucial to enhancing the effectiveness of

19-1427321/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

the anti-terrorist activities of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
That is why it is so important for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force to continue cooperating, in particular with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
It is of the utmost importance to focus
priority training targets around the protection of
civilians — which is one of Poland’s priorities as
a Security Council member — in order to prevent
human rights violations and abuses committed by
army and police components when conducting counterterrorism operations.
Lasting peace, security and prosperity in the
Sahel region cannot be achieved without major
reforms. Underdevelopment, poverty, exclusion,
poor governance, lack of access to basic services and
economic opportunities and the effects of climate
change in the region need to be addressed in line with
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel.
Therefore, there is a need to discuss how the
international community can continue to support the
G-5 Sahel and its Joint Force, through both bilateral
and multilateral cooperation, to increase not only
its operational capabilities, but also its development
initiatives. If we wish to ensure long-standing
peace, stability and prosperity, we need to address
simultaneously three pillars: peace and security;
development, as has already been mentioned by some
speakers; and the pillar of human rights. That requires
a creative approach focused on financial or material
contributions, as well as on political and diplomatic
cooperation. In that regard, we welcome the accelerated
implementation of the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment
Programme and the focus of development interventions
on areas where the most vulnerable communities live.
Currently, Poland supports the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
through both European Union channels and bilateral
channels. We have provided the contingent of Chadian
troops operating within the Force with significant
material support. We need to look at support for the G-5
Sahel and its Joint Force from a broader perspective.
It is most of all a long-term investment in regional
security, which is a prerequisite for creating durable
peace, security and prosperity in the Sahel region.
Finally, we commend Mr. Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali, and
the personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, who spare no
22/27

16/05/2019

effort to ensure that the Mission stands ready to provide
support to the Joint Force, in line with resolution 2391
(2017) and the technical agreement.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I wish to thank His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso, for taking
time to brief the Security Council on behalf of the
presidency of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel). I also thank the Assistant Secretary-General
for Africa, Ms. Bintou Keita; the African Union (AU)
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Mr. Pierre
Buyoya; Mr. Angel Losada Fernández, European Union
(EU) Special Representative for the Sahel; and Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director for United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, for their comprehensive briefings.
South Africa takes note of the recent report of the
Secretary-General (see S/2019/371) on the activities of
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and is deeply concerned about
the deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
the Sahel region, particularly the continued terrorist
attacks in northern and central Mali and Burkina
Faso, as well as in the border regions of Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger, and the increasing intercommunal
violence, which has resulted in many fatalities. Of equal
concern is the spill-over effect into wider West Africa.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to convey our condolences to the families and victims
of the violent attacks in the Sahel, in particular those
that took place in Ouagassou in Mali, Arbinda and,
recently, in Dablo in Burkina Faso. We also convey
our condolences for the two soldiers who sacrificed
their lives so that their countrymen could go back and
live in peace in their homeland. We are hopeful that
the perpetrators of those heinous crimes will be held
accountable. We commend the commitment expressed
by the G-5 Sahel countries to establishing the human
rights compliance framework. That is an important
development that will go a long way towards bringing
the perpetrators to justice and building the trust and
confidence of the population in the justice systems of
the respective countries.
We are encouraged by the concerted efforts and
commitment of the countries of the Sahel to forge
forward with the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force to combat terrorism, cross-border organized
crime and trafficking, in order to create conditions that
are conducive to peace and development. Likewise, we
welcome the resumption of the operations of the G-5
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8526

Sahel Joint Force at the beginning of this year to deal
with the security challenges that have engulfed that
region. South Africa recognizes the fundamental role
and sacrifices of the AU-endorsed G-5 Sahel Joint Force
and its member States. In that regard, we call upon the
Security Council to spare no efforts in the support of
the initiatives undertaken by the countries of the Sahel.

Faso. In addition, the Security Council should consider
further opportunities to reinforce partnerships
and strengthen the role of the African Union when
discussing African-led peace operations. That process
should be carried out in a well-coordinated manner in
order for the partnerships to complement one another in
support of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel.

We welcome the unique partnership between
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the G-5
Sahel Joint Force to restore peace and stability in Mali
and the wider Sahel region. As has been recognized by
the Council, the partnership provides a positive model
of cooperation between a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and a regional peace operation in Africa.
Therefore, every effort should be made by the Council
and the international community to ensure that the
challenges of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force are addressed
and that it is fully capacitated and able to effectively
implement its mandate.

South Africa recognizes the nexus between
security, peace and development. We believe that there
is a need to also address the root causes of conflicts
in the region, particularly poverty, climate change,
unemployment and other related issues. Therefore, a
holistic development approach to the challenges in the
Sahel is urgently needed for the current efforts and
initiatives to have a valuable lasting impact and bring
about stability and durable peace in the region.

We therefore reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s repeated recommendation to the
Council concerning the establishment of a United
Nations support office for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
funded through assessed contributions and independent
of MINUSMA, which we believe will allow for the
predictable and sustainable financing of support for the
Joint Force, longer-term planning and the consolidation
of this important initiative. That will enable the Force
to have the necessary capacity and the critically
needed logistical and operational base, which will
contribute positively towards the full and effective
operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force.
We are also of the view that if the Joint Force is to
operate optimally, the necessary logistical requirements
have to be provided. In that regard, South Africa
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the Council consider authorizing MINUSMA
to provide life-support consumables to battalions
operating in the framework of the Joint Force, under
the condition that the Joint Force or other partners
undertake the responsibility of ensuring the delivery of
support to their respective areas of operations.
In solidarity with Foreign Minister Barry and the
people of Burkina Faso, South Africa also welcomes
the plans to strengthen the office of the United Nations
Resident Coordinator and bolster humanitarian
assistance, funding and programmes across Burkina

To our development partners, South Africa
welcomes with appreciation the bilateral and
multilateral financial contributions towards the G-5
Sahel’s Priority Investment Programme, which focuses
on socioeconomic development initiatives in the
Sahel. At the same time, we urge all Member States
in a position to do so to continue to provide financial
support to ensure the successful implementation of the
G-5 Sahel’s Priority Investment Programme.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force alone cannot secure the
Sahel and that the Council should be mindful of the
catastrophic ramifications of the security situation for
the rest of the West African region now and Africa
as a whole later on if the situation is not adequately
and urgently addressed. That implies that no effort
should be spared by the Council, the region and the
international community to provide the necessary
support the Joint Force urgently needs to succeed in its
fundamental initiative.
South Africa will support the draft French press
statement in that regard.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): May I, like
others, start by extending sincere condolences to the
Niger and France for the loss of their servicemen
and servicewomen.
Let me also thank our briefers and welcome to the
Council His Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso.
As set out in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/371), there is some clear progress to be

19-1427323/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

welcomed, particularly the resumption of Joint Force
operations from January and the deployment of 75 per
cent of troops, as of March. We recognize the efforts of
the States of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
to combat cross-border threats despite difficult and
adverse circumstances. Now, the Force must accelerate
its efforts to achieve full operational capacity and
demonstrate that its security capacity is greater than
the sum of its parts. Evidence of tangible results from
its operations will build the Force’s credibility, both
regionally and internationally. To aid the Joint Force in
overcoming the challenges it faces in terms of funding,
and thereby achieving full operationalization, the
United Kingdom strongly urges all partners to make
good on the financial commitments they have made,
with the utmost urgency.
On the United Kingdom’s part, we have contributed
to the European Union’s package of support and
provided further bilateral contributions, which for the
Joint Force alone total approximately $20 million. That
is set against the far bigger contribution for the Sahel
as a whole. Continuing the close cooperation with the
European Union, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Operation
Barkhane is vital to aid operational efforts. In that regard,
we welcome the creation in January of the Coordinating
Body for Mali, which serves as a framework to enhance
information-sharing and coordination among the
various military and security forces present.
We also welcome the steps taken to advance the
human rights compliance framework and strongly urge
continued efforts to further embed and operationalize it
across the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. That will not only lead
to enhanced civilian protection but also support efforts
to win the hearts and minds of the populations that the
Joint Force was created to protect, which is crucial
to the stabilization of the region. Any alleged human
rights violations need to be fully investigated. Looking
forward, we encourage the G-5 Sahel secretariat to
finalize the Joint Force’s strategic concept of operations,
which will both demonstrate a unity of purpose within
the Joint Force and boost donor confidence.
The challenges facing the Sahel region are becoming
progressively more complex. With increasing incidents
of terrorism, criminality and inter-community violence
in Mali’s central regions, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s concerns about the spread of insecurity and
terrorism to other parts of the region, including into
Burkina Faso. We call upon G-5 Sahel countries to
24/27

16/05/2019

expedite their efforts to deploy all their outstanding
troops and to fully establish the police component in
order to address the growing transborder threat.
Military action alone is not the solution, as
recognized by the Council in its December 2017
resolution 2391 (2017) in support of the G-5 Sahel Force.
Long-term stability will be delivered to the region only
if security efforts are accompanied by programmes to
address governance, development, human rights and
humanitarian issues.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to welcome
Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, to the Security Council.
I would also like to thank all briefers for their very
interesting contributions.
I, too, would like to add my voice to the condolences
extended to the Niger, Burkina Faso and France.
In 2014, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, the
Niger and Chad decided to join forces against common
challenges. Five years later, that ground-breaking
initiative remains more relevant than ever. Belgium is
in favour of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel) being mandated under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. In addition, the
Force must be able to rely on adequate and sustainable
funding. That is why we also support, under welldefined conditions, funding the Force from mandatory
United Nations contributions.
In the meantime, my country supports the
operationalization of the Joint Force through the
European Union, of course, but also bilaterally. Last
year, Belgium contributed €1 million to ensure that
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) could
provide logistical support to the Joint Force. Belgium
also supports the G-5 Sahel Defence College, to which
it makes trainers available. In Burkina Faso, Mali and
the Niger, Belgian soldiers provide training to their
Sahelian comrades.
I would like to underscore the following point. The
success of a regional security operation depends, to a
large extent, on the existence of strong national armies.
In that regard, in the context of Mali, we support the
Secretary-General’s call for comprehensive security
sector reform.
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

In recent months, the Joint Force has undergone
two positive developments that we must welcome: first,
the relaunch of the Force’s operations in January, and
secondly, the gradual implementation of the compliance
framework for human rights and international
humanitarian law. We strongly encourage the G-5 Sahel
States to pursue their efforts on both tracks.
Some equipment promised to the Force, however,
has not yet been delivered, which has had an impact on
operational planning. But other means exist, and they
can be used now. The further implementation of the
compliance framework; the development of the police
component; the functioning of the permanent secretariat
and the Defence and Security Committee; the updating
of the concept of operations; and the establishment of
a mechanism to coordinate international support, such
as the follow-up group, are examples of areas where the
G-5 Sahel can fully pursue its operationalization with
the means already available.
Belgium is deeply concerned about the deterioration
of the security and humanitarian situation in the Sahel.
As in all crises, the solution is primarily a political one,
and the steps to be taken are manifold. A strong security
response is, of course, essential to the dismantling of
terrorist networks, the drying up of their sources of
funding and the thwarting of their deadly narrative.
But the profound aspirations of the people and
the various communities also deserve to be heard in
order to avoid sliding into situations of violence. There
is no magic formula, but there is a whole range of
measures to be stepped up in terms of governance, the
rule of law, the fight against corruption and impunity,
respect for human rights, the fight against all forms of
stigmatization of certain ethnic groups or communities,
the provision of basic services and even adaptation to
climate change.
In that respect, we must shed light on the events
that took place in Boulékéssi and draw all the necessary
conclusions from them on the judicial level. With regard
to the situation in Burkina Faso, Belgium is closely
following the efforts of the Secretary-General to
redouble United Nations support, notably as penholders
with our partner from Côte d’Ivoire, for the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
Belgium supports the tripartite arrangement among
the G-5 Sahel, the European Union and the United
Nations. We regret the underutilization of resources
due not only to the absence of operations, but also

S/PV. 8526

to the overly restrictive framework of conditionality
imposed on MINUSMA. To echo the plea heard during
our Council’s mission to the country, Belgium urges the
pragmatic adaptation of MINUSMA’s support for the
Joint Force. The enemies of peace recognize no borders.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we welcome the presence here today of His
Excellency. Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Burkina Faso. We would
also like to express our thanks to all the briefers for
their valuable remarks. It is pleasing to listen to the
diverse group of speakers today representing different
organizations and experiences, which gives us a better
understanding of the situation in the Sahel region and
helps us understand the different roles of actors in the
region, as well as the needs of the Sahel region at large.
As has been made clear to the Security Council from
the briefings today, there are issues that we can support
to achieve stability and security, promote development
and tackle the root causes of instability. I would like to
address three main aspects of our discussion today: the
efforts of the Joint Force, the security situation and the
measures to be taken.
On the activities of the Joint Force, we welcome
the resumption of its operations in January, particularly
after the difficult situation that followed the attack
on its headquarters last year. We also welcome its
efforts to reach 75 per cent of operational capacity.
We encourage the Joint Force to maintain that positive
approach in order to confront the terrorist threats that
are expanding in an unprecedented manner throughout
the region. We also welcome the recent measures taken
by the Joint Force to deploy a police component and
operationalize the human rights compliance framework
and investigate violations. Those issues are important
for restoring trust among the people, which will in turn
support the efforts of the Joint Force
We understand the difficulties faced by the Joint
Force, particularly with regard to the lack of sustained
funding to guarantee its continued operation. We
welcome the proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a dedicated United Nations support office for
the Joint Force. We must consider that proposal or other
ways to identify how the Council can support the Joint
Force, guarantee stability in the region and prevent the
further spread of terrorism throughout the region.
With regard to the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in

19-1427325/27

S/PV.8526

Peace and security in Africa

Mali to the Sahel Joint Force, we applaud the positive
response of the Mission to all support requests from the
Joint Force, in accordance with the technical agreement
pursuant to resolution 2391 (2017). The resolution
restricts support to Malian territories alone, which
increases the pressure on the Joint Force.
On the security situation, we are deeply concerned
about the increase of attacks in the region. There has
been a rapid spread of violence in the Sahel region,
from Burkina Faso to the coastal States of Benin,
Togo, Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire. That highlights the
importance of regional cooperation to address the
threats in the region. The international community
must support such cooperation in order to prevent the
further expansion of terrorist activities.
In Mali, we have recently witnessed successful
military operations by the military forces against
terrorist groups, but they have not, unfortunately,
improved the security situation. There have been
increased incidents of violence during the recent
period, the most important of which was the Ogossagou
village massacre, which took place during the Security
Council visit in March. In Burkina Faso, we heard
closely from the Government during our visit about
threats faced by the country. We understood that the
threats in the region are similar and interconnected, and
that addressing them in a coordinated and cooperative
manner is therefore crucial. In this regard, I would like
to join previous colleagues in expressing condolences
to the friendly French Republic on the recent loss of
two of its soldiers in Burkina Faso.
Lastly, in order to address the current situation
in the Sahel region there are several issues that
must be tackled, including the military and the
development aspects. On the political process in
Mali, the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali is important to the entire
region, as noted by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2019/371) on the Joint Force. He notes that progress
in the security sector in Mali would positively affect the
operations of the Joint Force.
On the root causes of instability, we emphasize the
need to achieve development throughout the region.
The lack of economic opportunities, fragile governance
and the impact of climate change, if not addressed, are
but a few of the factors for instability and conflict.
We are pleased about the preliminary efforts of
the G-5 States with respect to the Priority Investment
26/27

16/05/2019

Programme, and the efforts of the United Nations
through the implementation of its Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. Progress must be achieved in tandem
with the military aspect of the G-5 Sahel in order to
guarantee the achievement of comprehensive progress.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Indonesia.
I would like to begin by welcoming His Excellency
Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burkina Faso, to the Chamber and to
thank him for his briefing on behalf of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). I would also like to thank
all the briefers in today’s meeting, who have provided
us with a comprehensive overview. The variety of the
briefers certainly represents the excellent cooperation
among regional international organizations in working
together to address the G-5 Sahel.
Let me start by paying tribute to the many
peacekeepers on the ground and honouring those who
have lost their lives in the fight to preserve peace
and security in the Sahel region, including the two
fallen French soldiers. Our condolences also go to all
the innocent victims of the many terrorist attacks in
the region.
I would like to focus on three pertinent points.
First, Indonesia supports the initiative and
determination of the G-5 Sahel countries in addressing
the security challenges that they faced through the
establishment of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The
cooperation among Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger certainly serves as an
excellent example of neighbouring countries working
together to address a common cause.
As the report of the Secretary General (S/2019/371)
suggests and Mr. Barry mentioned, there has been some
encouraging progress, such as the deployment of 75 per
cent of troops across three sectors, the resumption of
operations of the Joint Force and the increase in civilmilitary cooperation activities. In addition, more
efforts have been made in the deployment of police and
civilian components, as well as the implementation of
the human rights compliance framework. We hope that
it will translate into real improvement in the overall
security situation on the ground.
We are cognizant, however, that the Joint Force
continues to work within a very difficult environment.
Therefore, support is indeed important, including
19-14273

16/05/2019

Peace and security in Africa

predictable and sustainable funding, as well as training
and capacity-building. In that regard, Indonesia
commends the commitment of donors and calls for the
disbursement of contributions pledged to support the
Joint Force. As also outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report, future support options from the United Nations
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force should be further
considered. Indonesia is of the view that the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is playing an important
role in supporting the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and that we
should further consider what can be done to enhance
that support, including when we discuss the renewal of
MINUSMA’s mandate.
Secondly, we remain concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the security and humanitarian
situation in the Sahel. The security situation in the
Sahel remains precarious, with continued attacks by
terrorists, including an attack on the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force headquarters last year. There has also been an
uptick in intercommunal violence. The persistent
insecurity has resulted in heightened humanitarian
needs and an increasing number of internally displaced
persons and people suffering from malnutrition. The
situation in the G-5 countries also has spillover effects
on neighbouring countries in West Africa and impacts
the overall stability of the region. There is therefore a
need for comprehensive and multisectoral approaches
to tackle the root causes of instability and build the
resilience of the Sahelian people.
Thirdly, Indonesia believes that security initiatives
should be part of broader efforts to ensure lasting
stability in the Sahel, which also encompasses social

S/PV. 8526

and economic development, as well as human rights
aspects. It is important to win the hearts and minds
of the population in addressing security challenges
in the Sahel. We have always advocated for greater
community engagement in that regard. In addition,
good governance, addressing poverty and inequality,
creating opportunities for young people and combatting
climate change remain crucial to improving the living
conditions of the Sahelian people.
We support the joint efforts of regional actors, the
African Union, the European Union and the United
Nations in the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel. We also appreciate the role
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in
supporting the Sahel region, as well as the accelerated
implementation of the G-5 Sahel regional strategy
and Priority Investment Programme, particularly for
the most vulnerable. We also call on the international
community to support efforts in the region so as to be
able to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
Indonesia stands ready to contribute and work with
the international community to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the Sahel, including through our
peacekeepers serving in MINUSMA.
We look forward to the press statement to be issued
by the French delegation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

19-1427327/27
