United Nations

A/RES/58/205

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 92

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/482)]

58/205. Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer
of assets of illicit origin and returning such assets to the
countries of origin
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 54/205 of 22 December 1999 and its resolutions
56/186 of 21 December 2001 and 57/244 of 20 December 2002, both on preventing
and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning
such funds to the countries of origin,
Recalling also the Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on
Financing for Development, 1 which underlined that fighting corruption at all levels
is a priority, and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”), 2
Deeply concerned about the seriousness of problems posed by continuing
corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin and return of such funds and
assets to the countries of origin, which may endanger the stability and security of
societies, undermine the values of democracy and civil ethics and jeopardize
sustainable and political development, in particular when an inadequate national and
international response leads to impunity,
Taking note of the global study on the transfer of funds of illicit origin,
especially funds derived from acts of corruption, submitted to the Ad Hoc
Committee for the Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption, 3 which noted
the substantial amounts of money involved, the economic hardships for countries
that are victims of such corruption and the enormous obstacles to recovery faced by
those countries,

_______________
1
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18-22 March
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.
3
A/AC.261/12.

03 50688

A/RES/58/205

Noting that Member States have different institutional arrangements and
capacities to ensure the implementation of legislation on preventing corrupt
practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin and returning such assets to the
countries of origin,
Considering that the prevention of corrupt practices and transfer of assets of
illicit origin and the return of such assets to the countries of origin have not been
adequately regulated by all national legislations and international legal instruments,
Emphasizing the responsibilities of all Governments to enact laws aimed at
preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of assets of illicit origin and
return of such assets to the countries of origin,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on preventing and
1.
combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds of illicit origin and returning such
assets to the countries of origin; 4
2.
Welcomes the entry into force of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime; 5
3.
Notes with appreciation the report of the Ad Hoc Committee for the
Negotiation of a Convention against Corruption on the work of its first to seventh
sessions; 6
4.
Welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption; 7
5.
Also welcomes the participation of Member States at a high level,
including at the ministerial level, in the High-level Political Conference for the
Purpose of Signing the United Nations Convention against Corruption, held at
Merida, Mexico, from 9 to 11 December 2003; 8
6.
Invites all Member States and competent regional economic integration
organizations to sign, ratify and fully implement the United Nations Convention
against Corruption as soon as possible in order to ensure its rapid entry into force;
Encourages all Member States that have not yet done so to enact laws to
7.
prevent and combat corrupt practices and the transfer of illicitly acquired assets and
for the return of such assets to the countries of origin, in accordance with the United
Nations Convention against Corruption;
Also encourages all Member States that have not yet done so to require
8.
financial institutions to properly implement comprehensive due diligence and
vigilance programmes that could facilitate transparency and prevent the placement
of illicitly acquired funds;
Encourages subregional and regional cooperation, where appropriate, in
9.
the efforts to prevent and combat corrupt practices and the transfer of assets of illicit
origin and for the return of such assets to the countries of origin;

_______________
4

A/58/125.
Resolution 55/25, annex I.
6
A/58/422 and Add.1.
7
See resolution 58/4.
8
A/CONF.205/2.
5

2

A/RES/58/205

10. Calls for further international cooperation, inter alia, through the United
Nations system, in support of national, subregional and regional efforts to prevent
and address the transfer of assets of illicit origin, as well as to return such assets to
the countries of origin;
11. Requests the international community to provide, inter alia, technical
assistance to support national efforts to strengthen human and institutional capacity
aimed at preventing corrupt practices and the transfer of assets of illicit origin,
returning such assets to the countries of origin and formulating strategies for
mainstreaming and promoting transparency and integrity in both the public and
private sector;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session a
sub-item entitled “Preventing and combating corrupt practices and transfer of funds
and assets of illicit origin and returning such funds and assets to the countries of
origin”.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

3
