S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9260th meeting

Tuesday, 14 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Camilleri/Ms. Cassar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Bajramaj
Mr. Muniz Pinto Sloboda
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Sanchez Izquierdo
Ms. Fériaud
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Ms. Barnor
Ms. Shino
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Magomedov
Mrs. Chanda
Ms. Tantawy
Ms. Browning
Ms. Postel

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Sea-level rise: implications for international peace and security
Letter dated 2 February 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Malta to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/79)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-04504 (E)
*2304504*

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and
resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Philippines.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): As an archipelagic
State with more than half of its cities and communities
located along its coasts, the Philippines is one of the
countries of the world most vulnerable to rising sea
levels resulting from anthropogenic climate change.
Like other island nations, we are now beginning to
experience significant sea level rise. For the Philippines,
the observed sea level rise has reached 60 centimetres,
about three times the global average.
As has been discussed in previous Security Council
meetings, we want to underline the importance of
not understating or overstating the impact of climate
on conflict. The relationship between climate and
conflict is not linear but rather complex, nuanced
and context-specific. In that regard, we emphasize
that the main forum for discussing climate change
and for international commitments addressing the
various aspects of climate action is the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The Philippines defines national security as the
state or condition in which a nation’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, its peoples’ well-being, core
values and way of life, along with the State and its
institutions, are protected and enhanced. The impacts
of sea level rise threaten all those elements of security
and are specifically a threat to the lives and livelihoods
of Filipinos, especially those in coastal areas. It is
therefore important to ensure that discussions on the
implications of sea level rise for peace and security
are always centred on people. The effects of rising
sea levels on statehood and security are far-reaching
and can include loss of territory, the displacement of
populations and attendant tensions related to access to
resources, livelihoods and services.
Sea level rise threatens the stability of boundaries.
In the Philippines, we caution against inferences
favouring ambulatory baselines without demonstrable
2/43

14/02/2023

State practices and opinio juris on the matter. We
are more inclined to subscribe to the principle of uti
possidetis juris, which in the past allowed newly
independent States to maintain their maritime borders.
Uti possidetis juris espouses certainty, predictability
and stability where boundaries are concerned and
can also serve to prevent conflict over boundaries.
We welcome the International Law Commission’s
decision to work on three main areas related to sea
level rise — the law of the sea, forced migration and
human rights and issues of statehood and international
security. That work should hopefully introduce some
certainty on the implications of the phenomenon for the
international legal order.
We also hope that the United Nations, especially
the Security Council, will take into account the reports
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and
its projections and recommendations, including that
sea level rise at the end of the century is projected to
be faster under all scenarios, and that non-climatic
anthropogenic drivers will continue to increase the
exposure and vulnerability of coastal communities.
Sea level rise will have a serious impact on coastal
ecosystems over the course of the century. Expected
annual flood damage will increase by two to three
orders of magnitude by 2100. Achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and charting climate-resilient
development pathways will depend in part on ambitious
and sustained mitigation efforts to contain sea level
rise, coupled with effective adaptation actions to reduce
its impacts and risk.
The convergence of scientific opinion on our way
forward should guide us in pursuing our common
security agenda on the matter of sea level rise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Nasir (Indonesia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s open debate, and
to thank the briefers for their insightful presentations.
The impact of climate change, including sea level rise,
has exacerbated our vulnerabilities. Our inability to
adapt to it could turn potential security threats into
real ones — from the loss of livelihoods and irregular
migration to food insecurity and environmental
degradation and perhaps even the potential loss of
territory from rising sea levels. We believe that firm
responses are therefore key to addressing those
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

challenges. On that note, I would like to highlight
three points.

Pacific Island Forum and on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security.

First, we need to work to prevent potential conflicts
as a result of sea level rise. We recognize that rising
sea levels could have a potential impact on maritime
borders, and in that case, we also need to make sure that
maritime boundary agreements are not affected. The
integrity of existing maritime boundary agreements
should be maintained.

Scientists globally agree that climate change is
increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme
weather events and that those impacts will continue to
worsen in future. As Ms. Pasisi pointed out this morning,
in my own country, New Zealand, just yesterday we
declared a state of national emergency in response to
Cyclone Gabrielle, so severe is the widespread damage
caused by that unprecedented weather event. This is
only the third time in our history that a state of national
emergency has been declared.

Secondly, we need concrete measures to build
national resilience. The real danger of climate change
on our planet, in particular sea level rise, demands
strategic policies and practical measures. Affected
countries need to have an adaptive capacity and
strong resilience, as the responsibility to respond to
the security impact of climate change lies with the
countries concerned. Measures to assist those countries
should be taken based on their needs and priorities.
Thirdly, we need to strengthen our cooperation
and information-sharing. The United Nations system
must work in synergy in accordance with the respective
competencies and mandates. Climate change and its
related security impact, including sea level rise, are
a highly complex area, rendering a response by any
single actor impossible and unrealistic. It is therefore
important to enhance cooperation and exchange
information across all United Nations entities to ensure
effective response strategies.
The Security Council must consolidate its efforts
to better respond to the security impact of climate
change, and not to respond to climate change itself.
The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) must remain the leading
forum for addressing climate change and upholding
the principles of the Paris Agreement. All measures
taken by the Security Council and UNFCCC should
be complementary. For its part, Indonesia stands ready
to contribute to the global efforts to combat climate
change, including the impact of sea level rise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): Aotearoa New
Zealand thanks Malta for convening this important
open debate on sea level rise and its implications for
international peace and security. New Zealand aligns
itself with the statements to be made on behalf of the

Climate change is a threat multiplier. It amplifies
and adds complexity to existing security threats. As
the effects of climate change continue to accelerate,
the associated impacts will fundamentally affect global
security. Climate change remains the single greatest
existential threat facing the Blue Pacific. Pacific Islands
Forum leaders have declared that the Pacific is facing
a climate emergency, which threatens the livelihoods,
security and well-being of its people and ecosystems.
That is backed by the latest science and the realities
lived on a daily basis in Pacific communities.
One of the most significant impacts of climate
change in the Pacific will be sea level rise. Some Pacific
island countries experience up to four times greater sea
level rise than the global average. While the severity
and impacts of sea level rise will vary among States and
regions, it is a phenomenon that will have implications
for all States, and which will pose specific peace and
security threats to the international community as
a whole.
Sea level rise is already having an impact
on vulnerable communities and degrading the
habitability of low-lying nations. It has the potential
to inundate low-lying territorial features. That would
cause immeasurable economic, social, cultural and
environmental harm. It is therefore critical that
the international community cooperate to develop
responses to such issues.
The impacts of rising sea levels also raise important
legal questions that are relevant to international
peace and security. Maritime zones and the resource
rights that come with them are essential to countries’
economies, identities and ways of life, especially for
small island developing States.

23-045043/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

We stand behind the 2021 Declaration on Preserving
Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-Related
Sea Level Rise. Issued by Pacific Islands Forum
leaders and firmly grounded in the primacy of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), it sets out our region’s collective position
on how UNCLOS applies in the situation of climate
change-related sea level rise to promote legal stability
and certainty over maritime zones. New Zealand is
appreciative of the level of international support that
the Declaration has received. We look forward to
ongoing engagement with the international community
to ensure that the maritime rights and entitlements on
which many States rely are preserved, consistent with
the principles of equity, certainty and stability that
underpin the Convention.
Pacific leaders have also recognized the importance
of considering the preservation of statehood and the
protection of persons affected by sea level rise. Pacific
Islands Forum members, including Aotearoa New
Zealand, are examining such issues and are being
guided and informed by the applicable principles and
norms of international law and the relevant international
frameworks and standards.
Finally, allow me to comment on Vanuatu’s
initiative for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on climate. New Zealand is a proud
member of the core group supporting that initiative
because of our active interest in having clarity on the
international legal implications of climate change.
I want to affirm that Aotearoa New Zealand is
committed to supporting countries in taking urgent
action on sea level rise so as to build a safer, more
prosperous and more sustainable future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this timely meeting on a
matter of the utmost urgency. I also thank our briefers
for providing important context for today’s open debate.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Denmark.
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, an estimated 680 million people from
coastal communities across the world are particularly
4/43

14/02/2023

exposed to ocean and cryosphere change, such as sea
level rise and the associated loss of biodiversity.
The citizens of small island developing States
(SIDS), especially low-lying atoll countries, are
faced with the existential threat of their country
becoming uninhabitable or even the partial or complete
inundation of land territory. If one’s land territory
becomes inundated, as a people, where does one go,
and how does one preserve one’s culture and one’s
heritage? How can sovereignty be maintained and
what are the implications for a State’s maritime zones?
These questions have been raised by SIDS countries
for decades, and it is high time that, together, we find
clear answers. As the International Law Commission
is considering the legal aspects of such questions, we
particularly welcome today’s discussions on the peace
and security implications of sea level rise.
This open debate is well timed given the Security
Council’s critical role in promoting a greater
understanding of the issues at stake in order to prepare
and protect people as climate change forces them to adapt
and eventually relocate. Today’s plight of communities
in low-lying coastal areas is tomorrow’s plight of the
global community. Allow me, Mr. President, to address
your pertinent guiding questions.
There is increasing evidence that climate change is
a significant risk-multiplier, especially when combined
with other factors, such as socioeconomic inequality
and weak resource governance. In line with the
Security Council’s mandate to maintain international
peace and security, the Council also has a role in raising
awareness of threats to peace and security, including
not only when that can prevent, or help to decrease, the
risk of a relapse into conflict, but also when it comes
to promoting human security. We therefore urge the
international community to redouble its efforts to
reduce the impacts of sea level rise.
In the relevant resolutions regarding United Nations
peace operations, the Council must continue to consider
the Organization’s supportive role in helping States to
mitigate and adapt to the adverse effects of climate
change in order to address climate-related security
risks. The Council should explicitly request the United
Nations to continue to build its capacity and expertise
in addressing climate-related security risks and should
strengthen the engagement of United Nations missions
with local, regional and other actors in that process.
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Some countries, such as Fiji, have already
progressed on national legislation and plans on how to
respond to the adverse effects of climate change, and the
sharing of ideas and lessons learned among those most
affected by sea level rise could identify entry points
where the United Nations and its wider membership
can help support national and regional engagement on
addressing climate peace and security risk.
The protection of State sovereignty and individual
human rights are enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. In addition, the United Nations countries
remain confident that the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, which sets out the legal framework
for all activities in the oceans and seas is the appropriate
framework for successfully addressing those and other
emerging challenges.
But the global security implications for States and
their citizens of their country’s land territory being
completely submerged are yet to be fully discovered. To
ensure solutions that promote peace and stability, it is
essential that we jointly pursue a deeper understanding
of how climate change affects the peace and security
situation in specific countries and contexts, but also
of related challenges. As a starting point, we reiterate
our support for regular reports by the SecretaryGeneral on the topic and for climate-related security
risks to be integrated into country-specific reporting to
the Council.
Finally, we should never stop looking for
opportunities. We know that inclusive natural resource
governance is key to peace and security. And where
Governments invest in legislation and capacity to
benefit all communities, the associated peace dividend
can reduce the risk of conflict. Taking action to battle
the climate crisis we collectively face is key. Involving
the right people is imperative. The participation of
rights holders, especially women, youth and the local
community, must be at the centre of those efforts in
order to ensure that solutions are locally owned and led,
that marginalized groups are empowered and that we
do not inadvertently harm those we seek to protect.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

of inundation, depending on corresponding scenarios
of sea level rise.
That is why Viet Nam understands first-hand the
multifaceted adverse impacts of climate change and
sea level rise on peace, security and even the existence
of States. Sea level rise and other phenomena can
exacerbate existing socioeconomic problems and,
therefore, increase risks of instability and insecurity
while incubating conditions for potential conflicts.
That is why this topic is dear to our heart and has
always been our top priority in multiple platforms,
including during our term as an elected member of the
Security Council in 2020 and 2021. In October 2021,
Viet Nam organized a Security Council Arria Formula
meeting on the very issue we are discussing today. That
is also why we believe that addressing climate change
and sea level rise is crucial to national and global peace,
security and sustainable development.
The fight against climate change and sea level
rise should be comprehensive and requires concerted
efforts that put people at the heart of the solution. Those
efforts should go hand-in-hand with initiatives to deal
with the root causes of insecurity, such as poverty
and inequality.
Various dispute-settlement mechanisms should be
strengthened. International commitments should be
fully implemented. In that regard, special attention
and support should be given to vulnerable States,
such as least developed countries and small island
developing States.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.

The role and coordination of relevant organs of the
United Nations should also be further strengthened. We
support the annual Human Rights Council resolution
on climate change and human rights to ensure global
climate justice. Viet Nam is also among the core group
that drafted and strongly supports a General Assembly
resolution, initiated by Vanuatu, requesting an advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
obligations of States with regard to climate change. We
support the ongoing efforts of the International Law
Commission Study Group on sea level rise in relation
to international law to identify the legal consequences
of sea level rise.

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam is one of the coastal
countries hardest hit by climate change, sea level rise
and saline intrusion. Approximately 11 to 26 per cent
of the population of Viet Nam, mostly in the low-lying
Mekong and Red River Deltas, are facing varying risks

It is incumbent upon the Security Council to heed
the security implications of sea level rise and contribute
to global efforts to address the impacts of that global
threat in a most comprehensive manner. The Council
should consider convening more briefings by scientists

23-045045/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

14/02/2023

and experts and capitalize on international and regional
experience on the impact of sea level rise to peace
and security.

increasing their contributions to that end. The severity
of the impact demands global solidarity. We need to be
there for the countries who need us the most.

The Council should consider the development
of a comprehensive United Nations database on the
multidimensional impacts of sea level rise in order
to facilitate the decision-making process for global
climate action. The Council should also consider
adopting an early warning system on sea level rise in
conflict regions. The fight against climate change and
sea level rise cannot be won without concerted efforts
and inclusive partnership. The Security Council plays a
significant role in that endeavour.

Secondly, the United Nations must focus more
systematically and ambitiously on the interactions
between climate change and global security, including
here in the Security Council. We commend Malta for
bringing this topic to the Council. By prioritizing
these issues, including with discussions at the highest
political level, we can prevent the world from becoming
even more unjust and dangerously unequal. Building
resilience in vulnerable regions and with vulnerable
groups is the only way forward. We should pay
particular attention to women, children and youth,
and older persons, as climate change requires us to
acknowledge social inclusion and good governance.
The triple humanitarian-development-peace nexus
must remain at the heart of any effort to achieve global
security and well-being.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Malovrh (Slovenia): Let me first congratulate
Malta on assuming the presidency this month and thank
Malta for organizing this debate on the important topic
of sea level rise.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representative of Nauru, on behalf of
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security, and by
the representative of the European Union. We wish to
make the following remarks in our national capacity.
Climate change is not only an environmental
concern, but also a major global security threat. It
endanger humankind’s very existence. The impact
of climate change on sea level rise is one of the most
critical manifestations of that, as it threatens the
territorial integrity of States, jeopardizes livelihoods,
exacerbates humanitarian crises, increases social
tensions and leads people to move. It also threatens
the very existence of low-lying and small island States.
There should be no doubt that those States deserve our
utmost attention and support. Even in my own country,
Slovenia, one of the least-affected countries globally,
our current projections are that sea level will rise at
least 30 centimetres by the end of the century — and, in
the worst case scenario, an entire metre — leaving our
coastal areas flooded 40 per cent of the time.
I wish to make the following three points on the
topic at hand.
First, we need to work together to implement
measures to mitigate the impacts of sea level rise while
at the same time supporting affected communities,
including through investment in adaptation and
resilience efforts. Slovenia joins those who are
6/43

Thirdly, as the incoming Chair of the Convention
for the Protection of the Marine Environment and
the Coastal Region of the Mediterranean, also known
as the Barcelona Convention, the key platform for
environmental multilateralism in the Mediterranean
region, Slovenia is committed to the protection of the
maritime ecosystem and is aware of its importance for
peace and security in the Mediterranean region.
In conclusion, my country, Slovenia, remains ready
to continue to work globally and proactively on this
important issue in future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile is grateful to Malta for this pertinent debate.
In this statement I would like to raise four
main ideas.
First, this issue is relevant in the Security Council.
In recent years it has become clear that climate change
is a threat multiplier that, acting in combination with
socioeconomic and/or political factors, aggravates the
risk of violence and intensifies conflict factors such
as food insecurity, economic crises and migration. In
that way, it contributes to the perpetuation of existing
conflicts and makes it more difficult to eradicate them.
That was recognized by the Secretary-General in 2009
in his report prepared pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 63/281 (A/64/350).
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

We are aware of our own vulnerability to climate
change, as Chile exhibits seven of the nine vulnerability
criteria under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. In particular, my
delegation would like to recall the holding of two Arria
Formula meetings, in 2015 and 2021, that complement
today’s meeting with significant synergies. In addition,
there have been at least five other Arria Formula
meetings and a special Council meeting in September
2021 (see S/PV.8864).

inequality, State fragility and climate vulnerability in
a number of ways. Its resolutions must acknowledge
the overlapping nature of those issues and their
specific impact on international peace and security,
and set forth mandated tasks to address them. The
lack of women’s significant participation in developing
policies related to climate change has prevented them
from incorporating the necessary gender perspective,
which is critical for addressing women’s specific and
differentiated needs.

Secondly, Chile believes that it is important to
continue discussing sea level rise, as it is one of the
most tangible effects of climate change that has been
aggravated by human activity. Chile acknowledges
the domestic, regional and international security
challenges posed by the phenomenon. The international
community must adopt concrete measures with a view
to cooperating with the communities that will be most
affected and avoiding a catastrophe that would affect
the security of large areas of regions throughout the
world, especially in the Pacific Ocean region, of which
our country is a part and in which we are involved in
seeking solutions. We must adopt a comprehensive
approach based on scientific projections, with an
infrastructure strategy to ensure resilience and the
active participation of the communities concerned.

Chile believes that an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice would be useful to
clarify States’ obligations in the area of climate change,
including with respect to sea level rise. Furthermore,
Chile, together with Colombia, has requested an
advisory opinion from the Inter-American Court of
Human Rights on the effects of the climate emergency
on human rights. A similar initiative has been taken
involving the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea. We believe that all of that will provide
the Security Council with important elements for
safeguarding international security. Our concern is
that climate emergencies lead to the loss of livelihoods,
displacement, migration and major disruptions of access
to health services, in addition to increasing harmful
behaviours. Such consequences make it incumbent upon
States to act and promote actions to mitigate the effects
of climate change and prevent destructive situations.

Thirdly, Chile appreciates the study being carried
out by the International Law Commission, which covers
subjects that can provide us with important answers
with respect to the protection of the people affected,
the stability of maritime delimitations and other issues.
Based on that ongoing process, the Security Council
must bear in mind certain principles, such as equity, the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
the duty to cooperate, the polluter pays principle, the
principle of territorial integrity and legal stability
with regard to the preservation of baselines and the
outer limits of maritime zones, in accordance with the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and
obligations concerning the non-refoulement of persons
affected by sea level rise to third States.
Fourthly, we underscore that women are
disproportionately
affected
by
climate-related
disasters. The reasons underlying that disparity are
multidimensional, ranging from economic to cultural
factors. Furthermore, the persistence of a humanitarian
response that lacks a gender perspective exacerbates
the disproportionate impact of climate emergencies.
The Council can respond to the triple nexus of gender

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): The
Kingdom of Morocco thanks His Excellency Mr. Ian
Borg, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs and
Trade of Malta, for convening and presiding over this
open debate of the Security Council on sea level rise
and its implications for international peace and security.
This debate is a timely opportunity to further elaborate
on the link between sea level rise, international peace,
security and stability, and climate change, which poses
an existential threat to many countries and regions
throughout the world.
We are only beginning to ask ourselves what
implications those issues have for the international
community. Currently, international law provides
only a limited scope of guidance on how to address
the gradual disappearance of a country’s landmass
below the tide line. At the time when the Charter of the
United Nations was adopted in 1945 and subsequently

23-045047/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

when the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea was adopted in 1982, sea level rise was not even
perceived to be an issue, as no one had anticipated
climate change — and certainly not at its current
rate and proportions. Indeed, sea level rise has many
ramifications. Spearheaded by Pacific small island
States, the issue has judiciously been elevated as one
of the priorities of the International Law Commission
(ILC). Morocco welcomes the inclusion of the important
subject in the ILC’s programme of work and is closely
following the work of its study group established for
that purpose.
Coastal areas are characterized by large populations,
industries, heavily trafficked transportation and
communication networks, and extensive coastal tourist
resorts. In many countries, erosion and flooding have
devastated large areas, including on the African coast.
In that regard, as part of Morocco’s commitment to and
its policy of solidarity with Africa under the auspices
of His Majesty King Mohammed VI, Morocco is
redoubling its efforts to strengthen the climate resilience
of African island States. Since the first African Action
Summit, convened by His Majesty the King on the
sidelines of the twenty-second Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, held in Marrakech, Morocco, in 2016,
three African commissions on climate change have
been launched and made operational, including one
dedicated to small island States, chaired by Seychelles.
Morocco has pursued its support for that commission
in order to ensure institutional financial support for
blue and green economies and to strengthen technical,
scientific and financial support for small island States.
Morocco also notes with interest the Rising Nations
Initiative, launched by the leaders of the Pacific
atoll countries last year, which aims to protect their
statehood, preserve their sovereignty, and safeguard
the rights and heritage of the populations affected.
In keeping with its firm commitment to addressing
climate issues, Morocco joined the initiative taken
by Vanuatu to seek an advisory opinion from the
International Court of Justice to clarify States’ rights
and obligations under international law with regard
to the consequences of the effects of climate change,
especially vis-à-vis the States most affected. I would
also like to recall that Morocco continues to strengthen
its cooperation for integrated coastal zone management
in order to achieve sustainable development. In 2019,
with the broad support of Member States, Morocco
8/43

14/02/2023

introduced the first United Nations resolution (General
Assembly resolution 74/210) on strengthening
cooperation for integrated coastal zone management
for achieving sustainable development with a view
to preventing disasters, mitigating their impact and
promoting coastal areas’ sustainable development.
In conclusion, we call on the Security Council to
take into account the link between climate and security
in the measures it takes before conflicts break out or
escalate. We cannot discuss the issue of sea level rise
without including the current reality of the climate
migration dimension. Moreover, let us not forget that
the acceleration of climate change throughout the world
could cause more than 216 million migrants to move by
2050, owing to droughts, crop failures, sea level rise, and
desertification. We call on the international community
today to build on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration, also known as the Marrakech
Compact on Migration, and comprehensively address
the growing challenge of climate migration in countries
of origin, transit and destination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Zacarias (Portugal): Allow me to commend
Malta for convening this timely meeting and for further
bringing to the attention of the Security Council the
importance of the climate-security nexus. We also
appreciate the valuable contributions of the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly and the
other briefers.
We align ourselves with the statements to be
made on behalf of the European Union and by the
representative of Nauru of the Group of Friends on
Climate and Security.
Most of the speakers we have heard today have
talked about the specific effects of sea level rise, which
are diverse and significant, particularly for coastal
areas, low-lying coastal States and small island States.
We cannot overstate their potential implications for
peace and security, including as a driver of conflict and
a risk multiplier. Precisely two weeks ago, as co-Chair
of the Steering Committee on Partnerships for Small
Island Developing States (SIDS), Portugal co-hosted
an event with Samoa on climate-induced mobility in
SIDS, which left no room for doubt about how climate
change is already forcing large numbers of people to
leave their homes. The displacement of people, forced
migration, threats to territorial integrity and territorial
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and boundary disputes, as well as the escalation of
current conflicts, are only some of the consequences
that we are already witnessing and that are likely to be
further exacerbated in future.
As a coastal State with island territories and three
quarters of whose population live in coastal areas,
Portugal welcomes the opportunity to reflect on the
implications of sea level rise for peace and security,
and more importantly on how to collectively address
the issue. In our view, we must start at the very root of
the problem. We need to do more — and faster — to
fight climate change. Portugal has been at the forefront
of efforts to mitigate climate change. We were among
the first countries in the world to commit to climate
neutrality by 2050. At the second United Nations
Ocean Conference in Lisbon, we pushed for a new set
of more ambitious and more effective commitments
on implementing the ocean-related targets of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and we
have continued to work on further advancing the
climate-water-oceans nexus.
We must also focus on preparedness, on building
resilience and on adaptation to the impact of rising sea
levels and all of its consequences. Those efforts should
also include the ability to answer legal questions arising
from sea level rise and its effects. In that connection,
we support ongoing reflections on how to preserve
stability and legal security in international relations,
and we highlight the importance of solutions consistent
with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. We particularly
commend the work being done by the International
Law Commission, whose Study Group is co-chaired by
a Portuguese member of the Commission, Mr. Galvão
Teles. We also fully support Vanuatu’s initiative
requesting an advisory opinion from the International
Court of Justice on the obligations of States with respect
to climate change.
It is crucial to ensure that the United Nations
system, as the platform best placed to promote a
cooperative and coordinated response to the challenges
we are discussing, works coherently to better prevent,
prepare for and respond to sea level rise. It is therefore
imperative that the United Nations system develop the
means to do so. In our view, it will be key to ensure
that the Security Council continues to work on a
comprehensive approach to addressing the security
impacts and risks posed by climate change. We trust
that this meeting is a timely step in that direction.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in French): Allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on Malta’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Our countries, both
of which border the Mediterranean, have an existential
link to the sea, and my delegation therefore welcomes
the convening of this debate. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Aurescu, speaking on behalf of the Study Group
of the International Law Commission, and Ms. Pasisi,
our civil-society representative, for their briefings
this morning.
The diversity of this morning’s briefers clearly
demonstrates how important it is that we act together
and within a multilateral framework, with the United
Nations playing a central role, if we are to be better
prepared and able to better respond to the threat of rising
sea levels. For small island developing States, their very
survival is at stake. While those nations are currently
on the front lines where the dangers of sea level rise
are concerned, coastal regions are no less affected.
Moreover, due to the many and varied consequences of
rising sea levels, it is ultimately the entire international
community that will be affected by this phenomenon.
As we know, it is a result of global warming and can
lead to the loss of means of subsistence and depleted
resources, as well as the forced displacement of
populations, thereby increasing migratory pressure and
food insecurity, to cite just a few examples.
That paves the way for greater instability and
increased security risks, tension and even conflict, all
of which are felt most strongly by States and regions
already weakened by crises. Peace and security and
development cannot be separated from one another
and our emphasis should therefore be on strengthening
prevention. Implementing the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change therefore continues to be vital if we
are to increase stability and reduce climate-related
disasters. In that regard, nationally determined
contributions, mitigation, adaptation and resilience
plans can help to address the effects of climate change
as drivers of instability, crisis and conflict and thereby
increase the adaptive capacity of countries, particularly
the most vulnerable.
The Security Council needs a better understanding
of the links between instability, conflict and climate
risks, which is why regular reports by the Secretary-

23-045049/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

General on the security implications of climate change
are so important. Of course, those implications vary
according to the particular situations of regions or
countries. In addition, the Peacebuilding Commission,
as an advisory body, could examine the repercussions
of climate change on peace and security and thereby
help to develop strategies for conflict prevention and
peacebuilding that take climate considerations into
account. Strengthening prevention must be accompanied
by predictable and sustainable funding, especially for
the States most affected by rising sea levels.
Finally, the various consequences of sea level rise
create several legal issues relating to the law of the
sea, the survival of States and protection for the people
affected. We are therefore following with great interest
the work of the International Law Commission on the
subject, which will clarify one of the many areas of
international law in question and may eventually offer
legal and practical solutions for States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Marschik (Austria): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting on sea level rise.
Austria is a mountainous, landlocked country,
so why are we speaking here today? We are here
because we care. We care about the States whose
security — if not their very existence — is threatened
by the consequences of climate change. We care not
only today, on Valentine’s Day, but every day. I should
also point out that we align ourselves with the statement
to be delivered by the European Union, but I would like
to add three short points in our national capacity.
First, Austria welcomes the fact that the Security
Council is dealing with a key question related to
climate change. It is indisputable that climate change is
increasingly affecting States and therefore eventually
international peace and security as well. The Council
should address issues related to climate and security as
a key priority more often.
Secondly, sea level rise does not just affect States.
Primarily it affects people. Whether those people live in
coastal areas or in small island nations, rising sea levels
destroy their livelihoods, leading to displacement and
conflicts over fresh water and fertile land. Exacerbated
by droughts and other natural disasters, as well as
conflict, crime and poverty, the very existence of those
10/43

14/02/2023

people is threatened and their fate must not be ignored.
We need to be there in solidarity.
Thirdly, from a legal perspective, sea level rise
has implications for several issues, such as territorial
sovereignty, statehood and the delimitation of maritime
boundaries, as well as entitlements, such as exclusive
economic zones and questions with regard to the
protection of the people affected. In our view, the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which largely reflects customary international law,
must be globally and uniformly applied. But many
questions remain. Does a State continue to exist if
it loses its territory? What happens to its population
and resources? Austria welcomes the fact that the
International Law Commission has taken up the topic. It
is important to look at creative solutions while making
use of all technological possibilities.
In sum, this is an issue that dramatically affects
the peace and security of a number of United Nations
Member States. In its tradition as a strong supporter
of multilateralism, international law and solidarity,
Austria remains committed to working towards
common solutions that help those most affected by
climate-security challenges, and it encourages the
Council to actively engage on those issues.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): At the outset,
I would like to commend Malta for organizing today’s
open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their important contributions.
Guyana aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered on behalf of the Caribbean Community and
the Alliance of Small Island States.
There are many deleterious effects of sea-level
rise that must be examined in the context of their
implications for international peace and security.
First and most immediately, it has an impact on
food and water security. For example, in my country,
Guyana, more than half of the population live at least
six feet below sea level. For our coastal communities,
sea level rise results not only in soil erosion but also in
saltwater intrusion into areas that are critical for food
production. The same can be said for many low-lying
States and small island developing States. What we
see as crucial to building resilience is to ensure that
vulnerable countries have the knowledge and financial
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

and technological capacities to withstand the disruption
of food production and the availability of potable water.
Secondly, there are legal implications. As a coastal
State, Guyana has maritime boundaries with several
States, although some of those remain to be defined.
While there is currently no obligation under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to keep
baselines and other related boundaries under review
once they are deposited with the Secretary-General, one
cannot discount the fact that sea level rise has territorial
consequences, including the erosion of coastlines
and the disruption of baselines and consequently the
boundaries determined by those baselines. That has
significant security implications. In situations in which
boundaries are undefined, there is an even greater
possibility for tensions and conflict. When one factors
in the potential loss of territory and displacement of
people, we may be left with a potential humanitarian
situation for which none of us are prepared.
Guyana agrees with those who have emphasized the
importance of undertaking mitigation and adaptation
measures where possible. But there is a cost attached.
Indeed, international cooperation is an obligation for
all States, but there is also the matter of equity. We
must consider not only where such measures could be
implemented but also who can afford them and what
happens to those who cannot. The need for the urgent
delivery of climate finance is paramount.
Allow me to conclude by stressing the need for
bolder climate action, adequate support for vulnerable
countries, capacity-building and more robust
international cooperation that aligns with the national
priorities of the affected States. Time is against us.
Commitment must be completed by being translated
into action.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Allow me to congratulate
Malta on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We also thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s open debate on this important issue.
We express our gratitude to the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and all the briefers
for their valuable input. I will make two quick points.
First, small island developing States (SIDS) are at
the forefront of the challenge of climate change and
sea level rise and bear the brunt of a global problem

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

to which they did not contribute. Adaptation to
climate change remains one of the highest priorities
for SIDS. Reducing the vulnerabilities of SIDS and
strengthening their resilience to climate change should
be the collective responsibility of the international
community. What we need now is to enhance action
on all important policies that address climate change,
including by fulfilling commitments on climate finance
and technology transfer.
Secondly, with a coastline of approximately 7,500
kilometres and several groups of islands located far
away from its mainland, India is cognizant of the
adverse impacts of sea level rise. However, it is our
considered submission that the Security Council is not
the place to address climate-change-related issues or
even sea level rise. We have repeatedly underlined that
there exists little scientific correlation or evidence of
the impact of climate change on peace and security.
The most equitable architecture in which to combat
climate change is the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change process, in which each
Member State has an equally important stake. In that
context, we welcomed the setting up of the loss and
damage financial facility in Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt,
and the inclusion of issues surrounding a sustainable
lifestyle. The operationalization of that fund needs to
be expedited so that the most vulnerable developing
countries are equally compensated.
Finally, given the history and backdrop of unkept
promises on financial commitments, is it not ironic that
developing countries are expected to bear the brunt
of everything — the burden of developing climate
resilience, industrialization without carbonizing,
grappling with adverse climate events and lifting
millions out of poverty, all at the same time — while also
managing disruptions and uncertainties in global supply
chains? Oversimplifying the causes of conflict will not
help to resolve them and cannot justify extreme policy
measures. Climate change is more about development
and less about peace and security. Choosing to address
that issue in non-mandated forums, especially those
in which all members do not participate on an equal
footing, may undermine the larger cause of securing
climate justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): As a small coastal country but a big ocean

23-0450411/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

State, Costa Rica is deeply concerned about the
impacts of sea level rise, both on the livelihoods of
our citizens and on regional and global stability and
security. An urgent starting point for this discussion
is the fulfilment of the obligations under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We must meet the agreed emissions cap. We must scale
up adaptation and resilience measures, and we must
deliver on climate finance commitments, including
through the implementation of the loss and damage
fund. That is not charity — it is a moral, environmental
and economic imperative to ensure international peace
and security and guarantee genuine climate justice.
It is also essential to recognize, address and
mainstream the humanitarian and security implications
of sea level rise across the United Nations system.
The effects of sea level rise could foment new
conflicts over land and resources, which could lead
to the creation of ever more dangerous migration
patterns and exacerbate the exploitation of vulnerable
groups. The Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission can and must jointly deliver an effective
response that takes into account human security and
sustainable peace, as established by the review of the
peacebuilding architecture.
On another note, island and coastal States face an
unprecedented challenge to their statehood — the risk
of large-scale losses of parts or all of their territories,
which threaten to undermine the foundations of the
current international order. A better understanding
of the legal implications of sea level rise is therefore
urgently needed.

14/02/2023

Costa Rica will co-host together with France. It is time
to urgently and jointly move from words to action so as
to ensure a safe and stable future for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mr. Sekeris (Greece): It is an honour to take part
in this open debate on a matter of great importance,
and I would like to commend Malta’s presidency of the
Security Council for this initiative.
Greece aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union on this
topic. We would like to add a few thoughts in our
national capacity.
The issue of sea level rise is directly linked to the
application and implementation of the provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS). The universal and unified character of
UNCLOS sets out the legal framework within which all
activities in the oceans and seas must be carried out. As
the constitution of the oceans, the Convention, which
reflects customary international law, sets the legal basis
for settling and regulating any relevant issue that may
arise. With respect to peace and security issues dealing
with sea level rise, UNCLOS provides the answers to
questions raised within its proper context.

In that regard, Costa Rica welcomes the progress
made by the International Law Commission on
sea level rise in relation to international law. We
support the request by the Commission of Small
Island States on Climate Change and International
Law to the International Tribunal for the Law of the
Sea for an advisory opinion, as well as the request to
the International Court of Justice with regard to the
obligations of States in relation to climate change.
In addition, Costa Rica calls for a discussion of the
international criminal law implications of acts that
cause irremediable ecological damage, including a
potential definition of ecocide.

Predictability, stability and certainty, which are
inherent to the Convention and guide its application,
involve the preservation of the baselines and the outer
limits of maritime zones, as well as maritime entitlements
deriving therefrom, in accordance with UNCLOS.
Furthermore, the Convention imposes no obligation for
reviewing or recalculating the baselines or the outer
limits of maritime zones established in accordance
with its provisions. Greece underlines the importance
of safeguarding the stability of maritime boundaries,
confirmed by State practice and international
jurisprudence. The International Court of Justice very
recently declared that it: “observes that boundaries
between States, including maritime boundaries, are
aimed at providing permanency and stability”. For that
reason, maritime boundary agreements are subject
to the rule excluding boundary agreements from a
fundamental change of circumstances and, hence, sea
level rise does not affect maritime boundaries.

We remain committed to addressing the
implications of sea level rise, including in the context
of the third United Nations Ocean Conference, which

Climate change increases the frequency and the
impact of extreme weather events, such as floods,
land erosion and water salination affecting low-lying

12/43

23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

territories and lands, thereby disrupting the lives
of millions of people, with food insecurity, water
scarcity, epidemics and health risks among its most
common consequences.
As a contracting party to all major international
environmental conventions, treaties and protocols,
Greece actively participates in the ongoing multilateral
negotiations and meetings supporting all efforts to
strengthen and improve environmental protection
at all levels for the benefit of the present and
future generations.
In addressing the impacts of sea level rise on peace
and security within the framework of international law,
the Security Council would be a driving force and an
instrumental factor in creating synergies among States,
United Nations bodies and regional international
organizations. That may be the case when the Security
Council is dealing with humanitarian risks or when
addressing the impacts of sea level rise and climate
vulnerability with regard to the protection of human
rights, highlighting gender issues.
In the future, the ability of the international
community to anticipate and adapt to the security
impacts of sea level rise, as well as climate change in
general, may be equally important to our long-term
efforts to reverse it. We need to improve our awareness
of climate-related security risks by enhancing our
understanding of the links between the impacts
of sea level rise and security. By integrating and
combining actions and policies on climate, security and
development, we will ensure the best possible outcome,
delivered at multiple levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): My congratulations
go to Malta on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this crucial and timely open debate on sea
level rise. Our appreciation also goes to the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the General Assembly, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania and Co-Chair
of the International Law Commission Study Group on
sea level rise in relation to international law, and the civil
society representative for their valuable perspectives.
Thailand and the Thai people are not immune to sea
level rise. In fact, none of us are. Bangkok is sinking
and is at risk, and so are other cities, beaches and low-

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

lying areas along the 3,000-kilometre coastline of
Thailand. As an economy that is dependent on tourism
and agricultural exports, sea level rise is a threat to
our economic lifeline, our food security, our home and
our livelihood.
Thailand is greatly concerned about the impacts
of sea level rise currently experienced by our friends
around the globe, many of which are much more
vulnerable and facing far greater loss and an existential
threat. Sea level rise also raises questions concerning
statehood, maritime zones and boundaries, as well
as the protection of affected persons, many of which
are fundamental to the maintenance of international
peace, security and stability and to peaceful relations
and cooperation among States. It is therefore high time
that the issue of sea level rise be urgently addressed. In
that regard, Thailand wishes to highlight the following
three points.
First, as sea level rise has far-reaching implications
for the international community as a whole, it is
incumbent upon all of us here at the United Nations
to join hands in addressing and responding to the risk
to prevent the world from falling into a situation of
greater reversals in development gains and of greater
risks of tensions or conflicts. Sea level rise affects
each and every one of us, threatens our sustainable
development trajectories and hampers our plans to
create a sustainable future for the next generation. It
is therefore a shared interest of each and every one of
us to work together to avert further threats that could
endanger international peace, security and stability.
Secondly, I wish to highlight a few examples
of Thailand’s efforts at the national level to achieve
climate resilience and strengthen the coping capacity
of our local communities. Those include integrating
adaptation into land use planning and development,
promoting the coping capacity of coastal communities,
including in the areas of prevention and surveillance
of sea level rise and storm surges, installing surge
barriers, planting mangrove forests and devising storm
surge evacuation plans to respond to climate change
impacts. There is more that can be done. Partnerships
and cooperation are essential to supporting such
adaptation and mitigation efforts.
Thirdly, sea level rise also raises questions regarding
its legal implications. In that regard, Thailand highly
values the work of the International Law Commission
(ILC) on sea level rise in relation to international

23-0450413/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

law. We believe that such work of the ILC could be of
great practical value to the international community,
particularly given the fragmented existing international
legal frameworks applicable to the protection of persons
affected by climate change, including sea level rise. We
recognize the urgency and importance of the ILC’s work
in that area, and we look forward to its presentation
of its further study on all aspects concerning sea level
rise in relation to international law, including on the
subtopic of the law of the sea at the Sixth Committee
meeting in the autumn.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that sea level rise
has far-reaching implications for the international
community as a whole and that none of us are immune
to its impacts. However, it is still within our power to
address the threats of sea level rise and minimize its
impacts if we act now. Together, we have overcome many
threats to international peace, security and stability and
many challenges to sustainable development, sustained
growth and human security in the past. Together, we can
therefore avert the potentially devastating implications
of sea level rise. Let us work to make that happen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Federated States of Micronesia.
Mr. Lippwe (Federated States of Micronesia):
Micronesia is honoured to address the Security Council
on this important subject. I also want to acknowledge
the contributions of a fellow Pacific islander, Ms. Coral
Pasisi, to this discussion today.
At the outset, my delegation associates itself
with the statements to be delivered later today by the
representatives of Samoa on behalf of the Alliance of
Small Island States, Tonga on behalf of the Pacific
Islands Forum, Palau on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States and Nauru on behalf of the
Group of Friends on Climate and Security. My delegation
congratulates Malta on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and organizing the open debate today.
As stated in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council has the primary responsibility,
on behalf of the members of the General Assembly,
to maintain international peace and security. The
discharge of that responsibility must, among other
things, be in accordance with the principles and
purposes of the United Nations. Two of those purposes
are the development of friendly relations among
nations based on respect for the principle of equal
rights and self-determination of peoples and the
14/43

14/02/2023

achievement of international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character.
In that regard, climate-change-related sea level rise
presents a challenge of which the Security Council must
be seized. As others have noted today, sea level rise
poses a particularly acute threat to the overall peace
and security of small island developing States like
my own, Micronesia, given our relatively small land
masses, populations and economies, our geographical
remoteness and our deep cultural ties to, and reliance
on, our island homes. Distressingly, and on a related
note, there is a school of thought in international law
and discourse that once sea level rise inundates the
land territory of a State, then that State automatically
ceases to exist and no longer enjoys statehood in the
international community.
In my delegation’s view, that school of thought
must be rejected by the Security Council, and we call
on the Security Council to do so. It would be deeply
disruptive to the peace and security of a people and
violates the principles and purposes of the United
Nations that I identified earlier if the status of people
as a State is deemed by the international community
to be extinguished by a phenomenon for which such
people have minimal responsibility, if any. Such people
will not have engaged in any act of self-determination
that endorses the loss of statehood and forcing them
to accept that loss is fundamentally contrary to the
development of friendly relations among nations.
Additionally, to the extent that the forced
extinguishing of their statehood disrupts a people’s
access to economic, humanitarian and other benefits,
including rights and entitlements flowing from maritime
zones, it is fundamentally contrary to the achievement
of international cooperation in addressing economic,
humanitarian and other international problems. In the
light of the foregoing, the Security Council must make
clear, in accordance with its duties and the principles
and purposes of the United Nations, that the loss of land
territory due to climate-change-related sea level rise
does not automatically translate to a loss of statehood
enjoyed by the people of that territory.
Along the same lines, my delegation calls on the
members of the Security Council and the General
Assembly to support the initiative started by Vanuatu
for the General Assembly to request an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

climate change. As today’s open debate indicates, sea
level rise, like other adverse effects of climate change,
raises major questions under international law that, in
our view, an advisory opinion can helpfully address.
In conclusion, my delegation echoes others in
calling for the appointment of a special representative
for climate and security. Such a special representative
could, among other things, strengthen the ability of the
United Nations to understand and respond sensitively to
all facets of the challenge of climate-change-related sea
level rise, including the implications of such sea level
rise for statehood and other matters of international law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, I would like to thank Malta
for convening this open debate on the implications of
the rise of sea level for international peace and security
and also for building on the Arria Formula meeting
organized by Viet Nam in October 2021, cosponsored
by my country, the Dominican Republic.
The Dominican Republic aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the representatives of Samoa,
on behalf of the Alliance of Small Island States, and
Nauru, on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security.
The threats of climate change and rising sea
levels are issues that threaten the livelihoods of our
people. They undermine peace and security, as well
as the prosperity and development of our country.
The rising sea level brings with it other issues that
threaten international peace and security. It increases
storm-water surges, coastal erosion and saltwater
intrusion. It therefore threatens coastal communities
and key areas for food production and livestock
breeding, thus endangering the livelihoods and assets
of rural populations and agricultural producers. It
also undermines the infrastructure of our countries
and consequently affects our urban planning and the
protection of our coastlines.
In our region, the Caribbean, and in particular
the coastal region of the Dominican Republic, we are
exposed to imminent land loss, which would lead to
forced migration and displacement and the attendant
social instability and demographic tension. The
territorial consequences of rising sea levels could

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

therefore endanger international cooperation and
generate conflict.
No region is exempt from the effects of sea level
rise. Globally, it is estimated that sea level rise could
increase up to 30 centimetres by 2050 and actually
endanger the very survival and existence of nations.
That could occur even sooner for other nations, such as
Kiribati, which is less than two metres above sea level.
In the case of the Dominican Republic, sea level
rise is estimated at 16 to 24 centimetres, which means
the potential loss of 13 per cent of our territory by 2050.
That alarming data is a threat to our territory, even more
so because we do not have the necessary resources to
address and mitigate the challenges of rising sea levels.
We would also like to reiterate that, as a consequence
of climate change and rising sea levels, we cannot
review or update the baselines and external limits or
geographical coordinates of our maritime zones. Given
that developing island States depend primarily on our
maritime areas, any changes in that respect would
undermine the peace and security of our countries.
According to the Inter-American Development Bank,
the cost of inaction in the face of climate change could
cause annual losses estimated at $22 billion by 2050,
approximately 10 per cent of the current economy of
the Caribbean.
Although our country is not a significant producer
of greenhouse gases, the Dominican Republic is
among the small island developing States (SIDS) that
are exposed to those threats. According to studies and
demographic data, the majority of the populations
of Guyana, Haiti and our country, the Dominican
Republic, live in low-lying lands. Similarly, since our
economy depends on tourism, we cannot ignore the
fact that as a sector, it is one of the most vulnerable
to climate change and sea level rise. Other emerging
risks that we in the Dominican Republic are currently
living with include the massive amounts of seaweed
that have reached our shores and have increased our
vulnerability, limiting our ability to respond to threats
such as sea level rise. It is therefore important that we
develop a road map that covers all the implications of
sea level rise and all issues related to sovereignty and
maritime delimitations.
We must use the tools available to us to combat
climate change and its impact on international peace and
security. And ensuring the availability of resources to
confront it is the only way to guarantee the sustainability

23-0450415/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

of our economies. The Dominican Republic is a member
of the transitional committee overseeing the loss and
damage fund recently established under the auspices
of the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. The fund will address the needs of the most
vulnerable countries resulting from damages and losses
caused by climate change, and that will enable us to
work on the fund’s modalities and operationalization.
We will also make a significant contribution as a
member of the preparatory committee for the fourth
annual International Conference on SIDS, to be held in
the Caribbean region next year.
I would like to simply reiterate that the cost of
inaction will be even greater for all countries if we do
not act now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): At the outset, let me
congratulate and thank Malta’s presidency of the
Security Council for creating this timely opportunity
for us to participate in today’s open debate on the
implications of sea level rise for international peace
and security. I would also like to thank this morning’s
briefers for their important insights.
Botswana is definitely a landlocked country. While
we do not face a direct threat from sea level rise, we
are affected by other impacts of climate change within
and beyond our borders. We therefore have a keen and
legitimate interest in this important debate. We are also
here to express our solidarity with all low-lying coastal
communities and the small island developing States
(SIDS), particularly the Pacific island countries, that
through no fault of their own are increasingly facing a
genuine existential threat from sea level rise with peace
and security ramifications. We therefore welcome and
fully support the Rising Nations Initiative, which was
launched by the leaders of the Pacific atoll countries
last year and aims to protect their statehood, preserve
their sovereignty and safeguard the rights and heritage
of the populations affected. Like the SIDS and the
Pacific island countries, Africa contributes very little
to global greenhouse-gas emissions, and yet we are
suffering the greatest negative impacts. However,
we are determined to adapt to the consequences of
global warming and prevent further loss and damage
to our people, environment, economies and cultural
16/43

14/02/2023

heritage while also preventing climate-change-induced
conflicts.
Over the past years, we in Africa have witnessed
how climate-change-induced incidents, such as
prolonged drought, flooding, cyclones and storms, have
intensified. Their frequency has brought about hardship
and devastation, including large-scale forced migration
and displacement. Recent findings by the Africa
Climate Mobility Initiative stress that the continent
will see an increase in climate-forced migration and
displacement over the coming decades, with internal
displacement forecast to affect as many as 113 million
people by 2050. Our subregion, Southern Africa, could
also see an increase in cross-border mobility owing to
the effects of climate change.
We all know that people have always moved to
escape from harm and to adapt to changes in the
environment. It is therefore important that we keep our
focus on mitigating the climatic factors that drive such
movements and not regard the people who move as a
threat. That is why Botswana, under the leadership of
President Mokgweetsi Masisi, has undertaken to play
a champion role in issues relating to climate mobility
data and information. In building on the Africa Climate
Mobility Initiative and working closely with the Global
Centre for Climate Mobility, we are embarking on a
national deep-dive process to identify climate risk
hotspots and develop a national blueprint for addressing
climate mobility and advancing people-centred climate
action. It is critical to ensure that responses from our
continent and elsewhere are based on the best available
data and information, including state-of-the-art
forecasting and modelling capabilities, if we are to
better anticipate and protect ourselves against climate
risks. Botswana is therefore committed to leading from
the front by putting people at the core of its response
to the climate crisis. If we want to prevent further loss
and damage from climate change, including its negative
impacts on peace and security, people and Governments
need to be able to better predict and prepare. Most
people do not want to leave the places they call home,
and they should not be forced to.
In that connection, existing commitments to
ensuring climate adaptation financing and universal
access to early-warning systems must be kept. Where
there is no other option, we must help communities to
move out of harm’s way and direct investments towards
areas of prospective settlement. Regional organizations
should also support joint forecasting and planning
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

among their member States to address cross-border
risks and harness opportunities associated with the
movement and resettlement of people.
As I conclude, I should note that even if we manage
those difficult transitions well, uprooting people and
their culture and livelihoods involves a huge cost
and carries substantive risks for States and social
cohesion. In the interests of climate justice, the onus
is on those who bear the primary responsibility for
climate impacts, and on the international community
as a whole, to face these issues head-on, including by
providing adequate financing for the most vulnerable
countries and communities. We must all live up to our
obligations and responsibilities. For Africa and all
communities in low-lying coastal areas — our brothers
and sisters, especially in the SIDS and Pacific island
countries — it is imperative that we act urgently and
that we do so today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Abesadze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our appreciation to the presidency of Malta
for convening this open debate on an important issue.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the President of the General Assembly and the other
briefers for their comprehensive inputs.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to make some additional comments in my national
capacity.
The relationship between climate change and
peace and security is a complex one. Unfortunately,
climate-change-related security risks have already
become an everyday reality for many around the globe.
According to the World Meteorological Organization’s
report, WMO Provisional State of the Global Climate
2022, extreme heatwaves, drought and devastating
flooding affected millions and cost billions last year.
Rising sea levels caused by global climate change
increasingly put coastal and island communities
under strain, in some cases threatening their very
existence. Climate and weather extremes create risks
of uncertainty and instability, including increasingly
at the regional and international levels, driving
displacement in all regions, with small island States
disproportionately affected. Flood- and drought-related
acute food insecurity and malnutrition are on the rise in
many countries. What is even more worrisome is that

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

the risks posed by sea level rise to coastal ecosystems
and populations are likely to increase tenfold well before
the end of this century, if the adaptation and mitigation
action agreed by the parties to the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change are not implemented.
As the tremendously fast-growing climate-security
nexus increasingly influences the global peace
and security context, addressing climate-related
consequences and future risks has become a matter
of global urgency and can be addressed only through
joint and resolute action. We believe that addressing the
security impacts of climate change should be at the core
of the Security Council’s conflict prevention agenda and
should become a subject of in-depth analyses. In that
context, we welcome the increased focus of the Security
Council on climate change issues by broadening its
discussions on the matter, incorporating climate security
language into resolutions and establishing institutional
architecture, such as the Climate Security Mechanism,
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security and
the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security,
in order to strengthen the Security Council’s working
agenda. We believe that assessments of climate-related
security risks and responses to them should be further
fed into the Council’s work, including as a part of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement
are the major international mechanisms for guiding
global efforts in addressing climate change. In that
regard, Georgia, as a party to the UNFCCC and the
Paris Agreement, has been committed to making its own
contribution to international efforts to combat climate
change. To underpin the Paris Agreement with concrete
actions, the Government of Georgia has submitted
an updated nationally determined contribution to the
UNFCCC. The new nationally determined contribution
has new targets, as required by the Paris Agreement, to
be more ambitious. We are also working on a long-term
low-emission development strategy for 2050, which
will plan Georgia’s long-term path towards climate
change mitigation.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm Georgia’s
commitment to do its utmost to reduce the implications
of the climate crisis for international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Palau.

23-0450417/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Seid (Palau): I deliver this statement on behalf
of the 12 Pacific small island developing States (SIDS).
We align our statement with those to be delivered by
the representatives of Samoa on behalf of the Alliance
of Small Island States (AOSIS) and of Tonga on behalf
of the Pacific Island Forum.
We convey our gratitude to Malta for holding this
debate on sea level rise and its implications for peace
and security.
Climate change is no longer a novel concept in
the Security Council’s discussions — it has been
discussed in various forms since 2007. Rising seas
create a multitude of issues for all coastal States.
However, they are an existential threat to low-lying and
atoll islands throughout the Pacific. The Pacific SIDS
led the discussions on the novel General Assembly
resolution on climate change and its possible security
implications, which was adopted in 2009 (General
Assembly resolution 63/281). Rising sea levels have
already flooded many of our coastlines and forced
migration and displacement. They have intruded on our
water tables, creating water insecurity and affecting
our ability to grow crops and live healthily.
The risk of sea level rise to the Pacific islands is
such that many of us have taken severe measures to
address it. In Kiribati, former President Anote Tong
introduced a “migration with dignity” strategy and
purchased 5,500 acres in Fiji for supplementary food
production in order to combat food insecurity and
provide a potential location in which to resettle if
sea level rise were to render Kiribati uninhabitable.
Similarly, fearing total inundation, the nation of Tuvalu
has launched an initiative to upload a virtual version of
the country into the metaverse as a means to preserve
the country and its culture. It sounds like science
fiction — something we might see in a movie about
some made-up disaster — but those are two real-life
examples that are happening today.
But extreme measures are not only happening in
SIDS. In the United States, the Biden Administration
will pay $75 million to three tribal communities in
Alaska and Washington that have been severely affected
by the effects of climate change for them to relocate to
higher ground. The main difference here is that we, as
small island developing States, do not have the fiscal
space or in some cases the physical land mass to take
those extreme adaptation measures. However, we also
want to note that our identities as Pacific islanders
18/43

14/02/2023

are grounded in our countries. Those are our homes
and have been for thousands of years — paying for
relocation is not a solution we can accept. We all need
to do more to meet the goal of the Paris Agreement to
limit global warming to 1.5°C. We propose four actions
that the Council might undertake to address the risks
related to sea level rise.
First, we reiterate our call for support as it relates
to our maritime zones and the need to secure them, as
well as the rights and entitlements that flow from them,
without reduction, even in the face of rising sea levels.
That position is reflected in the Pacific Islands Forum
Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face
of Climate Change-related Sea Level Rise and the 2021
AOSIS Leaders’ Declaration, which set out our position
on how the rules on maritime zones under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea must apply
in the situation of climate-change-related sea level rise.
Secondly, we ask for support for the initiative
spearheaded by Vanuatu and supported by the Pacific
Islands for an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the obligations of States in respect
of climate change.
Thirdly, we reiterate our call for the appointment
of a special representative of the Secretary-General
on climate change and security, who would inform the
future work of the Council and the General Assembly.
Finally, we invite the Council to come to the
Pacific to see sea level rise first-hand and hear the
stories of those affected. We have said in previous
debates that forced migration, displacement, food
and water insecurity, and infrastructure damage are
terms we often associate with war and conflict zones,
but in the Pacific it is climate change that is the root
cause of such threats to peace. While SIDS are on the
front line of the crisis, 149 of the 193 United Nations
Member States — 77 per cent of the United Nations
membership — are exposed to sea level rise. Currently,
approximately 634 million people worldwide are at risk
owing to sea level rise, while a significant part of the
world’s population live in coastal areas. If we do not
take steps to mitigate those risks, one can only imagine
the enormity of the security issues we will face.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate. We call on Malta’s leadership and all
members of the Council to recognize the risks to peace
and security associated with sea level rise and join with
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

the Pacific to find meaningful, proactive and effective
solutions with urgency.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia thanks Malta
for organizing this important meeting on global
climate action. We thank the briefers for their
insightful presentations.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
We often speak of the next generations that will
suffer greatly from climate change, but we have to listen
to science here — it might be our generation that needs
saving first, and that might be sooner than we expected.
Latvia, too, has identified sea level rise as a significant
threat in its 2030 national plan for adaption to climate
change, which was adopted in 2019. With the impacts of
climate change increasing in occurrence and strength,
such adaptation plans and measures will determine the
resilience of countries and communities. It is necessary
to urgently develop, update and implement adaptation
strategies that are holistic and based on the best
available science.
International cooperation has a crucial role to play
in climate action. In the Baltic region, we pay special
attention to regional cooperation, for instance within
the Council of the Baltic Sea States. On a global scale,
we fully support the ongoing work under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) in scaling up climate action and enhancing
the resilience of countries on the front lines of the climate
crisis and facing the existential threat of sea level rise. In
that regard, we look forward to the forthcoming report
on the multidimensional vulnerability index. We also
look forward to the holding of the fourth International
Conference on Small Island Developing States and
its preparatory process, which could also provide an
opportunity to reflect on the topic from a sustainable
development perspective. Latvia has put forward its
candidacy to the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee
and stands ready to contribute to the process.
Latvia is closely following the work of the
International Law Commission’s (ILC) Study Group on
sea level rise in relation to international law. We have
reflected upon it and provided our response during the
yearly discussion of the ILC’s report in the General
Assembly’s Sixth Committee. Sea level rise poses

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

significant questions about the suitability of established
concepts and institutions of the international law of the
sea, international human rights law and statehood law
for addressing the interests of specially affected actors.
While the way those questions are framed may be new,
international law is not unfamiliar with the phenomenon
of legally recognized and existing States having limited
factual control over their territory, and the historical
experience of the Baltic States gives us an informed
perspective and sympathy for the arguments of States
thus affected. Latvia is also looking forward to reading
the materials of the third issues paper of the Study
Group and its discussion by the ILC later this year.
With respect to the legal implications of sea level
rise, we believe that international courts and tribunals
play an important role in clarifying the rules that guide
the conduct of States and other actors in dealing with
the causes and implications of the climate crisis. We
therefore express our appreciation for Vanuatu’s historic
initiative in requesting an advisory opinion on climate
change from the International Court of Justice, as
well as the request by the Commission of Small Island
States on Climate Change and International Law for an
advisory opinion from the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea. Latvia will consider participating
in those advisory proceedings to contribute to the
development of international law.
It will be important to see the Security Council
demonstrate its full flexibility so as to embrace the
existing climate challenges and ensure that the impact
of sea level rise is considered in a cross-cutting manner
in its work, activities and mandates that can also enable
a response to the specific threat of sea level rise itself.
We regret that the important draft resolution S/2021/990,
which framed the problem of climate change as a threat
to international peace and security and was sponsored
by a majority of the United Nations membership,
failed to be adopted in 2021 owing to the veto of one
permanent member of the Council (see S/PV.8926).
In conclusion, ambitious and urgent climate
mitigation action continues to be the crucial element in
managing climate risks and limiting sea level rise. Latvia
is strongly committed to fulfilling its climate targets
and achieving climate neutrality by 2050. Additionally,
we are currently working on the implementation of
more ambitious 2030 greenhouse-gas emissions targets.
Latvia encourages all countries to commit to more
ambitious climate targets in their new and updated
nationally determined contributions before the twenty-

23-0450419/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. Latvia
recently contributed to the United Nations Development
Programme Climate Promise, which helps countries
reach their climate goals. As we continue to respond to
the crises unfolding across the world, we must ensure
that we build back better and greener for a sustainable,
climate-resilient and peaceful future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Hinton (Canada): We congratulate Malta on its
presidency of the Security Council and commend it for
selecting such an important topic for an open debate.
We would also like to thank today’s briefers.
Canada aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Nauru on behalf of
the Group of Friends on Climate and Security.
Sea level rise is already threatening the lives and
livelihoods of the 40 per cent of humankind who live in
coastal communities. Additionally, as we speak, more
than half a billion people around the globe live in lowlying areas, which are most at risk of intense flooding
events and erosion. Sea level rise is also an urgent and
existential threat for the citizens of small island States.
For decades they have been raising the alarm about
the threats that climate change poses for all of us. We
have also seen that the effects of climate change and
sea level rise disproportionately impact women, girls
and indigenous and other historically disadvantaged,
marginalized communities.
Lived experience and ideas for innovative solutions
should be at the centre of our efforts. That work must
be done hand in hand with an active commitment to
supporting the meaningful participation of those worst
affected in order to significantly address climate
change and sea level rise. The Rising Nations Initiative,
launched by Tuvalu and the Marshall Islands, is an
example of such positive action. We need to listen
carefully, and we need to take action.
Canada is actively working in collaboration with
international partners to foster resilience, especially in
the most vulnerable areas. Such efforts cover the different
stages of the consequences of rising sea levels, helping
to prevent, mitigate and adapt to changes. They include
ongoing financial and technical support to several
initiatives, including the Canada-Caribbean Resilience
Facility, a multi-donor partnership administered by the
20/43

14/02/2023

World Bank to strengthen Caribbean States’ resilience
and ability to build back better in the wake of natural
disasters; the CARICOM Climate Adaptation Fund,
which contributes to insulating Caribbean Community
member States from disaster risks; the Ocean Risk and
Resilience Action Alliance, a multi-stakeholder alliance
investing in coastal resilience with a focus on the
global South; and lastly, the Pacific Catastrophe Risk
Assessment and Financing Initiative, which provides
Pacific island countries with disaster-risk modelling
and assessment tools.
(spoke in French)
While today’s discussion focuses specifically on
the effects of sea-level rise on international peace and
security, we also want to acknowledge that the wider
phenomenon of climate change is a threat multiplier
for insecurity and conflict. Canada is working closely
with its allies and partners and with multi-sectoral
stakeholders to set up the NATO Climate Change and
Security Centre of Excellence. The new Centre of
Excellence will help to identify and address the range
and complexity of security risks posed by climate
change. And we will continue to seek opportunities to
do more.
As with other climate-change-related threats, sea
level rise is a global, multigenerational challenge. We
must all do our part to help address rising sea levels and
take action together now to prevent, mitigate and adapt
to their impact. At the same time, we must also raise
public awareness about and work to directly address
the implications of climate change and sea level rise on
international peace and security. The Security Council
should play a central role in those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank Malta
for convening today’s very important debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the General Assembly and all of today’s briefers for
their excellent presentations.
Climate change is one of the defining challenges of
our time. Its catastrophic consequences are multifaceted
and global. It threatens lives and livelihoods and drives
displacement. It is a risk multiplier that contributes to
conflict and insecurity. It disproportionately impacts
women and girls, people living with disabilities and
marginalized groups. The science is clear — a series
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

of reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change have starkly outlined what the future holds if
we do not act urgently. Climate change is an issue that
the entire multilateral system must address if we are to
mitigate and adapt to this crisis. Deepening the Security
Council’s understanding of the link between climate
change and international peace and security was a key
priority for Ireland during our recent term, and we will
continue to draw attention to that connection at the
United Nations. While we were naturally disappointed
by the use of a solitary veto blocking the adoption of the
draft resolution on climate and security (S/2021/990)
led by Ireland and the Niger, it is clear that there is
huge support for that agenda from all across the United
Nations. It is essential for the Council to use the tools
it has at its disposal to address the issue in delivering
on its mandate.
As we have heard today, more than 600 million
people live in low-lying coastal areas. They will be
directly affected by sea-level rise, with many more
impacted through the displacement of people, food
insecurity and a lack of access to resources. As
with so many of the critical issues we discuss at the
United Nations, the impact of sea level rise will be
disproportionately felt by people in low-lying areas
and developing countries, particularly in small island
developing States (SIDS).
As an island State, Ireland is very aware of the
urgency of sea-level rise. We have worked with our SIDS
partners to build resilience and amplify their voice in
important multilateral forums. We are acutely aware of
the need to address the specific vulnerabilities of SIDS.
That is recognized in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and a further important step will be to
ensure that the international financial institutions are
also able to take that deep vulnerability into account.
The legal aspects of the impact of sea level rise are
also crucial. Further study of that area in relation to
international law is timely in the light of the various
unprecedented environmental challenges, particularly
facing low-lying States and small island States. Ireland
very much welcomes the fact that that topic is currently
on the agenda of the International Law Commission
(ILC). We will continue to engage on issues related
to the law of the sea, statehood and the protection of
persons affected by sea level rise. The ILC’s work can
play a role in examining important legal questions
relevant to the challenges posed by sea level rise.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

As other speakers noted today, in addressing the
consequences of sea level rise, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea will clearly be a key
consideration in any response. In that regard, Ireland
reaffirms the universal and unified character of the
Convention, which sets out the legal framework within
which all activities in the oceans and seas must be
carried out.
In conclusion, Ireland wishes to again stress the
importance of the Security Council addressing how
climate change is affecting its ability to deliver on its
mandate. Action now to deepen our understanding of
how climate change is having an impact on insecurity
and conflict is essential if we are to be able to
respond effectively.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Mr.
Humlegård.
Mr. Humlegård: It is my pleasure to address the
Security Council on an issue of central importance to
global security.
In the past years, extreme weather events caused
widespread destruction, killed thousands of people and
displaced millions. To quote from the statement made
by Secretary-General António Guterres at the twentyseventh session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt: “Climate
chaos is a crisis of biblical proportions. The signs
are everywhere.”
Millions of people live in vulnerable contexts,
with low-lying island nations and coastal regions at
risk of land loss. The immediate impacts may differ
across regions and disproportionally strike the most
vulnerable, but the climate crisis affects us all. The
climate crisis is indeed a threat multiplier. Rising sea
levels lead to resource scarcity and organized criminal
groups exploiting them for profit. Climate-induced
migration flows raise the demand for people-smuggling
services. The increased frequency of natural disasters
exacerbates local grievances and fuels conflict,
terrorism, fragility and instability.
There is no one country or organization that can
mitigate the implications of climate risks alone. Even
so, law enforcement plays a crucial role in our collective
response measures. Indeed, the global law enforcement
community is at the front lines of protecting

23-0450421/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

communities and combating the criminal networks that
exploit and fuel natural disasters to their advantage.
INTERPOL’s environmental security programme
and vulnerable communities programme have long
been assisting its 195 member countries in tackling
the climate-security nexus. Furthermore, effective
international law enforcement cooperation will
contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and INTERPOL’s complementary
seven Global Policing Goals. For example, INTERPOL
Global Policing Goal 3 addresses the protection of
vulnerable communities. Global Policing Goal 7, on
environmental security and sustainability, supports the
implementation of 11 Sustainable Development Goals,
including Goal 13, on climate action.
Let us harness the Sustainable Development Goals
and the Global Policing Goals to work together so as
to strengthen our capacity to investigate environmental
crime, protect resource-dependent communities,
build mechanisms to protect biodiversity and natural
resources and disrupt organized crime networks and
the profit element. Let this be a year of strengthened
cooperation and renewed ambitions to secure a
sustainable future for the next generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kiribati.
Mrs. Moote (Kiribati): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate, and
we commend you for the theme that you chose. Kiribati
welcomes the opportunity to provide its perspectives
on the implications of sea level rise for international
peace and security.
There is no doubt that our world is today
experiencing the most significant changes in sea levels
and climate extremes, so much so that even a marginal
increase in sea level rise places the most vulnerable,
particularly low-lying islands and coastal communities,
at an immediate risk. In Kiribati, sea level rise, extreme
weather events, increases in annual and seasonal
temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns are
some impacts of climate change that are constantly
observed. No part of Kiribati’s land rises more than
three metres above sea level. With the changes in our
climate system and with sea level rise, our islands are
facing major and ongoing challenges. Besides eroding
coastlines, food crops have been destroyed and the
fresh-water lens, the source of our drinking water,
contaminated by the intruding sea water.
22/43

14/02/2023

While it is understood that sea level rise affects
every Member State, what is often misunderstood is the
discrepancy in its impact affecting the most vulnerable
low-lying island nations, such as my country, Kiribati,
and why urgent and effective mitigation and adaptation
strategies stand as our only chance to address the risks
posed by sea level rise. Rising seas and climate change
remain the most destructive force, acting against not
only the Government’s efforts to improve the wellbeing of its increasing population, but also people’s
meaningful participation in our economy and in
promoting peace.
Kiribati appreciates the Security Council’s
recognition of the importance of promoting climate
adaptation and resilience through peacebuilding and
climate financing. Similarly, the call on developed
countries to double their provisions on climate finance
to developing countries for adaptation from the 2019
levels by 2025 is an initiative worth considering and
is particularly important to strengthening resilience
measures for small island developing States and other
developing countries with low-lying coastal areas.
To that end, we recommend that our partners and
all members of the international community enhance
their collective efforts to mobilize support and increase
investments with regard to climate change. In that
regard, the Security Council should invite non-Council
members to brief them about the current situations in
the most vulnerable regions, including the Pacific.
Kiribati recognizes the risks that climate change and
sea level rise pose to maritime boundaries. We believe
that such a risk may undermine our territorial integrity
in the future if international law remains immobile in
the face of dynamic changes. Kiribati believes that,
once the delimitation of our maritime boundary is
completed and submitted to the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, maritime boundaries will remain
permanent and that our baselines shall not be affected
by climate-change-induced sea level rise.
The magnitude of the threat of sea level rise and its
consequential implications warrant a holistic approach
that builds synergies among the relevant stakeholders,
be they national Governments, regional organizations
or local actors at the national level. National and local
actors are fundamental to achieving a real impact on
the ground and to improving resilience in the face of
climate change. We need to listen to their experiences
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

in implementing solutions and take into account and
integrate traditional knowledge systems and solutions.
We need to mobilize where progress has been limited.
We also need to increase support and to strengthen
preparedness and early warning initiatives, improving
data gathering and monitoring on climate and sea level
risks as key elements of adaptation. Forging an increased
recognition of the social implications of climate change
through social safeguards is essential. In addition, we
must provide provisions for access to justice for victims
of climate change under international law.
Through its 20-year vision, Kiribati is fully
committed to building the resilience and adaptive
capacity of its people. This 20-year road map and
initiative, under the current President and Government,
advocates self-development and the establishment of
innovative strategic partnerships in order to sustainably
transform this issue through international discourse
describing our future as one sinking island. Kiribati’s
20-year vision encourages the people of Kiribati to
embrace development challenges, including climate
change, and turn them into opportunities.
We therefore join like-minded States in calling for
the immediate recognition of climate change and its
social, security and humanitarian implications under
international law.
Kiribati also believes that peace needs to exist in
homes and communities first before it can be extended
on a wider scale. That includes the protection and wellbeing of our families, women and children. Kiribati
strongly believes that the international community,
including the Security Council, must invest in women
and girls in order to help alleviate the effects of sea
level rise on sustainable peace. They have the voice and
agency to withstand multiple hazards. In that respect,
we need to advance gender-responsiveness in climate
processes by ensuring that global knowledge is shared
and provide platforms for both intergovernmental
agencies and non-governmental organizations to brief
the Council on gender-responsive resilience policies. The
Security Council should therefore consider a resolution
that takes into account both the security implications
of climate change, similar to the resolution proposed
in 2021 and the foundations of resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Samoa.
Mr. Luteru (Samoa): I am pleased to deliver this
statement on behalf of the members of the Alliance

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

of Small Island States (AOSIS), the 39 small island
developing States (SIDS) that are specially affected by
the multiple and intersecting effects of climate change.
We thank the Malta presidency for convening this
very important discussion. We recognize that it builds
upon the work of many in the Council on the issues of
climate change.
There is a litany of new examples of the sudden and
slow-onset impact of climate change on small islands,
from king tides, to super hurricanes, to the unstoppable
and unprecedented rise in sea level. In the interest of
time, we will not recite them here, not because they are
not important, but rather because it is essential that we
talk less and take more action in order to prevent and
minimize the impacts of climate change going forward.
Turning to the questions proposed by the President,
we would like to comment on a few of them.
The impact of climate change on SIDS will continue
to be extraordinary. Our small land masses, populations,
economies and remoteness mean that we have greater
exposure to external economic and environmental
shocks. Climate change will, without a doubt, pose an
existential threat to our way of lives, potentially even
to our economies and communities. But, to be clear, sea
level rise resulting from anthropogenic climate change
does not have an effect on our statehood or sovereignty.
We recall the AOSIS Leaders’ Declaration of
September 2021. In that Declaration, our leaders
affirmed that there is no legal obligation under the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to
keep baselines and the outer limits of maritime zones
under review or to update charts or lists of geographic
coordinates once deposited with the Secretary-General.
Such maritime zones and the rights and entitlements
that flow from them shall continue to apply without
reduction, notwithstanding any physical changes
connected to climate-change-related sea level rise.
We are heartened to see that other States, including
some of the largest coastal States, have adopted a
similar understanding of international law, recognizing
the need to ensure legal stability, security, certainty
and predictability.
On the issue of statehood, we think that the past two
centuries of State practice are abundantly clear. The
Montevideo Convention on the Rights and Duties of
States is not relevant to the question of the continuation

23-0450423/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

14/02/2023

of statehood. Rather, there is a fundamental presumption
of the continuation of statehood in international law.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Marshall Islands.

It would be inequitable and unjust to now suggest
that, in the context of rising sea levels, we should strictly
apply criteria developed in a regional agreement signed
almost a century ago and ratified by 16 countries. Such
criteria, in our view, do not apply to the continuation of
States. We note that the potential loss of land territory
by small islands due to sea level rise is not a natural but
an anthropogenic phenomenon. To make an analogy,
our land territory is being invaded as a result of the
actions or inaction of other States. To now deprive us
of our sovereignty is contrary to a century of State
practice and our interpretation of the relevant law in
this situation.

Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): As a low-lying atoll
island nation, I want to first congratulate Malta, a dear
fellow island nation, on assuming the presidency of the
Council and extend to it our appreciation for convening
this important and critical debate.

It would also constitute an unacceptable exertion
of power by larger States, contrary to the principle
of self-determination. It is our view that once a State
is created by a people expressing their right to selfdetermination, through statehood, that statehood will
cease only if another form of expression of the right to
self-determination is explicitly sought and exercised by
that people. That is the only determinant of whether a
State should continue.
The protection of persons in the face of sea level
rise is a global challenge that requires meaningful
inter-State cooperation. That cooperation is not only
a policy imperative, but also a legal obligation for
every State. While cooperation is a legal obligation, it
is also a matter of equity. AOSIS members are among
the lowest emitters of the greenhouse gases that drive
climate change and sea level rise, yet we face some of
the most severe consequences of rising sea levels. To
expect small island States to shoulder the burden of
sea level rise, without assistance from the international
community, would be the pinnacle of inequity.
More needs to be done. We attach great importance
to discussions on the urgent need to fulfil international
commitments, including on climate change and
finance. We want to note, however, that the UNFCCC
should remain the primary forum for discussions on
climate change.
I again thank the President and the Government of
Malta for convening this timely discussion. We look
forward to continued collaborative discussion on how
we confront this global scourge.
24/43

We have repeatedly outlined not only the
security implications of sea-level rise, but also
action pathways well within the Council’s mandate.
This includes addressing traditional security
benchmarks — forced displacement and resettlement
between populations — and overall fragility, as well
as unpacking complex issues concerning resilience
and sovereignty itself. For atoll and low-lying island
nations like my own, these are not sudden issues. We
have considered these security implications since the
earliest climate policy discussions.
The Security Council must spare no effort in seeking
to build upon its presidential statement of 20 July 2011,
in which the Council expressed “concern that possible
security implications of loss of territory of some States
caused by sea-level-rise may arise, in particular in small
low-lying island States.” (S/PRST/2011/15, p. 2) Where
the Council does not speak further, individual members
can and must act. Many of the needed tools are already
in front of the Council, and more focused action from
the international system can be invited. What is needed
most is the political will to start the job, supported by a
United Nations special representative.
I would like to offer the Council the following
three points.
First, the Council should take note of the ongoing
action taken by the Marshall Islands and in concert with
actions of Pacific Island Forum members regarding
geo-referenced maritime boundaries. These boundaries
are intended to preserve both stability and the legal
definition of our unique regional characteristics,
including our Pacific waters. Our own territorial
integrity and sovereignty remain defined as state
practice, even as we face severe threats, including sea
level rise.
Secondly, it should address the importance of
security and common state fragility in our Oceania
region and encourage the United Nations system,
including the Peacebuilding Fund, to strengthen
engagement in supporting national structures for
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

security, including climate dimensions, and to spur
further local community engagement. The international
system can invite and encourage collective action in this
regard between low-lying atoll nations, within regions
and between small island developing States.
Thirdly, it should identify the scale of resilience and
adaptation actions, including large-scale interventions,
needed to reduce security risks from sea level rise
inundation. As a practical matter, the Council can
examine at least a baseline assessment and if are those
actions being taken adequately, or why they are not.
Just because the questions are tough, or the nations
concerned are remote and small, that is no reason for
the Council to fail to take adequate action, particularly
regarding a region that is now realizing wider geostrategic engagement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya’s delegation
congratulates Malta on its assumption to the presidency
of the Security Council during the month of February
and for convening this debate on a matter of utmost
urgency and importance.
The rising sea levels due to climate change present
a real threat to state sovereignty and the very existence
of nations, particularly small island developing States
(SIDS). It is already creating environmental refugees,
worsening socioeconomic crises, destroying coastal
infrastructure and, generally, creating or worsening
conditions for conflict. Clearly, any inaction and
lack of ambition in addressing this global crisis will
be extremely costly. We must marshal and direct all
resources — human, institutional and financial — to
a multisectoral and multipronged approach to climate
action by the whole multilateral system, and this
Council must be on board.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Secondly, the Security Council must recognize the
climate and peace and security nexus, and in so doing,
can incorporate climate adaptation and mitigation
measures in all its work, including peacekeeping
and special political mandates, and ensure their
faithful implementation.
Thirdly, we must build upon the work of the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), which is the
centre of environmental multilateralism. We need to tap
into UNEP’s work across the fields of science, policy
and technology, to better coordinate our collective
action for climate resilience and green economies.
Fourthly, ultimately, to slow down sea level rise,
all — and especially industrialized countries — must
drastically reduce their greenhouse gas emissions to
achieve their Paris Agreement targets. They must also,
in line with their commitments, provide support to
developing countries, including small island developing
States, to build their resilience and adaptation in the
face of the climate crisis.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): I would like to thank Malta for
convening this debate and the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly, Minister Aurescu
and Director Pasisi for their interventions.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the European Union and with
that to be delivered by Nauru, on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security.

In this connection and as an affected coastal State,
Kenya underscores the following four imperatives.

Today’s debate gives us the opportunity to point out
why sea level rise represents a threat to international
peace and security, enabling us to define a common
strategy for this specific aspect of the climate-security
nexus. We need to raise awareness on the existential
threat posed by sea level rise, which can lead to the
permanent submergence of land and the disappearance
of entire coastal areas across the world. Extreme sea
levels are also causing more frequent flooding, loss of
ecosystems and salinization of soils.

First, as the leading multilateral actor in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council can shine an important light on
sea level rise and its implications for conflict. At a
minimum, this will encourage all stakeholders to act
with more urgency and ambition as the issue rises on
the list of global priorities.

As a direct consequence, the very survival of many
small island developing States is at risk, while other
climate-vulnerable countries are experiencing damage
to their infrastructure and losses in their industries.
Poverty, food insecurity, a scarcity of resources,
displacement and immigration are also linked to
sea level rise in many coastal areas. Those factors

23-0450425/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

combined are key drivers of conflict and a threat
multiplier, endangering peace and security not only
in the States most affected but also at the regional and
global levels. We therefore believe that every organ of
the United Nations should take coordinated multilateral
action to address the adverse implications of climate
change. That would help both Member States and
regional organizations in stepping up their climate
action to fulfil their international commitments. By
the same token, the Security Council should tackle
the accompanying security implications, such as those
resulting from sea level rise.
Mitigation and adaptation should be further
integrated into the formulation of mandates for United
Nations peacekeeping missions. As the co-Chair,
with Bangladesh, of the Group of Friends Leading on
Environmental Management in the Field, Italy is engaged
in shaping solutions that can enable peace operations to
perform in a sustainable way. Financial support is also
critical. In that regard, we welcome the investments of
the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund in support
of building and sustaining peace in relation to the
effects of climate change. We should also continue to
address the legal implications of rising sea levels. Italy
commends the Study Group of the International Law
Commission for its work, while recalling the centrality
of the legal framework enshrined in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. In conclusion, it
is our hope that the Security Council will continue to
address the threats posed by sea level rise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tonga.
Mr. Tōnē (Tonga): It is a pleasure to join everyone
today for this important event. I am pleased to be
making these remarks on behalf of the member States
of the Pacific Islands Forum that have a presence at
the United Nations. We continue to endorse this open
debate, with a focus on the implications of sea level rise
for international peace and security, a topic well suited
to the primary responsibility of the Security Council
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Climate change remains the single greatest
existential threat facing the Blue Pacific, and in 2022,
Pacific leaders declared a climate emergency in our
region. Indeed, climate-change-related sea level rise is
a threat multiplier for our people on many levels. The
international community will have to address important
26/43

14/02/2023

questions, including in relation to statehood, maritime
zones, rights and entitlements.
A major step that should be taken to safeguard
international peace and security in the face of
climate-change-related sea level rise is the preservation
and maintenance of our maritime zones established in
accordance with the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Through their
groundbreaking Declaration on Preserving Maritime
Zones in the Face of Climate Change-related SeaLevel Rise, Pacific leaders reaffirmed the threats
of climate change and sea-level rise as the defining
issue imperilling the livelihoods and well-being of
our peoples and undermining the full realization of a
peaceful, secure and sustainable future for our region.
Our leaders proclaimed that our maritime zones,
and the rights and entitlements that flow from them, will
continue to apply without reduction, notwithstanding any
physical changes connected to climate-change-related
sea level rise. The Declaration emphasizes the primacy
and centrality of UNCLOS, which itself was adopted
as an important contribution to the maintenance of
peace, justice and progress for all peoples. Importantly,
the Declaration is also rooted in the principles of
legal stability, security, certainty and predictability
that underpin the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. We welcome statements from States
and organizations endorsing the Declaration and once
again extend our call to the rest of the international
community to join them. We also strongly support and
endorse the work of the International Law Commission
(ILC) in its current study of the topic of sea level rise in
relation to international law.
Next month, from 27 to 30 March, our region will
assemble to unpack the complex legal issues created by
sea-level rise and its implications for statehood and the
protection of the people it affects. This represents our
region’s concerted effort to contribute meaningfully to
the important work of the ILC’s second issues paper
(A/CN.4/752), because the issues it addresses are of
critical importance to the future of our people as they
face the growing threats to their welfare, safety and
security posed by rising sea levels. We welcome the
work of the Security Council in supporting these efforts
and taking relevant concrete measures. We stand ready
to provide the necessary support, including by sharing
information on matters raised today. In that regard,
we reiterate our call for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General for climate
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

change and security, who would inform the work of the
Security Council and the General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Rai (Papua New Guinea): At the outset,
I would like to pay special tribute to the Maltese
presidency of the Council for the month of February
in organizing today’s timely and much-needed
meeting, and also to thank our briefers. The Council’s
engagement on this topical issue is welcome and should
be further encouraged.
Sea level rise is one of the effects of the global
warming caused by human-induced greenhouse-gas
pollution of the Earth’s atmosphere. The science
is clear, as highlighted by the 2022 report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which in
part notes that some coastal communities in the tropics
have lost entire coral-reef ecosystems that once helped
sustain their food security and livelihoods. Others
have been forced to leave low-lying neighbourhoods
and cultural sites as sea levels rise. The significant
adverse effects that sea level rise has on lives and
livelihoods in coastal and island communities include
coastal erosion, saltwater contamination of the soil and
drinking water, more powerful storm surges, extensive
flooding, uninhabitable land and the dislocation and
displacement of peoples and entire communities. In
my own country, Papua New Guinea, the ominous
march of the rising sea levels in our outer small islands
and coastal communities continues to worsen and is
a serious concern. Low-lying Pacific atoll nations are
facing a grave existential risk. Rising sea levels are
also a potential trigger for conflicts and tensions over
the use of limited resources between displaced and
dislocated persons and their new communities. That is
why we have made it a priority to address this issue
through our regional efforts now and going forward.
Our lived reality is that rising sea levels pose
a serious threat to our sustainable development,
security and well-being. The results of sea level rise
for communities and countries are devastating and
often irreversible, and the losses and damages will
only increase as global temperatures continue to rise.
That is why we are urging the Security Council to
effectively address non-traditional security issues such
as this. In our view, the Council’s preventive role, as
provided for in Article 1, paragraph 1 of the Charter
of the United Nations, is instructive in this context.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

The Council must not wait until it is too late to act on
issues that have serious implications for international
peace and security, such as sea level rise and the
climate-security nexus. We therefore strongly support
the International Law Commission’s ongoing work on
addressing sea level rise in relation to international
law. The Security Council would do well to draw on the
Commission’s important work.
A key concern for Papua New Guinea and the
Pacific region is the importance of the protection
of persons displaced by sea level rise. The duty of
international cooperation, which is well recognized in
international law, must be operationalized to address
that human rights and humanitarian issue. Another
crucial but related issue for us concerns maritime
zones under the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea. We therefore join the call for attention to
the Pacific Islands Forum’s Declaration on Preserving
Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-related
Sea-Level Rise, issued by our leaders in August 2021,
about which Pacific small island developing States and
the Pacific Forum Chair spoke earlier. Another serious
implication posed by sea level rise is the fundamental
issue of sovereignty, particularly for countries that
may in future be submerged by the ocean. We strongly
believe that existing statehood cannot be extinguished
by sea level rise, as a matter of international law. That
cannot be taken for granted.
Noting the nexus between sea level rise and climate
change and their security implications for global peace
and security, we urge Council members to be proactive,
based on evidence and science, in order to better account
for today’s realities while respecting their mandate, as
provided for under the Charter of the United Nations.
We also call on those Council members who continue
to question the nexus between climate change and
security to be realistic about the perils that climate
change poses to international peace and security. In
Papua New Guinea’s view, the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, has an important role
to play in the climate-security nexus. We join others
in reiterating the call for the appointment of a special
representative on climate and security, who could serve
as a focal point for the climate-security nexus in the
United Nations system.
In conclusion, Papua New Guinea wishes to
associate itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Samoa on behalf of the Alliance

23-0450427/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

14/02/2023

of Small Island States and of Tonga on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum.

people in least developed countries and small island
developing States.

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.

The International Law Commission (ILC) is
currently examining the topic “Sea level rise in relation
to international law” in three main areas: the law of the
sea, statehood and the protection of persons affected by
sea level rise. We stand ready to support that process.
Any responses to the consequences of that slow-onset
phenomenon should ensure the preservation of stability
and security in international relations, including legal
stability and security. In accordance with the ILC’s
mandate, such responses need to be in line with and
respect the legal framework established by the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS),
which reflects customary international law. UNCLOS
sets out the legal framework within which all activities
in the oceans and seas must be carried out and
establishes mandatory mechanisms for the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Mr. Gonzato: The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the potential candidate country Georgia align
themselves with this statement.
Climate change, with sea level rise being a direct
consequence thereof, is a core driver of conflict and
a risk multiplier. As explained by previous speakers,
sea level rise poses substantial threats to many coastal
States, including small island developing States. For
that reason, we would like to thank Malta for further
advancing the importance of the climate-security nexus
on the agenda of the Security Council. We also thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the General
Assembly and the other briefers for their insights.
To minimize those threats, a joined-up approach
on the part of the international community as a whole
is necessary. It is also important to adopt a whole-ofsociety approach that includes all stakeholders,
especially women and young people. Partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations are equally
important in that regard. It is timely and urgent that
the Security Council take up its role in addressing
the adverse effects of climate change on peace and
security. It should also systematically integrate
climate-related security issues, where appropriate, in
its resolutions and should continue to work towards
adopting a comprehensive approach to tackling the
security concerns of climate change, including through
reconsidering the adoption of a resolution on climate
change and security. Moreover, it should consider the
creation of the position of special representative on
climate and security.
We acknowledge that the United Nations climate
and security mechanism contributes to enhanced
coordination, integrated analysis and education within
the United Nations system. The establishment of
the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security
is also an important tool that can help the Security
Council react to threats of climate change. We further
welcome the Secretary-General’s announcement on
early warning systems. In that regard, the Climate
Risk and Early Warning Systems initiative saves lives,
assets and livelihoods by providing increased access
to early weather warnings and risk information for
28/43

The European Union (EU) takes an integrated
approach to climate change and security in its external
action, including through crisis responses and conflict
management. As the world’s biggest contributor of
climate finance and a major humanitarian donor, we
support disaster-risk reduction, anticipatory action,
adaptation and mitigation efforts. For example, through
the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery,
we support more than 140 programmes conducted by
African, Caribbean and Pacific States and regional
institutions to implement disaster-risk reduction
activities. As the current chair of the Platform on Disaster
Displacement, we aim to strengthen efforts to address
the challenge of population displacement prompted
by disasters, climate change and environmental
degradation. Through the EU Global Climate Change
Alliance Plus initiative, we have funded more than 80
adaptation programmes in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean
and the Pacific. Finally, we supported the establishment
of new funding arrangements responding to loss and
damage at the twenty-seventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda.
Mr. Thomas (Antigua and Barbuda): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

(CARICOM), for which sea level rise poses an
existential threat.
Peace and security in the Caribbean region is
progressively being decimated by sea level rise. Our
economic viability, health, well-being and cultural
and social way of life are all under threat, as are the
development gains achieved over the years. Historically,
sea level rise was merely seen as one of the main effects
of climate change, dating back to the early years of
the climate negotiations. Today, however, the absence
of concrete, collective action on climate change has
made sea level rise a devasting and crippling reality for
many of our countries. The flat, low-lying topography
and porous limestone bedrock of the Caribbean basin
make our region especially vulnerable to sea level rise,
with the best available science predicting a very grim
reality in the not-too-distant future. The retreat of our
coastlines affects vital ecosystems and biodiversity,
as well as the lives, livelihoods and communities that
rely on them. The effects of sea level rise globally can
therefore exacerbate the vulnerability of populations,
especially those already in situations of armed conflict,
violence or fragility, and whose capacity to cope with
climate shocks and changes is limited.
That leads us to the ongoing international debate on
sea level rise in relation to the law of the sea, statehood
and the protection of persons. CARICOM aligns itself
with the following positions of the Alliance of Small
Island States.
First, on the law of the sea, there is no obligation
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea to keep the baselines and outer limits of maritime
zones under review or to update charts or lists of
geographical coordinates once they have been deposited
with the Secretary-General. Moreover, such maritime
time zones and the rights and entitlements that flow
from them shall continue to apply without reduction,
notwithstanding any physical changes connected to
climate-change-related sea level rise.
Secondly, with regard to statehood, there is a
fundamental presumption of the continuation of
statehood in international law. The potential loss of land
territory by small islands because of sea level rise is not
a natural phenomenon, but is anthropogenic in cause.
Sea level rise therefore does not affect our peoples’
ability to express their right to self-determination
through statehood. That would be grossly inequitable
and unjust.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Thirdly, regarding the protection of persons, there
is a legal duty of cooperation, which establishes an
obligation for the international community to assist the
States that are most affected by sea level rise, which
includes the CARICOM States.
It should also be noted that our region is doing its
utmost to prevent assaults on our peace and security
by sea level rise through climate change adaptation
actions. That is done to the greatest extent possible with
the limited resources at our disposal. Nevertheless,
there are limits to what we, as a region, can adapt to.
As an international community, we must
simultaneously plan and organize a system to address
the inevitable loss and damage, which are uprooting our
peace and security. That calls on us to provide equitable
solutions that are in line with countries’ international
obligations and rights to address in a systemic manner
difficult issues, such as climate change displacement,
including the treatment of climate refugees. Having a
truly international plan and system for addressing such
climate-change-related disrupters to international peace
and security will allow for its continued maintenance.
Going forward, we urge the Security Council
to work closely with the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change by inputting into a
coordinated approach to address this common concern
of humankind and to give adequate attention to the
humanitarian consequences of climate-related security
risks. Our CARICOM region will continue its pursuit
for climate justice, and we call on the international
community to assist in protecting our peace and
security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tuvalu.
Mr. Falefou (Tuvalu): Let me first thank the
briefers for their statements. I also thank Malta for
having convened this open debate.
I stand here today as a living reminder that the
issues being discussed are central to the lives and
livelihoods of my people. The impacts of sea level rise,
its implications and its consequences are not just ideas
or statistics that are read out in statements. For Tuvalu
and many of our fellow small islands and developing
countries, those are the realities that we face every day.
For us, the threats that sea level rise represent to our
sovereignty and statehood are not hypothetical. The
extensional threat that we face is real. It is forecast that

23-0450429/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

this century, several Pacific island nations, including
my own, Tuvalu, will lose considerable territory to
the rising sea level, with some becoming completely
uninhabitable. We are facing the complete inundation
of our land by seawater.
The Charter of the United Nations and our current
international system are founded on the fundamental
principles of territorial integrity. Yet, for us, that is
being eroded on an epic scale. How are our people
to preserve their heritage, culture and rights? What
obligations are owed towards our protection and the
safeguarding of our sovereignty?
We are not contributing at all to the current climate
crisis. The Pacific islands, as a whole, account for less
than 0.03 per cent of the world’s current total carbon
emissions, far less in terms of historical emissions.
Yet we are the ones at the forefront of the impending
climate disaster. We are already facing the terrible
consequences of sea level rise. Rising sea water has
penetrated and contaminated our groundwaters, causing
crops and vegetation to die. We are losing precious
coral, which supports the marine life that provides our
daily protein consumption and ensures our overall food
security. Higher tides are increasing the intensity of the
storms that we face, devastating our homes and fields.
Our young people and families are being forced to
move, with some leaving and our communities drifting
apart. That is today, and the situation is only going to
get worse.
Tuvalu and our Pacific brothers and sisters have
been raising alarm bells in international forums for
several years now. We are deeply grateful for the
support of many countries, the representatives of some
of which spoke today on this critical topic, which is
a serious security concern for us. This morning, we
heard speaker after speaker raising the threat posed by
rising sea level and asking what should be done. The
Secretary-General also asked for innovative legal and
practical solutions to address its impact on the very
existence of the land territory of some countries.
Let me put forward Tuvalu’s views on what
is needed, as outlined by my Prime Minister, the
Honourable Kausea Natano. Apart from the urgent
efforts to address such issues within climate change
mitigation and adaptation, we need a global settlement
that guarantees nation States, such as mine, a
permanent existence beyond the inhabitable life of our
actual homes — one that recognizes and protects our
30/43

14/02/2023

cultural integrity, our human and economic capital and
our sovereignty.
As our briefer Ms. Pasisi, Director of Climate
Change of the Pacific Community, said so eloquently
this morning, any solution must be jointly created and
enacted with the peoples and Governments of island
nations, not visited upon us by others. To achieve that,
we urgently need a global dialogue that acknowledges
the realities and rights of the States Members of the
United Nations that face an existential threat from
rising sea level.
Tuvalu and other countries are already taking
important steps. The Pacific islands are pressing for
action in international legal forums and processes.
We initiated the Future Now project in 2021 to take a
proactive stance for Tuvalu amid climate change. Last
year, at an event on the sidelines of the seventy-seventh
session of the General Assembly, Prime Minister
Natano and President Kabua of the Marshall Islands
launched the Rising Nations Initiative to fill the current
gaps in awareness, the legal framework and political
commitment and bring the international community
together to support our push for a global solution. I
therefore count on everybody’s support in taking action
now. We cannot wait any longer.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the delegation of Malta for
convening this open debate on a particularly relevant
topic, given the fact that sea level rise directly affects
more than 70 States, which is to say more than a third
of the international community. As we all well know,
the phenomenon is already having a growing impact on
many vital aspects of life for coastal areas, low-lying
coastal States and small island States, especially for
their populations. Another fairly large group of States is
also likely to be indirectly affected, for example by the
displacement of populations, a lack of access to resources
or threats to food security. Sea level rise has become
a global phenomenon and therefore creates problems
that affect the international community as a whole. The
phenomenon of climate change and its negative impact
are undeniable realities. We must address the issue as
a threat to international peace and security. If we delay
or fail to take firm and immediate action, there will be
devastating long-term consequences.
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The Charter of the United Nations calls on us to
promote international economic and social cooperation
to ensure the highest possible standards of living,
universal respect for human rights and peaceful
solutions to international economic and social issues.
That is the principle that should guide Member States
in taking action to resolve those issues, in accordance
with the principle of sovereign equality among States
and their national legal systems. Sea level rise can
potentially lead to tensions in relations among States,
which is when the Security Council should exercise
the primary role assigned to it by Chapter VI of the
Charter by urging the parties concerned to settle
such disputes peacefully, including through forums
such as the International Court of Justice and the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea. In that
regard, the Council should focus on conflict prevention
and resolution by peaceful means, based on scientific
evidence, which should also include increased
cooperation with the Economic and Social Council in
addressing such problems. In exceptional cases, the
Security Council is duty-bound to resort to Chapter VII
when such disputes threaten to breach the peace.
International cooperation efforts should include
assistance and capacity transfer to developing countries,
including island States, so that they can address their
adaptation needs in the face of the effects of climate
change. Sea level rise leads to flooding in low-lying
coastal areas and islands. Guatemala is cognizant of
the consequences that such events may have within
the context of the law of the sea and the sovereignty
of States. We therefore urge States to continue their
cooperation with the International Law Commission to
clarify how the international legal regime can respond
to such situations. In that regard, it is important to
ensure that the international legal order can provide
States with an adequate level of certainty and stability
where their respective sovereign rights are concerned,
in accordance with the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. We also stress the importance of
preventive measures and regional action, an example
of which is the Greater Caribbean Climate Mobility
Initiative, which promotes a regional vision and road
map for collecting data, modelling future climate
mobility, holding consultations and developing a
common action agenda.
In conclusion, Guatemala reiterates its commitment
to the Charter. It is critical that we immediately address

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

the consequences of climate change, and we must take
decisive action before it is too late.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): We thank the Maltese
presidency for convening this important debate,
and we would like to thank all the briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.
Ukraine has always been a promoter of intensified
and concerted action aimed at addressing climate
change as a global threat to international peace and
security. In particular, in April 2017, during its term
as an elected member of the Security Council from
2016 to 2017, Ukraine organized an Arria Formula
meeting on the security implications of sea level rise.
It is well known that rising sea levels undermine the
viability of low-lying regions around the world that lack
higher areas as well. Small island developing States
will be particularly affected by rising sea levels that
will inevitably undermine the prospects for their future
existence. As much as 73 per cent of island States will
face increasingly dry conditions by the middle of the
century as rising sea levels swallow up their coastlines.
It is not just a matter of climate but of those countries’
own security and of global security more broadly.
The displacement of people, the destruction of critical
infrastructure and the changes in coastlines caused by
sea level rise are particularly worrisome in regions that
are already experiencing political and socioeconomic
tensions, and they may result in additional or heightened
threats to peace and security.
At the same time, climate-induced sea level rise
is mostly a slow-onset event that provides individual
Member States and the United Nations in general with
significant time to prepare and respond. It is therefore
alarming that Russia’s aggressive behaviour has been
multiplying conflicts and thereby undermining our
ability to concentrate on resolving existing global
threats. It reveals the interlinkages within the global
security architecture, as the Russian invasion of Ukraine
has affected the world’s ability to efficiently address
climate-related threats. The war has also aggravated the
world food crisis, affecting mostly countries suffering
from current effects of climate change, especially
catastrophic droughts and large-scale flooding. It means
that as soon as a comprehensive just and lasting peace
in Ukraine, based on the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, is achieved, our concerted actions

23-0450431/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

to combat global threats such as climate change, and to
protect countries exposed to sea level rise, will be more
efficient and targeted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ian Borg, Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs and Trade of Malta,
for presiding over the open debate this morning. I am
grateful to the Permanent Mission of Malta, and the
Maltese presidency of the Security Council for this
month, for convening a debate on such an increasingly
important issue, as the negative consequences of
climate change continue and may impact international
peace and security. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres, President Kőrösi
of the General Assembly and the other briefers for their
comprehensive statements.
The links between sea level rise and international
peace and security are complex and interconnected.
The continuing rise in sea levels is creating challenges
that may threaten the political, economic and security
stability of societies and thereby lead to conflicts.
Moreover, rising sea levels have the potential to force
the collective migration of local communities and could
strain resources in countries hosting them, increasing
tensions and creating instability.
In that context, the United Nations and its Member
States have a critical role to play in addressing that
global challenge. Rising sea levels require collective
and concerted efforts nationally and internationally in
order to mitigate their effects and prevent their likely
consequences for international peace and security. We
should also find sustainable solutions for all.
As an island state, the Kingdom of Bahrain believes
that climate change represents a global challenge that
requires global solutions. Under the leadership of His
Majesty King Hamad Bin Issa Al Khalifa, we placed
the principle of sustainable development at the core
of our national strategy, particularly through the 2030
Bahrain Economic Vision.
At the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh Conferences
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, held in Glasgow, United
Kingdom, and Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, respectively,
His Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad Al
Khalifa, Crown Prince and Prime Minister, reaffirmed
32/43

14/02/2023

the Kingdom of Bahrain’s commitment to reaching
carbon neutrality by 2060. To that end, we adopted a
set of short-term goals to reduce emissions by 30 per
cent by 2035 through carbon reduction initiatives,
direct investment in carbon-capture technologies, and
measures to enhance energy efficiency and multiply
renewable energy sources.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has also conducted the
necessary studies to assess the impact of sea level rise
on coastal areas. We have developed a long-term plan
commensurate with the scale of the challenges at hand
and the nature of the priority areas to be protected. The
Kingdom of Bahrain is keen to exchange best practices
in the field of environmental affairs and climate change,
in which we are utilizing all available resources to
bolster joint efforts and seek out opportunities and
advanced solutions to ensure climate security, in line
with the aspirations of the countries of the world and
the Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain underscores
the importance of harnessing all capabilities and the
exchange of experiences and best practices in order to
contribute to tackling climate change, which constitutes
a global challenge that may have dire consequences for
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nauru.
Mrs. Deiye (Nauru): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends on
Climate and Security — a broad and diverse group of
more than 60 States from all regions of the world.
On behalf of the Group, let me first congratulate
Malta on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and extend our appreciation for the convening
of this open debate on the important topic of sea
level rise and its implications for international peace
and security.
Sea level rise, fuelled by climate change, poses
a substantial threat to island nations and coastal
communities around the world. An average sea level
rise of 25 to 58 centimetres along the coastlines of
island States is predicted already by the middle of this
century. Depending on various temperature scenarios,
it is estimated that between 130 million and half a
billion people live in areas that will be submerged in
the long run. That will be devastating, particularly for
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

small island developing States, in which one third of the
population live 5 metres above sea level.
To contain that threat, it is essential that the
global community accelerate its efforts to adapt and
mitigate climate change and keep a 1.5ºC limit on
temperature rise within reach. To that end, States
must take ambitious actions in their implementation
of the Paris Agreement and the decisions under that
Agreement, including the Glasgow Climate Pact and
the Sharm El-Sheikh Implementation Plan. Measures
must also be taken to fast-track women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in preventing and
addressing climate-affected conflicts in relation to sea
level rise. We also need to enhance efforts to contain
the security consequences of rising sea levels through
initiatives aimed at increasing the resilience of States
to climate change, in particular with regard to disasterrisk reduction. As such, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s announcement on early warning systems.
It is agreed by all that climate change is causing
a multidimensional crisis with repercussions for
sustainable development, including climate-related
displacement, food security and growing inequalities,
all of which increase the risk of conflict and,
prospectively, inter-State tensions. We need to recognize
the links between climate change, energy security,
forced displacement, peacebuilding, human security,
development, gender inequality and the protection
of human rights. Recognizing the multidimensional
relationship between climate change and peace is crucial
for developing effective and sustainable responses to
the challenges posed to peacebuilding. In that regard,
we stress the importance of the Secretary-General’s
Peacebuilding Fund investments in support of building
and sustaining peace in relation to the implications of
climate change.
In particular, we welcome the collaboration
between the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) on the
first climate security project in the Pacific. The project
represents the first multi-country initiative of its kind
in the Pacific region, proposing concrete assessments
and actions at all levels to tackle climate-related
security risks. Similarly, in Africa, the IOM has been
working together with the World Bank and other bodies
in the United Nations system, as well as regional
partners, on the Africa Climate Mobility Initiative. The
Initiative is evidence-based and aimed at generating

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

political momentum around a common policy agenda
and mobilizing resources for the implementation of
comprehensive and locally anchored solutions to address
climate mobility and displacement. That is a good
practice that could be implemented in other contexts.
We have repeatedly — and I mean repeatedly and
repeatedly — called for the following to be considered:
first, regular reporting by the Secretary-General on
the security implications of climate change; secondly,
the appointment of a special representative on climate
insecurity, who could improve the ability of the United
Nations to address climate-related security risks;
thirdly, climate-sensitive prevention, mediation and
peacebuilding and the inclusion of women in those
processes; fourthly, training for all relevant United
Nations personnel on the implications of climate
change on peace and security and humanitarian crises;
and fifthly, enhanced cooperation with civil society,
regional and national actors.
The entire United Nations system must address
that challenge in all relevant forums and with all
relevant mandates. The Climate Security Mechanism
is a laudable example of inter-agency cooperation,
strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
system to analyse and address the adverse impacts of
climate change on peace and security. We encourage
all Member States to continue to support and engage
with the Climate Security Mechanism. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s call for an increased focus on
the effects of climate change on peace and security in
his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), and we
ask the Security Council to take on our suggestions to
help drive action to address the security implications of
climate change and resulting sea level rise.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Niger.
Mr. Ousman (Niger) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the delegation of the Niger, I wish to congratulate
Malta for organizing this important debate on the
implications of sea level rise for international peace and
security. We are heartened to see that more and more
Council members are placing the security implications
of climate change on the agenda during their Council
presidencies. That is a sign of the growing interest in
the topic and allows us to engage in frank discussions
on the facts of such a pressing issue.

23-0450433/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

I would like to thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and all the other
speakers for their inspiring briefings this morning.
In line with the joint initiative of Ireland and the
Niger of December 2021 (see S/2021/990), we remain of
the view that the adoption of a resolution on the security
risks of climate change will strengthen the capacity of
the Security Council to better understand and address
that phenomenon, within its mandate, and enable it to
take informed action to address those risks. That would
include improved data collection, monitoring and
analysis of the effects of climate change in the context
of armed conflict and humanitarian emergencies.
Climate change is already reshaping our world. In
Africa, climate shocks and sea level rise are already
causing loss and damage, forcing people to abandon
their homelands and livelihoods in search of safer land
and new income opportunities.
The arid and semi-arid countries of the Sahelian
belt and the Horn of Africa are among the most
vulnerable regions of the African continent. Increasing
climate risks in a warming world threaten to further
undermine our infrastructure, agriculture and our
peoples’ livelihoods. Pastoralists, fishing communities
and small farmers are among the most vulnerable
groups, leading to conflicts over access to and control
of increasingly scarce natural resources. By 2050,
climate-related impacts are expected to increase the
numbers of people moving to rapidly growing African
cities, many of which are in vulnerable coastal areas,
especially in West Africa. To avoid uncontrolled
movements that expose people to new risks, populations
and communities facing climate stressors must be
provided with the information and resources that they
need to make informed decisions concerning if, when
and where to move.
That is why in building on the continental efforts of
the African Climate Mobility Initiative, the Government
of the Niger will work closely with the Global Centre
for Climate Mobility to conduct an in-depth national
analysis of the migration dynamics that are triggered by
climate change in our country. The goal is to develop
a master plan to integrate climate mobility into the
Niger’s adaptation and development plans. Thanks
to our unique geographic location and experience in
hosting refugees and managing our own internally
displaced people in recent years, the Niger now finds
itself called on to play a major role in the quest for
34/43

14/02/2023

solutions to the consequences of climate disruption in
the Sahel. That is why, at the twenty-seventh session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, President
Mohamed Bazoum pledged to act as a champion of
climate mobility and work with other States that are
similarly affected to encourage the international
community’s attention and support to the issue. And we
see ourselves standing in solidarity with the States and
peoples of the Pacific islands who are facing existential
threats related to those issues.
Climate change is a threat multiplier for States
and social cohesion, including in Africa. We have
seen the cross-border effects that result from States’
vulnerabilities and the risks posed to human and
regional security in our neighbourhood. But while
climate change does have implications for international
security, it is first and foremost a threat to the security
and the well-being of the people and communities most
affected. We must therefore prioritize the development
needs and aspirations of our people and protect them
with adequate investments in climate adaptation. In
the interests of international peace and security, we
cannot fail that test and lose the trust of the public. We
have an opportunity to build resilience in Africa and
other regions that are vulnerable to climate change, but
the window for delivering on that promise is closing
rapidly. It is therefore high time that the promises made
to developing countries were kept.
Let us work together to put people at the heart of our
collective response to the climate crisis. Every organ of
the United Nations, including the Security Council, has
a role to play in that fight.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): I would like to thank
Mr. Ian Borg, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
and Trade of Malta, for convening today’s important
debate during Malta’s presidency of the Council for
the month of February. I would also like to thank the
eminent experts for providing us with valuable insights
in their briefings earlier today.
I align my statement with that delivered by the
representative of Samoa as the Chair of the Alliance of
Small Island States.
I was just nine years old back then, but I vividly
remember that day — the day the surge of tidal waves
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

inundated my island and flooded my house. My father
was desperately piling sacks of sand to prevent more
water from entering our home. I remember being
very scared, thinking to myself that my home, my
island, was sinking. That was in 1987, when king tides
inundated much of our capital city, Malé, causing
extensive damage. Of course, it was a time when
climate change and its science were very much in their
infancy. However, the floods in Malé gave credence to
the growing belief in the links between greenhouse-gas
emissions, rising global temperatures and consequent
sea level rise. It would soon become increasingly clear
that the world was facing a serious environmental
challenge and one that leaves low-lying islands among
the most vulnerable areas.
In response, the Government of the Maldives
initiated an emergency conference on the issue of
sea level rise, inviting 14 ministers from small island
States, as well as scientists and observers. It was
the first meeting of its kind highlighting the threats
that global warming and sea level rise pose to small
islands and signalling the unequivocal need for the
broadest possible international cooperation to manage
the impending crisis. Ultimately, it was that early
conference that culminated in the establishment of
the Alliance of Small Island States. Looking back,
it is astonishing, and in some ways depressing, that
more than 30 years later we are still negotiating and
discussing the issue of the implications of sea level rise
and what needs to be done.
Today all of humankind is standing on the
precipice of a triple planetary crisis — the interlinked
issues of climate change, pollution and biodiversity
loss — which, if left it to its own devices, could
destabilize the Earth’s systems. That is a sentiment that
echoes the very essence of a recent Earth Commission
presentation, which took place at the World Economic
Forum last month. While 80 per cent of our islands
are a metre above sea level and 50 per cent of all our
housing structures are within just 100 metres of the
coastline, rising sea levels and extreme weather events
pose serious threats to the very existence of small island
States such as mine, the Maldives. The sixth assessment
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) has made it amply evident that lowlying islands, including the Maldives, are particularly
vulnerable to the cumulative and cascading risks of
climate events. But while we may be a small country,
our size has not hindered our resolve and might in being

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

a defined voice in climate advocacy among Member
States, especially in the time since the Security Council
held its first debate on security and climate, almost 16
years ago (see S/PV.5663). Most recently, in 2019 our
Foreign Minister, Mr. Abdulla Shahid, reminded the
Council that a rise in sea levels of two metres would
submerge the Maldives in its entirety (see S/PV.8451).
My delegation would like to highlight that human
activity has contributed to abrupt and large-scale
changes in our planet’s systems. The scientific data and
evidence are abundantly clear that the effects of climate
change on our oceans and their biodiversity will continue
to worsen. It is therefore incumbent on policymakers to
heed the planetary boundaries framework that scientists
and experts have called for. The IPCC anticipates that
sea levels could rise by approximately half a metre by
2100 even if greenhouse-gas emissions are sharply
reduced, or up to one full metre if those emissions
continue to increase. That scenario suggests that lowlying coastal areas such as the Maldives could become
uninhabitable by 2050. That is 27 years from now. That
will mean losing a culture, a way of life, homes and
livelihoods built over many generations. At the societal
level, climate change will have a cascading impact
on food, water and health security and exacerbate
gender inequalities. That is the sobering reality we
are speaking about — losing our country and our very
identity, effectively rendering us stateless. Climate
change is our number-one security threat.
That is why the Maldives and other small island
developing States have consistently reminded the
international community of the importance of limiting
the Earth’s warming to 1.5℃. That is why we continue to
urge the international community to raise its ambitions
and match its actions to that goal.
It is disappointing to hear, despite the grave
circumstances of climate risk, opposition to recognizing
or enhancing the role of the Security Council in
addressing the peace and security threats related to
climate change, especially since the Council has already
established that climate change has contributed to
conflicts, particularly in resolutions 2349 (2017), 2561
(2021) and 2576 (2021). Those resolutions underscore
what we know to be true — that climate change can and
has contributed to conflict and insecurity. The Security
Council’s mandate is clear. It may investigate any
dispute or any situation that may lead to international
friction or give rise to conflict in order to determine
whether the continuance of the dispute or situation is

23-0450435/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

likely to endanger the maintenance of international
peace and security. In short, the ask is not for the
Security Council to solve the climate change crisis, but
for it to recognize and address the risks posed to peace
and security by climate change.
We must address that from a perspective of
protecting people’s lives, livelihoods and territorial
integrity. The Council must move beyond its expression
of concern. We simply cannot bear the costs of negligence
and inaction, and in the true spirit of solidarity we must
take meaningful action now. We take this moment to
applaud the efforts taken by several members of the
Security Council over the years to discuss this matter
in the Council. In truth, it is important to ask whether
we can envision peace prevailing in a future that stands
to lose populations from so many parts of the world.
World development within the biophysical limits of a
stable Earth system is a necessity. Scientific research
has made it possible to assess, identify, evaluate and
quantify the risks of abrupt planetary and biome-level
shifts due to our crossing the thresholds of planetary
boundaries. In that regard, we urge the Security Council
to monitor and take into account the planetary boundary
thresholds established by scientists for maintaining a
safe operating space for humankind. Monitoring and
assessing the security implications of sea level rise will
greatly assist taking action to prevent the tensions and
conflicts that may result from it.
Despite the mounting challenges, the Maldives is
determined to set an example in addressing the security
and humanitarian risks related to sea level rise. Almost
all of our 189 inhabited islands in the Maldives need
coastal infrastructure, and we are working to safeguard
them from tidal swells and beach erosion. Crucially,
our coral reefs have served as a natural barrier of
protection, which is why building the resilience and
maintaining the growth of our coral ecosystems have
continually been at the forefront of our policies. We
have pledged to achieve net zero emissions by 2030.
As the impacts of climate change intensify, it
is undeniable that it is women who bear the brunt of
those challenges, given their immense vulnerabilities
across social, economic and cultural dimensions.
In these times of crisis, we recognize that women
and girls invariably have less access to resources
and decision-making power. In the Maldives, we are
working to empower women and provide inclusive
decision-making
environments.
The
Maldives
Government, in collaboration with non-governmental
36/43

14/02/2023

organizations and intergovernmental organizations, is
working to make sure that women entrepreneurs and
leaders lead the conversation on climate adaptation
and resilience. We believe it is imperative that the
Council do more to increase the participation of women
in all aspects of decision-making and peacebuilding
processes, including as mediators, negotiators and
leaders of security forces.
In conclusion, the fate of our fragile existence rests
on the urgency with which the world collectively acts
today, and we must not delay. Let us all be the generation
that is remembered to have saved a whole generation
that is yet to come. The Maldives remains courageous
and determined to stop the waves from washing away
our beloved home, our beloved homeland, our culture,
our history and the very essence of our being on this
planet. Therefore, we urge the international community
to demonstrate that courage and determination for the
sake of humankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See.
Archbishop Caccia (Holy See): The Holy See
thanks Malta for holding this open debate, which
recognizes the threat that climate change poses to
peace and security.
As Pope Francis has observed, the world’s poor,
though least responsible for climate change, are the
most vulnerable and already suffer its impacts. That
is especially true with regard to sea level rise, which
mainly affects impoverished coastal populations
who have nowhere else to go. The negative effects of
rising seas appear long before lands are submerged, as
evidenced by coastal erosion, the saltwater intrusion of
aquifers, soil salinization and the flooding of critical
infrastructure. Of particular concern is the potential
seawater infiltration of low-lying nuclear power plants
and repositories containing radioactive waste from
nuclear weapons testing, such as on Runit Island, which
could contaminate widespread areas, including the
flora and fauna upon which local populations depend
for subsistence.
Such threats require timely climate change
adaptation and mitigation strategies. Often, however,
the affected States lack the means to adopt such
measures. To address that, the developed States, which
have disproportionately contributed to climate change,
ought to make financing more easily accessible to
coastal States, especially small island developing States,
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

so that they can adapt to the adverse impacts of climate
change, foster climate resilience and respond to loss and
damage. Sea level rise can increase water scarcity, food
insecurity and poverty, threatening social structures
that depend on the local environment, and shape cultural
identity, especially for indigenous communities. As a
result, many of those affected have no choice but to flee
their homes. Those climate migrants, however, are not
recognized by international conventions as refugees
and do not enjoy any legal protection whatsoever.
While the Global Compact for Migration calls on States
to develop solutions for migrants displaced owing to
sea level rise, the international community must do
more to clarify where and on what legal basis affected
populations can relocate across borders.
Eventually, sea level rise will likely submerge
the entire territories of some States. The Security
Council has rightly expressed concern at the security
implications of such a scenario, which raises legal
issues concerning self-determination, maritime
borders and statelessness. Ensuring the protection of
affected persons requires greater clarity as to whether
such States retain their sovereignty and the practical
implications of that. The threat of sea level rise appeals
to our responsibility to promote, through collective and
joint commitment, a culture of care that places human
dignity and the common good at the centre. States have
the duty to promote changes of lifestyle, production
and consumption in order to reduce the drivers of
climate change and limit the resulting environmental
degradation and human suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Malta for convening this important meeting.
The issue of sea level rise has been addressed by
Member States in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which notes that the phenomenon
is severely affecting coastal areas, including in
many least developed countries and small island
developing States, and thereby slowing progress on
sustainable development.
As is widely accepted, for many small island
developing States sea level rise poses one of the greatest
threats to survival and opportunities for growth, and it
can even lead to loss of territory for some. With regard
to statehood and its continuity in the event of loss of
territory, it should be noted that the International Law

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Commission is the competent body for addressing
the legal aspects of the issue, in accordance with its
mandate, which includes the progressive development
of international law and its codification.
With regard to the legal framework applicable to
this issue, various instruments of international law
contain provisions relevant to the issue of sea level
rise and its effects. The first of these that we want to
highlight is the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea (UNCLOS), since it is the framework for
the regulation of all activity in the oceans and seas. In
that context, the starting points for measuring maritime
spaces under national jurisdiction are baselines that
are customarily measured from the low-water lines
along coasts. With regard to the protection of persons
affected by this scourge, there are a vast number of
international norms aimed at preserving the integrity
and well-being of the individual. In that regard, careful
consideration should be given to whether a draft treaty
would be necessary to address the issue or whether
solutions could be provided within the framework of
existing international law.
Regarding the effects of sea level rise on the
boundaries of maritime spaces, it should be noted that in
terms of legal certainty, it seems appropriate to consider
that once the baselines and outer limits of the maritime
spaces of a coastal or archipelagic State have been duly
determined in accordance with the requirements of
UNCLOS, which also reflects customary international
law, States should not be required to readjust those
baselines and boundaries in the event that sea level
change affects the geographic reality of the coast.
With regard to the effects of changes in coastlines
along agreed maritime boundaries, it is vital to
emphasize that the concept of a fundamental change of
circumstances, also known as the rebus sic stantibus
clause, is not applicable to boundary agreements, as
set out in article 62 of the Vienna Convention on the
Law of Treaties. Both international jurisprudence and
prominent jurists agree on that view. Examples worth
mentioning in that regard include the judgment of the
International Court of Justice in the case Aegean Sea
Continental Shelf (Greece v. Turkey), in addition to the
Bay of Bengal Maritime Boundary Arbitration between
Bangladesh and India (Bangladesh v. India), to cite
only two. In the latter ruling, the Permanent Court of
Arbitration underlined that maritime delimitations, like
land boundaries, must be stable and definitive to ensure
a peaceful relationship between the States concerned in

23-0450437/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

the long term. It added that in the view of the Tribunal,
neither the prospect of climate change nor its possible
effects can jeopardize the many maritime boundaries
established around the world. That applies equally to
maritime boundaries agreed on between States and
those established by international adjudication.
In the same vein, in its study on the issue of sea level
rise, the International Law Association recommended
an interpretation of UNCLOS that favours the
preservation of rights to maritime spaces. With that
in mind, the Association concluded that the question
of the effects of sea level rise on boundaries should be
considered much more broadly in the context of the
importance of the principles of certainty and stability
of treaties, in particular those relating to international
boundaries and limits.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that given
the complexity of this issue and the various political
and legal aspects involved, it merits further in-depth
analysis by the entire membership of the United Nations,
within the General Assembly, taking into account the
Assembly’s competence, the views and practices of
Member States and international jurisprudence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): At the outset, the
Netherlands aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the European Union.
I will also make some additional remarks in my
national capacity, as the issue of sea level rise is of
particular importance to all parts of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, from the North Sea to the Caribbean.
I would therefore like to thank Malta for convening
today’s meeting, as sea-level rise has become a
reality, with real implications for international peace
and security.
My first point is about the threat we are facing.
The Netherlands is still well protected against the sea.
However, the danger of sea-level rise in the longer term
is severe. Famously, significant parts of our territory
are below or at sea level. And we are not alone. A
significant part of the global population lives in fertile
river deltas and coastal areas. Throughout history, we
have seen that loss of land can serve as a catalyst for
conflict, whether over resources, forced displacement
or other threats to peace and security. The risks to those
communities if sea levels rise by almost one metre in
the next century — something that according to the
38/43

14/02/2023

reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) will happen if we fail to curb carbon
emissions — are paramount and deserve the full
attention of the Security Council.
My second point is about what we can do. If we do
indeed manage to curb carbon emissions as much as
the IPCC urges us to do, we will still have to deal with
a certain degree of sea level rise. Coastal communities
will have to adapt to that reality. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General’s continued call for spending
at least 50 per cent of public climate financing on
adaptation. In fact, the Netherlands already spends
close to 70 per cent on adaptation. Other important
aspects include adequate risk assessments and watermanagement solutions to protect lives and livelihoods,
especially in the global South, both by Member States
and United Nations organizations.
The upcoming United Nations Water Conference,
to be held in March, which is the first of its kind in
almost 40 years and will be co-hosted by Tajikistan and
the Netherlands, provides a perfect platform to discuss
those challenges in depth. In addition, we also need
comprehensive evaluations and reports to thoroughly
analyse the significant number of risks to peace and
security related to sea level rise. The more we are
aware, the better we can prepare. For instance, the
establishment by the International Law Commission
of its Study Group on sea-level rise in relation to
international law is very welcome in that regard.
The Security Council is our principal organ for
the maintenance of peace and security. It is therefore
incumbent on it to call for appropriate action when
stability is at risk, including in the case of risks related
to sea level rise. Much is at stake, as the SecretaryGeneral said this morning.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I would like to
congratulate your delegation, Madam President, on
Malta’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council, and to thank it for convening today’s very
timely open debate.
For a low-lying coastal country such as Bangladesh,
sea level rise poses an existential threat to the lives and
livelihoods of the coastal population. Just a one-metre
rise in sea level could result in an inundation of a large
area of Bangladesh and potentially displace more than
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

40 million people by the end of the century. To address
the multidimensional threats posed by climate change
and sea level rise, we have adopted comprehensive
national policies and strategies. However, those
measures at the national level will have minimal impact,
or none at all, if the global response to sea level rise and
its diverse implications remains slow and inadequate.
Allow me to share a few specific thoughts on
today’s topic.
First, we see sea level rise as a risk multiplier that
may affect various dimensions of human security,
especially in climate-vulnerable countries. It may create
new risks or exacerbate existing ones by undermining
food, energy and water security and even cause the
loss of national territory. Broad understanding and
recognition of the implications of sea level rise for
peace and security are critical for taking appropriate
action at the national, regional and global levels in the
spirit of solidarity and international cooperation.
Secondly, there are many grave security threats
posed by sea level rise, including the displacement of
affected persons. In Bangladesh each year, an average
of 110,000 people are being displaced from lowerlying areas owing to sea level rise and its multifaceted
adverse impacts on water, soil, flora and fauna, to name
a few. That exacerbates social challenges, including in
population management, housing and social security
architecture in the affected countries. The presence
of 1.2 million Rohingya refugees in the southern part
of my country is further aggravating the situation in
an already severely land-scarce Bangladesh. We need
a concrete legal framework and effective response
mechanisms to address the issue of the forced
displacement of people. The Secretary-General’s
action agenda on internal displacement is an important
opportunity to step up collective action and resolve to
address climate-change-related internal displacement.
Thirdly, the risks and vulnerabilities emanating
from climate change and sea level rise need to be
addressed in a holistic manner, including through
measures that contribute to mitigation and adaptation.
In that regard, climate finance, technology transfer
and capacity-building are crucial. Developed countries
must fulfil their commitments to strengthen measures
to support vulnerable countries. We welcome the loss
and damage fund established at the twenty-seventh
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to support

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

the global response to the adverse impacts of climate
change, including sea level rise.
Despite repeated calls from scientists, policymakers
and the people affected by climate change, actions to
avert climate catastrophes remain woefully inadequate.
Most unfortunately, there is a persistent denial mode,
while countries like Bangladesh, with no historical role
in climate change or factors that contribute to sea level
rise, continue to suffer the worst consequences.
Against that backdrop, we believe that the upcoming
draft resolution in the General Assembly seeking
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on the legal implications of climate change is a
critical step for securing climate justice and equity for
our people. We urge all Member States to extend their
support to this historic initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by welcoming the Minister for
Foreign and European Affairs and Trade of Malta
and congratulating him and his country on presiding
over the Security Council. I would like also to express
my sincere thanks to them for holding this important
debate on sea level rise and its effects on international
peace and security.
This meeting is being held in delicate and
extremely sensitive and important circumstances,
given the growing environmental challenges that
the international community is facing. That requires
concerted international efforts to achieve constructive
solutions in order to protect the segments of the
population exposed to environmental threats and sea
level rise from dire consequences that may occur as a
result of environmental degradation.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has always
emphasized the importance of addressing challenges
of climate change and its effects on sustainable
development at the economic, environmental and social
levels. Undoubtedly, pooling international efforts to
implement the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement is a
balanced approach to ensure mitigation and adaptation.
Indeed, the phenomenon of sea level rise is one of the
most significant effects of climate change that we all,
particularly developing countries and least developed
countries, are facing. Protection from that phenomenon

23-0450439/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

requires us to work together in order to mitigate its
effects and adapt to its potential outcomes.
In that connection, the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia has launched two initiatives, namely, Green
Saudi Arabia and Green Middle East, which aim to
address the challenges of climate change through the
implementation of a circular carbon economy approach,
reforestation, land rehabilitation and the protection of
coral reefs, not only at the national level, but also at the
regional level.
Turning to emissions mitigation, there are
three main pillars of energy transformation: energy
security, economic development and climate change.
We must achieve them all equally and moderately,
without prejudice to any of them. We must ensure
that comprehensive solutions and techniques are used
and that adequate funding is provided for all available
and promising solutions while focusing on emissions,
regardless of the energy source.
In that context, the Kingdom follows a balanced
approach to mitigate emissions and to reach net-zero
emissions, in line with its development plans and our
economic diversification, without harming our supply
chains, while also aiming to develop technologies that
contribute to limiting emissions, in cooperation with
various countries.
The Kingdom is aware of the importance of raising
the level of expectations in addressing climate change,
particularly in the current decade. We have therefore
increased our nationally determined contributions by
reducing our emissions by 278 million tons per year by
2030. That is double what was previously announced in
2015. Furthermore, we announced our ambitious aim
to reach net zero in 2060, based on a circular carbon
economy approach.
In addition, the Kingdom has joined the global
pledge to reduce global methane emissions by
30 per cent, compared to 2020 levels. We also stress the
importance of balanced solutions between mitigation
and adaptation, to be achieved through international
cooperation by boosting investments to both, in order
to promote the global economy, address climate change
and ensure the recovery of the global economy.
Adaptation is no less important than mitigation. The
world is focusing on mitigation, but we must also adapt to
the target temperatures set in the Paris Agreement — that
is between 1.5°C and 2°C — particularly in developing
40/43

14/02/2023

countries and those most vulnerable to climate change.
Adaptation contributes to creating an environment that
is more resistant to climate change, ensuring continued
sustainable development while mitigating emissions at
the same time. It should be noted that one of the most
important outcomes of the twenty-sixth Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change was the launch of the
Glasgow–Sharm El-Sheikh work programme, which
seeks to enhance adaptive capabilities, strengthen
endurance and limit the effects of climate change to the
Paris Agreement target temperature range, achieving
sustainable development according to national
capacities and circumstances.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is
keen to promote the issue of adaptation owing to its
importance and its compatibility with the Kingdom’s
projects, such as Green Saudi Arabia initiative, which
seeks to plant 10 billion trees across the country. That
is equivalent to rehabilitating 40 million hectares of
land and increasing protected areas to more than 30 per
cent of our total land and sea areas. In addition, we are
focusing our efforts on establishing the King Salman
Bin Abdulaziz Natural Reserve, which covers 130,000
square kilometres in the north of the Kingdom in an
effort to restore ecosystems and preserve wildlife.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, on behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Haiti, allow me to congratulate the Maltese presidency
of the Security Council on having taken the initiative
to organize this important open debate on the specific
challenges related to sea level rise and its implications
for international peace and security.
The Government of the Republic of Haiti is all
the more pleased that this meeting, which takes place
following the United Nations Ocean Conference in
Lisbon, is being held at a pivotal moment ahead of the
second part of the fifth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries, to be held in Doha.
The Republic of Haiti, like all developing island
States, is grappling with the many challenges of resource
scarcity, exposure to natural disasters, ecological crises
and vulnerability to external economic shocks. In
addition, sea level rise, as a result of climate change,
is hampering the progress of small island developing
States (SIDS) towards sustainable development.
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The current scientific research shows that climate
change will lead to a substantial rise in sea levels in
some regions of the world. Sea levels have already
risen by between 10 and 25 centimetres over the past
century. Global warming will accelerate those rates,
with a sea level rise of 50 centimetres by 2100. Sea level
rise is therefore the greatest existential threat to island
and coastal countries. The phenomenon forces people
to abandon their places of residence to seek refuge
elsewhere, creating large-scale population movements
and forced migration.
The SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
Pathway recognizes that rising sea levels and other
adverse effects of climate change pose significant risks
to SIDS and are the greatest threat to the survival and
sustainability of many of them, particularly through
the loss of territory. The most serious physical impacts
of the progressive sea level rise on coastal lowlands
are the inundation and displacement of wetlands and
lowlands, coastal erosion, increased vulnerability to
the damage caused by coastal storms and flooding and
the salinization of surface water and groundwater.
This is not only an environmental issue, but also a
matter of the security and survival of such populations. It
has been recognized that climate change and its adverse
consequences pose a threat to the territorial integrity,
security, sovereignty and even the very existence of
islands owing to the submergence of existing land and
the loss of maritime heritage. Even developed countries
are not spared by the phenomenon, which is becoming
increasingly widespread. Moreover, it can create social
tensions within a country and trigger conflicts between
neighbouring States.
In Haiti, the consequences of climate change pose
a direct threat to both the densely populated coastal
communities of the island and their economies. The
projected increases in the average sea level and sea
surface temperature also have implications for most
of the country’s strategic sectors, in particular fishing,
agriculture and tourism, not to mention the health
and well-being of our population. In addition to those
existing sources of pressure and concern, there are
also those relating to climate variability and change,
which are likely to further exacerbate the degradation
of the Haitian coastal area — hence the need to develop
recommendations for the protection of mangroves and
marine ecosystems, as well as coastal tourism and
agricultural infrastructure.

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

All the facts related to the impact of sea level rise
that I have described demonstrate that climate issues
have concrete implications for international security
and peace. Security is multidimensional, and today
it goes beyond traditional military issues to include
the so-called new threats to peace, which are more
widespread, more fragmented and often more of a social
than a military nature. Human security is a prerequisite
for peace and development. The management of
security, in all its dimensions, must therefore be part
of a global approach that challenges unilateralism and
draws on the strength of interdependence.
The Government of Haiti hopes that this enriching
debate on sea level rise and its implications for peace and
security will result in conclusions and recommendations
that will be put to good use to advance the dialogue on
this critical issue for our common future, international
peace and security and the sustainable development of
small island developing States and coastal countries,
the sustainability and survival of which are today
threatened.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important open debate of
the Security Council. The delegation of Sierra Leone
congratulates Malta on its election to the Security
Council and its assumption of the presidency. I also
thank the briefers for their important contributions.
Sierra Leone recognizes the nexus between climate
change and peace and security, and welcomes the debate
on sea level rise and implications for international
peace and security. Given the acute awareness of
the vulnerability of States, in particular developing
costal States and small island developing States, to
climate change, in its bid for a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council for the term 2024–2025 Sierra
Leone has prioritized the serious consideration of and
robust engagement on climate security and risks as an
imperative.
In the ongoing consultations within the General
Assembly to request an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the obligations of
States in relation to climate change, an initiative
led by Vanuatu and of which Sierra Leone is a core
member, recognition has been duly given to the
unprecedented challenge of civilizational proportions
of climate change, requiring an immediate and urgent

23-0450441/43

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

Threats to international peace and security

response. That response must be comprehensive and
multidimensional, taking a whole-of-United-Nations
approach to addressing climate change and its effects.
Sierra Leone notes the sustained efforts to continue
the Security Council’s engagement on the security
implications of climate change, particularly following
its 13 December 2021 vote on the thematic draft
resolution contained in document S/2021/990, proposed
by Ireland and the Niger. We therefore acknowledge the
work and efforts to integrate climate change language
into country- and region-specific outcomes.
We call for a climate change approach to
both case-specific and thematic issues, noting the
developments in 2022, including the expressed
concerns that climate change is a risk multiplier that
can exacerbate insecurity. Having agreed on the need to
combat climate change, the Security Council must unite
around the role that it must play in addressing the threat
under its mandate and in appropriate circumstances.
On sea level rise, appropriate attention must be
paid by the Security Council to the identifiable oceanrelated climate security risks and threats, including loss
of territory, the attendant humanitarian consequences,
State sovereignty, statehood and maritime delimitation
and disputes.
Sierra Leone therefore welcomes the study of the
topic of sea level rise in relation to international law
by the International Law Commission. The study by
the Commission, which is legal in nature, exemplifies
the critical synergy that can be developed through
a whole-of-United-Nations approach as part of the
preventive mechanisms.
Let me conclude by expressing Sierra Leone’s
commitment to pursue constructive engagement on
climate change, peace and security, including oceanrelated climate security, noting the nexus related to
peacebuilding and addressing fragility and the potential
disproportionate impacts on women and children.
The President: The representative of Japan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): In the statements made earlier
by the Chinese and Russian delegations, reference was
made to the discharge into the sea of the water treated
through the advanced liquid processing system at the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power station. Japan will
never approve the discharge of such water into the
sea if it fails to meet regulatory standards, based on
42/43

14/02/2023

international standards. The International Atomic
Energy Agency and international experts have been
reviewing our efforts, and that review will continue.
Japan will take appropriate measures before the
commencement of the discharge, taking into account
the observations of the review to be conducted prior to
the discharge, and the concentration level of the water to
be discharged will be far below the regulatory standard.
Japan has explained the matter to the international
community in a highly transparent manner, based on
scientific evidence, and will continue to do so.
As one of the last speakers, Japan would once again
like to thank and congratulate Malta for addressing a
theme as important as sea level rise and its implications
for international peace and security
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
know that everyone is probably hungry, but given the
importance of the issue at hand, I would like to make a
further statement in response to the statement made by
the representative of Japan concerning the discharge by
Japan of nuclear-contaminated water into the sea. We
would like to further elaborate on our position. As is
clear to everyone, the topic of our discussion today is
the implications of sea level rise. One can only imagine
that if what is rising is highly nuclear-contaminated
sea, then the implications will be far more dramatic
and the negative effects farther reaching. That is the
main reason why China has raised the concern. Japan
has confirmed that it will release at least 400,000 tons
of nuclear-contaminated water into the Pacific ocean in
the first quarter of this year. The contaminated water
from the Fukushima contains more than 60 types of
radioactive substances, and the discharge is estimated
to last for up to 30 years.
Japan’s discharge of nuclear-contaminated water
into the sea will severely endanger the global marine
environment, ecosystems and the lives and health of
people of all countries. Therefore, that is by no means a
private matter for Japan. Japan’s neighbouring countries,
the Pacific island countries and other stakeholders have
all expressed serious concerns about Japan’s wrong
decision. And within Japan, strong voices of opposition
have also been raised.
Regrettably, to date Japan has yet to provide a
science-based and credible explanations on key issues,
such as the legitimacy of its discharge programme, the
23-04504

14/02/2023

Threats to international peace and security

reliability of its data on nuclear-contaminated water,
the effectiveness of the treatment systems and the
uncertainties concerning the environmental impact, nor
has it conducted full and meaningful consultations with
stakeholders, including neighbouring countries. The
relevant international organization has yet to complete
an assessment of Japan’s disposal programme, let alone
reach concrete conclusions. Under such circumstances,
Japan has been bent on forcibly approving the
discharge programme of the nuclear-contaminated
water and has accelerated the preparations for its
discharge. Such behaviour is extremely irresponsible.
Japan has indicated that nuclear-contaminated water
after treatment is completely harmless, which I find
highly questionable. If that is really the case, then
the water could be discharged elsewhere, including

S/PV.9260 (Resumption 1)

into Japan’s own rivers or lakes. China urges Japan
to take seriously the legitimate concerns of all
parties and not to take the liberty of initiating the
discharge of nuclear-contaminated water without prior
consultation or agreement with neighbouring countries,
other stakeholders and the relevant international
organizations. We also call on the international
community to follow this important issue closely.
Before concluding, I would like to join Japan in
thanking the presidency of Malta for convening this
important meeting, at which countries can focus on an
issue that has implications for the shared future and
welfare of humankind.
The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.

23-0450443/43
