S/2020/862

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 August 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 25 August 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you with regard to the financing of the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Pursuant to article 3 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone on the establishment of a Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone, “the expenses of the Residual Special Court shall be borne by voluntary
contributions from the international community. The parties and the Oversight
Committee may explore alternative means of financing the Residual Special Court”.
The Oversight Committee of the Court has informed me that the Court will run out of
funding at the end of 2020 and that, while fundraising efforts will continue, it is not
expected that there will be sufficient voluntary contributions for the operations o f the
Court beyond 2020.
The Residual Special Court was established pursuant to a mandate from the
Security Council and has been carrying out residual functions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone since 1 January 2014. Those functions include supervisin g the
enforcement of sentences of the persons who were convicted by the Special Court;
providing for witness and victim protection and support; preserving and managing
the archives of the Special Court; responding to requests for access to evidence by
national prosecution authorities; responding to requests from national authorities with
respect to claims for compensation; reviewing convictions and acquittals; conducting
contempt of court proceedings; providing defence counsel and legal aid for the
conduct of proceedings before the Residual Special Court; and preventing double
jeopardy.
The Residual Special Court is a lean institution with a small number of staff.
The Registrar is the only full-time senior official, and the judges, the Prosecutor and
the Principal Defender are remunerated on a pro rata basis for work actually
performed.
In order to minimize costs further, the Office of the Residual Special Court in
The Hague is co-located with and receives administrative support, on a cost reimbursable basis, from the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
In accordance with General Assembly resolution 74/263 of 27 December 2019,
the senior officials of the Residual Special Court have cont inued to fundraise in 2020,
despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic, with
a view to broadening the donor base of the Court. In addition, I wrote to all Member
States in May 2020 to appeal for voluntary contributions for the Court. While no

20-11310 (E)

020920

*2011310*

S/2020/862

contributions have been received to date, one pledge has been made in 2020 for
€10,000, for which I am grateful. No contributions or pledges have been made
towards the budget of the Court for the year 2021.
The Residual Special Court is helping to consolidate the rule of law and the
contribution of the Special Court for Sierra Leone towards achieving peace and
security in Sierra Leone and the region. If it does not secure sufficient funding, the
Residual Special Court will not be able to fulfil its important mandate. The failure of
the Residual Special Court would diminish the legacy of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and severely undermine the achievements made in pursuit of accountability for
the serious international crimes committed in Sierra Leone.
In the light of the foregoing, I intend again this year to propose to the General
Assembly that the costs of the Residual Special Court for 2021 be met through a
subvention under the assessed programme budget. A subvention would be a temporary
measure to address the current financial situation. I will continue to seek additional
voluntary contributions for the Court and to assess the potential for achieving greater
efficiencies and possible savings in coordination with the Court.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

20-11310
