United Nations

S/PV.6457

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6457th meeting
Monday, 20 December 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. DiCarlo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Nishida
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-70084 (E)

*1070084*

S/PV.6457

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: At this meeting, we will hear
briefings by His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan and of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals; His Excellency
Mr. Tsuneo Nishida, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions; His
Excellency Mr. Claude Heller, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea and of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict; His Excellency
Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and of the Working Group established pursuant
to resolution 1566 (2004); and His Excellency
Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa.
I now give the floor
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting.

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Madame President,
I thank you for giving me the opportunity to share with
the Council some personal observations concerning the
Committees I have had the honour to chair. More
specifically today, I will speak about the Sudan
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005). I will also say a few words about the state
of play within the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, which Austria has chaired
since January 2009.
As members of the Council will remember, I
already had the opportunity to give my assessment of
the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on
15 November (see S/PV.6424). I will therefore not
reiterate what I said on that occasion; I will simply

2

return to two points that I made in my personal
capacity when I briefed the Council then. At that time,
I said that, under the current guidelines, if consensus
cannot be reached, any de-listing request may be
submitted to the Council for review and subsequent
majority decision. In my view, it would thus seem only
logical to adopt the same decision-making procedures,
that is, a majority vote for de-listing decisions of the
1267 Committee.
I also referred in November to the point that the
procedure of the triennial reviews of the 1267
Committee could be changed to require a positive
reconfirmation of each list entry under review. That
adaptation of the review process would have the same
effect as the introduction of a time limit or sunset
clause for listings and would thus put an end — from
my point of view, in any case — to the question
whether the sanctions regime is of a punitive or
preventive nature.
Turning to the 1591 Sanctions Committee on the
Sudan, let me say that chairing the Committee was a
challenging task. It is not easy, if I may put it in these
terms, to monitor and enforce an arms embargo that
covers only part of a State’s territory in an environment
where every use of arms potentially violates the
embargo and where arms are used quite regularly.
While all members of the Council and the Committee
share the objective of bringing peace and stability to
Darfur, their interpretation of the nature of the conflict,
the role of sanctions in resolving the conflict and the
sanctions regime itself differs. The work of the
Committee would benefit from a common
interpretation of the regime. In that regard, resolution
1945 (2010) was an important step towards clarifying
the embargo exemptions and requiring end-user
documentation for arms supplies not prohibited by the
embargo.
A main objective during Austria’s chairmanship
was to promote dialogue between the Committee and
all relevant stakeholders. As Chairman, I maintained
regular contacts with the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan as well as with the Permanent
Representatives of other relevant States. Such direct
contacts proved to be very useful and, I believe, should
be continued in the future.
We also established a regular dialogue with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) through Committee meetings with

10-70084

S/PV.6457

the Joint Special Representative. The Committee held
close contacts with the Secretariat’s Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the development of
provisional guidelines for peacekeeping missions to
facilitate the work of panels of experts, which are used
for all expert panels that interact with peacekeeping
operations.
The Committee also made headway regarding its
contacts with the private sector. It heard briefings by
the Executive Director of the Global Compact and by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
business and human rights. More needs to be done,
however, to increase due diligence and create
awareness of the sanctions regimes among companies
operating in the Sudan and particularly in Darfur.
As regards the travel ban and assets freeze, no
persons have been designated on the Committee’s list
since the adoption of resolution 1672 (2006). In my
view, those responsible for attacks on the United
Nations, especially UNAMID, clearly meet the listing
criteria and should be considered for listing by the
Committee in the future. I do believe that the Security
Council has a special responsibility in protecting the
missions it has mandated. In that context, I think that
looking at listing people who have attacked those
missions is logical and of key importance. It is also an
important point for the credibility of the work of the
Council. Let me also say that the same applies to
individuals who commit sexual and gender-based acts
of violence. Those crimes often go unpunished. We
believe that the Committee can also play an important
role in alleviating that situation.
Regarding confidential annexes to reports
received by the Committee, it would certainly facilitate
the work of the Committee and indeed of the Council
itself if those annexes, which mainly contain listing
proposals, remain confidential. I would like to
underline my full support for the work of the Panel of
Experts in order to provide the Committee with highquality information. We must assist their work and
fully respect their independence.
In view of my country’s strong focus on the rule
of law, we were also pleased and satisfied to be able to
chair the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals. Under our chairmanship, the Working Group
held 26 meetings in 2009 and 25 meetings this year.
The Group maintained a close dialogue with

10-70084

representatives of the affected countries and host
countries.
In order to increase transparency, raise awareness
and provide an opportunity to hear the views of the
broader United Nations membership, in October 2009,
for the first time ever, the Austrian Mission organized
an Arria formula meeting on residual issues of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) that was open to all States
Members of the United Nations. Moreover, at the
biannual public Security Council briefings by the ICTY
and the ICTR, I regularly briefed the Council on the
activities of the Working Group. We started to publish
annual reports of the Group and also included a chapter
on the work of the Working Group in the annual report
of the Security Council for the first time.
Over the past two years, the Working Group has
considered various requests by the Presidents of the
Tribunals to facilitate their completion strategies. In
2009 and 2010, the Council has adopted nine
resolutions on the ICTY and the ICTR introduced by
my country after agreement was reached in the
Working Group. The last two resolutions, as Council
members will recall — resolutions 1954 (2010) and
1955 (2010) — were adopted just last week.
After more than two years of negotiations, a final
agreement on the establishment of an international
residual mechanism for criminal tribunals is now, I
strongly believe, within reach. The envisaged
mechanism will continue certain essential residual
functions of the Tribunals, including trials of fugitives,
management of archives, protection of witnesses and
supervision of enforcement of sentences.
The package that I presented as Chairman,
together with Legal Adviser Konrad Bühler, who
supported me in these matters, consists of the
following elements: a draft resolution to be adopted
under Chapter VII, in which the Security Council
would decide to establish the residual mechanism with
two branches, one for the ICTR in Arusha and one for
the ICTY in The Hague; an annex I, with the statute for
the mechanism; and an annex II, with transitional
arrangements.
The establishment of the residual mechanism will
send a strong message from the Security Council
against impunity. High-level fugitives indicted by the
Tribunals, such as Ratko Mladić or Félicien Kabuga,

3

S/PV.6457

cannot hide and escape justice. At the same time, the
draft resolution would send a clear signal of the
Tribunals’ intention to complete their work
expeditiously, prepare their closure, and ensure a
smooth transition for the mechanism.
I believe that it is in the interest of all delegations
to use this window of opportunity to conclude the
negotiations. There is a sense of urgency for the
Council to reach agreement now in order to allow for
sufficient time to make the necessary arrangements for
a smooth transition to the mechanism, while avoiding
any increase in costs.
We have presented a carefully balanced
compromise package that attempts to reconcile all the
different views presented. All issues can be resolved
with the necessary flexibility and political will. I
therefore very much hope that we can adopt the draft
resolution in the coming days, before the forthcoming
holiday season. I would call on all delegations to
support us in that endeavour.
Before closing, I would like to express my
gratitude to all delegations for their support and active
contributions. I also thank the Monitoring Team and
the Panel of Experts for their excellent work and
cooperation. My sincere thanks also go to the
Secretariat staff, in particular the sanctions Branch and
the Office of Legal Affairs, for their invaluable support
and advice over the past two years. I would like to
thank my own collaborators, who have made it much
easier and, in fact, possible for me to chair three of the
Committees all together. More specifically, as I have
already said, I want to say a word of thanks to our
Legal Adviser, Mr. Bühler, who in fact led most of the
work of the Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals.
The President: I thank Ambassador MayrHarting for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Tsuneo Nishida, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I thank you, Madame
President, for the opportunity to give my views on the
subsidiary bodies that I have chaired. I shall try to be
brief in order to promote the effectiveness of the

4

Security Council. I briefed the Council in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) earlier this month. Therefore, I
should like to say a few words on the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions.
First, it gives me great pleasure to address the
Council in my capacity as Chair of the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations. During the past two years,
the Group issued four reports. I wish to thank all
members of the Council for their constructive
contribution to and cooperation with the activities of
the Working Group.
Japan’s commitment to the Working Group has
been consistent. The overarching theme of the Working
Group during Japan’s chairmanship was how to fill the
gaps that between Security Council mandates and
actual implementation on the ground. As we all know,
we are faced with the challenges of historically high
levels of deployment and increased complexity of
mission mandates. This requires a renewed effort to
minimize capability gaps, manage resource constraints,
expand the contributor base and strengthen cooperation
with other actors within and beyond the United Nations
system.
As stated in the last report, the most important
contribution of the Working Group has been in
bringing Council members closer to major troop- and
police-contributing countries and, of course, the
Secretariat. The interactive dialogue among a wide
range of stakeholders at meetings has served to
enhance transparency and accountability in the work of
the Council. It also provided opportunities to create
some common ground to meet various challenges.
The report included three suggestions for the way
Forward. The first was to further encourage inclusive
dialogue among relevant stakeholders, especially in the
context of the establishment, renewal or modification
of the mandate of a peacekeeping operation. In our
view, this is vital to ensuring the implementation of
mandates. We hope that the current good practices,
including the use of the diagram produced by the
Working Group for scheduling a monthly programme
of work, will continue. The second suggestion was to
facilitate regular reporting on critical gaps affecting
mandate implementation and to find ways to address
them. The third was to build common ground on early

10-70084

S/PV.6457

peacebuilding tasks in a peacekeeping context in order
to prepare for transitions and exits. We feel that there
remains a lot to be done, and the Working Group can
be a facilitating vehicle to generate practical solutions.
Japan hopes that the Working Group can take
these suggestions into consideration in its future
discussions. We wish the next Chair every success.
Japan will be leaving the Council, but will continue to
be committed to all of these issues and stands ready to
continue working with the Council members as well as
other stakeholders.
Allow me now to say a few words in my capacity
as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and other Procedural Questions. I
would like to thank all members for their cooperation
and constructive input.
The Informal Working Group initially worked on
improving the implementation of previously agreed
measures to improve the working methods of the
Council, including presidential note S/2006/507 of
2006. The Informal Working Group focused on such
issues as the Council’s interaction with non-members
and other entities, including the Peacebuilding
Commission; enhancing dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries; the format of Council
meetings; Security Council missions; and the timing of
the issuance of reports of the Secretary-General.
The Security Council held an open debate on its
working methods in April of this year under Japan’s
presidency (see S/PV.6300). Thirty-eight non-members
participated, and statements were made on behalf of
many regional groups. We believe that it was a
constructive discussion. We hope the Council will
periodically hold such Open Debates.

Japan recently finished printing the successor to
the so called “Blue Book”. The new Book includes
document S/2010/507 and other useful documents. We
hope it will be a user-friendly guide to the working
methods of the Council. We will make them available
to all missions. I have brought a few copies here today,
and hope that anyone who is interested will take one on
his or her way out.
The President: I thank Mr. Nishida for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Claude
Heller, Chairman of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009),
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, and of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In
keeping with the established practice concerning the
end of the term of office of elected members of the
Security Council, I should like to share my impressions
and assessments on the work I have carried out at the
helm of the subsidiary bodies over which I have
presided in the course of my country’s membership of
the Council. I will first turn to the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), concerning Somalia and Eritrea. I will
then refer to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation and
weapons of mass destruction. Lastly, I will turn to my
chairmanship of the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

In our two years in the chairmanship of the
Sanctions Committee on Somalia and Eritrea, we faced
and overcame significant challenges that no doubt were
a reflection of the difficult situation that prevails in the
Horn of Africa. In December 2009, with the adoption
Taking note of the views expressed by Member
of resolution 1907 (2009), the Committee’s mandate
States during the open debate, the Informal Working
was expanded to include the Eritrea sanctions regime
Group worked to revise presidential note S/2010/507
and to give the Committee a regional focus. As a result,
and the new note (S/2010/507) was adopted by the
the Committee’s guidelines were reviewed and the
Council on 27 July. In the new note, new measures to
Monitoring Group’s mandate was expanded to include
enhance the Council’s interaction with non-members
reporting on violations of both sanctions regimes.
and other relevant entities are of particular significance.
Those changes and the results of the Monitoring
The informal dialogue is a useful tool in this regard.
Group’s investigations clearly lent greater and more
Enhancing transparency, efficiency and interaction
specific weight to the Committee’s work with regard to
with non-Council members benefits Security Council
the regional dynamic of the situation, including on very
members and non-Members alike. I hope that the
sensitive issues that have an impact on the situation in
Informal Working Group will continue its effort in
Somalia and on international efforts to achieve peace
these areas in the coming years.
and stability in the region.

10-70084

5

S/PV.6457

With the support of the members of the
Committee, I led a mission to the Horn of Africa last
April, in which the delegations of the United States of
America and Turkey also participated. On that occasion,
we had conversations in Yemen, Eritrea and Kenya
with pertinent officials and stakeholders on this issue.
We also met representatives of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and of the Puntland region, as
well as with United Nations officials on the ground and
members of the diplomatic community. It is important
to underscore that the basic purpose of the visit was to
attain greater understanding and help disseminate
information in the region with regard to the sanctions
regime and the implementation of the measures
provided for in the relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009).
As part of those efforts, I also held meetings in
New York with senior officials from Ethiopia and
Djibouti. I also maintained an ongoing and frank
dialogue with the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Somalia. Moreover, in an effort to
promote transparency and a proper balance in the
Committee’s decisions, I convened several meetings to
provide the members of the Committee with an
opportunity to receive information and exchange views
with officials of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and the Coordinator for
Humanitarian Affairs, as well with officials from the
World Food Programme and UNICEF.
The Committee also took an important step by
placing the names of several persons and entities on the
consolidated sanctions list, in line with the provisions
of the relevant resolutions. I should point out that, to
date, more than 20 decisions have been taken with
regard to exceptions to the sanctions regime, with a
view to supporting humanitarian assistance efforts and
those of the Transitional Federal Government.
As Chairman of the Committee I aimed from the
very beginning to ensure that there were clear decisionmaking processes and to provide timely and relevant
information on the work of the Committee and its
implications to the members of the Committee, the
States of the region and other pertinent actors. The
Mexican delegation’s initiatives in the Committee were
always focused on further implementing the sanctions
regime and ensuring its impact, all the while promoting
its use as a tool for both control and incentives so that

6

the relevant stakeholders would join a regional process
conducive to peace and stability.
It seems to me crucial that, in the future, the
Committee’s chairmanship should promote the practice
of duly keeping the Members of the Organization
informed, including the various parts of the Secretariat
and other relevant stakeholders, with regard to
substantive and technical aspects of both sanctions
regimes. The goal should be to produce a better
understanding of the Committee’s work and ensure
better cooperation in implementing the measures
provided for in the relevant resolutions, as well as to
prevent the recurrence of technical violations.
I believe that the Security Council should use
clearer language in its resolutions, especially with
regard to cooperation between the organs of the
Organization and their responsibilities, including
Sanctions Committees’ groups of experts. Similarly,
there should be special follow up in developing that
cooperation as well as with regard to its results. With
regard to the sanctions regime on Somalia and Eritrea
in particular, some aspects deserve greater clarity in
future mandates. Those include issues relating to the
Committee’s formal function of attending consultations
of the Organization’s Members and questions relating
to potential gaps in the current sanctions regime,
including the lack of provisions concerning the
carrying of weapons by the security personnel of
delegations visiting Somalia, to give just one example.
Lastly, I would like to thank the Secretariat for its
valuable support. I want to emphasize the importance
of that support in carrying out all the administrative
aspects associated with the work of the chairmanship.
That support also serves to provide him with an
environment conducive to productive work as head of
the Committee, easing the burden and contributing to
the fulfilment of his duties in line with his mandate and
agreement on the part of the Committee’s members.
Turning to the 1540 Committee, although on
15 November I made some personal observations in the
Council from my perspective as Chairman of the
Committee, I think it is important, given the upcoming
renewal of the Committee’s mandate next April, to
briefly and concisely highlight the main ideas and
proposals to emerge from the various bilateral and
multilateral consultations I have held during 2010. I
should therefore like to reiterate the five points I raised
in the Council in November, namely, areas that merit

10-70084

S/PV.6457

greater attention on the part of the Committee; the
Committee’s
relationship
with
the
relevant
international bodies; strengthening the Committee as a
platform for cooperation and bolstering its capacity to
facilitate the provision of assistance; the structure of
the Group of Experts; and, lastly, the length of the
Committee’s mandate.
With regard to areas that merit greater attention
by the Committee, in a wide-ranging assessment, the
Committee found that, of the three categories of
weapons of mass destruction, biological weapons were
the subject of the fewest measures. Likewise, delivery
vehicles, sanctions lists and the financing of prohibited
proliferation activities were also identified as worthy
of special attention.
I reiterate my belief in the pressing need to
further enhance cooperation with international entities,
particularly with regard to information exchange, with
full respect for the specific mandates of those entities
and of the Committee. The Committee’s work on
cooperation and assistance must, therefore, be further
strengthened. Implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) depends not only upon the
political will of States but on the resources they
possess to implement specific security measures. In
that context, the Committee must continue to actively
ensure that requests for assistance and offers to assist
coincide.
A structure to facilitate smoother functioning by
the Group of Experts must be established. It should not
be overly complex, and perhaps the appointment of a
coordinator by the Committee or by the SecretaryGeneral would be a first step in that direction.
Unfortunately, it is unlikely that the risks related
to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors will cease to exist in the short or
medium term. The Committee’s mandate could,
therefore, be extended for a further 10 years, with a
review five years from now, similar to the review cycle
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, in order to be able to draw on a long-term
strategy to address challenges related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
resultant risks related to non-State actors, through
cooperation with the international community.
I assumed the chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict on 1 January
2009. That was the first time that a non-permanent

10-70084

member of the Council had the honour to hold such a
distinguished post. I am pleased to share with the
Council the progress that took place during that period.
As part of the substantive work carried out within the
Group we were able to convene two thematic debates
in the Council, which were chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico, as well as the subsequent
adoption of two presidential statements on the subject
in April 2009 (S/PRST/2009/9) and June 2010
(S/PRST/2010/10). Those decisions reflect the
importance that my country and Council members
attach to the problem of children affected by armed
conflict, and our interest in promoting initiatives that
will end the recruitment of minors or their being
reinducted into armed groups; protect their physical
safety through actions to prevent killing or maiming;
eradicate the practice of sexual violence to which they
are victim. We have also sought to promote measures
aimed at ensuring access to such initiatives for States
suffering the consequences of armed conflict so that
they can establish programmes aimed at the
rehabilitation, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers into their communities and their families.
Those efforts paved the way for the adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009), whose negotiations were led by
my delegation. That resolution constituted a milestone
for the issue, as it extended the Secretary-General’s
criteria for listing parties to armed conflict that recruit
and make use of children and are thus involved in the
murder, mutilation and sexual violation of those
children. That extension was accompanied by the
criteria for listing and de-listing that the Working
Group had studied and that the Secretary-General duly
included in his report on children and armed conflict
this year (S/2010/577). Furthermore, we also held an
Arria Formula meeting in April 2009 to further
strengthen
cooperation
with
non-governmental
organizations.
Additionally, the Working Group adopted 11
conclusions and recommendations on the situation of
children in armed conflict in various parts of the world,
including Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Myanmar, Burundi, Uganda, Sri Lanka, Colombia, the
Philippines and Nepal. Given the unique nature and
complexity of each situation, each negotiation
generated substantive documents which, in addition to
providing an overview of efforts under way in those

7

S/PV.6457

countries, established diverse recommendations that
seek to protect children affected by armed conflict.
Analysis of the situations addressed in the
annexes of the Secretary-General’s report on children
and armed conflict achieved a new level of
understanding with the first field mission of the
Working Group to Nepal, which I led from 22 to
26 November, where I was also joined by the
delegations of Austria, the United States, France, Japan,
the United Kingdom and the Russian Federation. We
were also able to draw on the valuable support of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The purpose of that visit
was to take stock of the progress made in protecting
children affected by armed conflict following the
signing of an action plan by the Government of Nepal,
the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist and the
United Nations on 16 December 2009 after the
Working Group’s adoption of various conclusions on
that situation.
The Group also met with representatives of the
Government and the military leadership in Nepal, the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist and the
youth wings of the political parties. We also met with
United Nations agencies on the ground and
components of the task force on monitoring and
reporting for Nepal. We were also in contact with
representatives of civil society, the Human Rights
Council and national and international media outlets,
and visited rehabilitation and reintegration centres for
children affected by armed conflict.
While the results of that visit will be described in
greater detail at the formal meeting of the Working
Group to take place tomorrow morning, I wish to
emphasize that that first mission constituted a
watershed with respect to the responsibilities entrusted
to the Working Group, by shedding light on one of the
situations addressed by the Secretary-General and by
providing the Working Group with an opportunity to
express in situ its commitment to children affected by
armed conflict. It is thus a crucial tool for improving
the recommendations issued by the Working Group. To
that end, I suggest that the Working Group maintain
that practice by ensuring the resolve and financial
resources needed to give it effect.
Finally, after various actions undertaken by the
Chair of the Working Group, we were able just two

8

months ago to ensure the provision of the
administrative support needed by the Working Group
in order to ensure that the Chair will have the
necessary resources to enable the Working Group to
better carry out its activities and responsibilities.
Finally, I wish to commend for the record the
excellent and outstanding support extended to my
delegation by all members, allowing me to fulfil my
work as Chair of the subsidiary bodies previously
mentioned.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ertugrul Apakan, Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006) concerning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Madam, for giving me the opportunity to speak in my
capacity as Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) and of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006)
concerning the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
At the open debate of the Security Council
convened on 15 November (S/PV.6424), I provided
detailed information about the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee and expressed my suggestions
for its future work. And this afternoon, I will brief the
wider United Nations membership on the work of the
two Committees. For that reason, I will limit my
statement now to only a few points that I wish
particularly to highlight in my personal capacity.
Since I assumed the chairmanship of the CounterTerrorism Committee at the beginning of this year, we
have tried to make counter-terrorism and the work of
the Committee more visible in New York and other
parts of the world, and to look into the evolving nature
of terrorism to identify issues and regions that require
greater attention. In this understanding, the Committee
has adopted a more strategic and focused approach. We
have held detailed thematic discussions on all key
areas indicated in resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) and organized regional discussions. We also
brought together officials in the capitals of the Security
Council members and key counter-terrorism figures of
the United Nations system in Ankara in June. This was
followed in September by a thematic meeting in the
Security Council at the ministerial level (see
S/PV.6389). As a result of all of these efforts, we now

10-70084

S/PV.6457

have a clearer picture of the thematic and regional
challenges and what steps need to be taken.
More transparency has been another priority for
the Committee. This afternoon’s briefing will be my
third to member States. So far, the Executive
Directorate has made presentations to the wider
membership on eight different areas. This afternoon,
two more presentations will be held.

inspection and seizure of contraband cargoes. I
commend these Member States for acting in a
responsible manner, consistent with resolution 1874
(2009). The Committee, with the support of the Panel
of Experts, has responded to these reports, while also
intensifying its awareness-raising activities with a view
to preventing future sanctions violations.

It goes without saying that the implementation of
sanctions is a process that requires continuous and
The Committee should continue its strategic,
determined efforts on the part of the international
focused and more transparent approach. This will help
community. Much has already been done to implement
better monitor the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009), but it is not
resolutions, identify the specific needs of each region
enough. Indeed, the recent reports about the new
or Member State, and enable the Committee to interact
nuclear facilities of the Democratic People’s Republic
and cooperate more intensively with all Member States.
of Korea, including a newly built uranium-enrichment
I believe that the Committee should dwell more on the
facility, about which the Committee has recently been
issues mentioned in resolution 1624 (2005),
briefed, is a stark reminder of the challenges remaining
particularly incitement to terrorism.
ahead of us. Therefore, I very much hope that the
Prevention is another area that needs more Committee will continue to work in the same
attention. We have seen that capacity-building is still a cooperative and efficient manner as it has done during
challenge for many countries. This is an issue that the the past two years under our chairmanship.
Committee should continue to focus on.
The President: I thank Ambassador Apakan for
With regard to the Working Group established his briefing.
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004), which held its first
I now give the floor to His Excellency
meeting this year after a four-year interval, I wish to
Mr. Ruhakana Rugunda, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
inform the Council that a report will be issued in the
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
coming days on its work.
in Africa.
Let me now briefly report to the Council on the
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Uganda has served as
work of the 1718 during the period 2009-2010, and
Chair of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
share my assessment on its future work. Since last year,
Prevention and Resolution in Africa for the past two
the 1718 Committee has encountered various
years. The Working Group, in accordance with its
challenges and, in my opinion, has been able to address
mandate, reviewed and considered issues that affect the
them in an effective and credible way. In this context,
Council’s work on conflict prevention and resolution in
the Committee has designated new entities, goods and
Africa, and that strengthen the Council’s cooperation
individuals associated with the Democratic People’s
with the African Union (AU) and subregional
Republic of Korea’s nuclear and missile programmes.
organizations. The priority issues were considering
It has also adopted and implemented a comprehensive
how conflict early warning and response mechanisms
programme of work covering issues relating to
can be made more effective; considering how countries
compliance,
investigations,
outreach,
dialogue,
emerging from conflict can be better supported to build
assistance and cooperation.
sustainable peace and avoid relapse into conflict;
On 26 November, the Committee adopted its new strengthening the working relationship between the
programme of work, which outlines important tasks for Council and the African Union on conflict prevention
the Committee in the future. I encourage the and resolution in Africa; and African Union-United
Committee to continue implementing the new Nations strategic partnership on security sector reform.
programme of work in a creative and constructive way
The Working Group held four meetings this year.
in the coming months.
On 20 July, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Since last year, the Committee has received Affairs Lynn Pascoe briefed the Working Group on the
various reports from Member States about their proposed establishment of a United Nations office in

10-70084

9

S/PV.6457

Central Africa and the role it would play in promoting
peace and security in the broader context of conflict
prevention in the Central African subregion. The
Working Group exchanged views on how the mandate
of the proposed office could be streamlined, within the
context
of strengthening
AU-United Nations
cooperation, to discharge its role effectively and
complement the efforts of the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and other subregional
organizations.
On August 16, the Working Group held an open
interactive panel discussion on the role of conflict
early warning mechanisms in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. The Directors of the
conflict
early
warning
mechanisms
of
the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Economic Community of West African States, Mr. Kitevu
and Colonel Kone, respectively, were invited by the
Working Group as panelists. Participants included
Council members, representatives of the Department of
Political Affairs, the Office of the Special Advisor on
Africa, non-Council members and observers.
The panel discussion provided an opportunity for
an exchange of views with the key practitioners of the
conflict early warning mechanisms. It focused on how
these mechanisms can be optimally utilized, the
challenges being faced, and how the United Nations
and the international community can support the
African Union and subregional organizations to make
these mechanisms function more effectively.
The Working Group continued to focus on
security sector reform as one of the key prerequisites
for peace and stability, especially in fragile and postconflict African countries. On 2 December, the
Working Group held a panel discussion on the strategic
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations on security sector reform. The Chief of the
United Nations Security Sector Reform Unit, Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, and the Permanent Observer of the African Union,
Ambassador Téte António, briefed the Group on the

10

progress made so far towards the finalization of the
African Union security sector reform policy framework.
The Council has recognized the value that the Ad Hoc
Working Group continues to add to the process of
embedding preventive-diplomacy practices in the
United Nations conflict management architecture.
I would like to recommend that the Working
Group’s practice should be to hold as many open
interactive meetings as possible, as that allows more
Member States and stakeholders to participate and have
an input. It is essential that the Council continue to
support conflict prevention and resolution efforts in
Africa in order to reinforce the commitment and
resolve shown by the African Union in that regard.
Finally, I am grateful to the members of the
Working Group for the support and cooperation
extended to me in the discharge of the Group’s
mandate. I also thank the Secretary of the Working
Group, Mr. Oseloka Obaze, and other members of the
Secretariat who facilitated our work. A comprehensive
report on the activities of the Working Group in the
year 2010 is being finalized for submission to the
President of the Council.
The President: On behalf of the Security Council,
I take this opportunity to express appreciation to the
outgoing Chairmen for the manner in which they have
discharged their important responsibilities on behalf of
the Council. Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador
Nishida, Ambassador Heller, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Rugunda, we are grateful for your
leadership on those issues.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Before adjourning, I would like to invite Council
members to consultations upon the adjournment of this
meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

10-70084
