UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/871
11 August 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 11 AUGUST 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to refer to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 21 January 1999 (S/PRST/1999/3), in which the Council
requested me to report to it on the status of my consultations with the
Government of Angola on a continued multidisciplinary presence of the United
Nations in that country.
As members of the Security Council are aware, the Secretariat had a series
of exchanges with the Government of Angola on this issue, including the
consultations conducted by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Bernard Miyet, and my Special Representative for Angola,
Mr. Issa B. Y. Diallo, in Luanda on 17 and 18 June 1999. Following those
exchanges, I discussed the matter with the Minister of External Relations of
Angola, Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, during the Organization of African Unity
summit in Algiers from 12 to 14 July 1999. I impressed upon the Minister that,
pending further consultations between the United Nations and the Government of
Angola, the new United Nations office should consist of 30 substantive
Professional staff, as well as the necessary administrative and other support
personnel.
In a letter addressed to me on 26 July 1999, a copy of which is attached
(see annex I, enclosure), Minister de Miranda conveyed to me his Government’s
positive assessment of the results of our meeting in Algiers. He indicated that
conditions were now created for thee signing of an agreement with the United
Nations which would enable the United Nations office to start operating in
Angola.
In my reply to Minister de Miranda dated 2 August 1999, which is also
attached (see annex II), I expressed my intention to proceed soon with the
establishment of the United Nations office in Angola, the mandate of which would
be based on the relevant Security Council resolutions and presidential
statements on Angola. The new multidisciplinary office would be staffed with
the personnel necessary to liaise with the political, military, police and other
civilian authorities, with a view to exploring effective measures for restoring
peace. The office would also assist the Angolan people in the area of human
rights and will coordinate other activities.

99-23386 (E)

110899

/...

S/1999/871
English
Page 2

The United Nations Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Unit, the
activities of which enjoy the full support of the Government, would continue to
operate in its present configuration.
Accordingly, I intend to initiate practical arrangements for the earliest
establishment of the new office and the conclusion with the Government of Angola
of a status-of-mission agreement. The cost estimates for the office will be
presented to the Security Council shortly.
I should be grateful if you would have the text of the present letter and
its annexes circulated as a document of the Security Council.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/871
English
Page 3

Annex I
Note verbale dated 27 July 1999 from the Permanent
Mission of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General

The Permanent Mission of the Republic of Angola to the United Nations
presents its compliments to the Secretary-General and has the honour to forward
herewith a copy of a letter dated 26 July 1999 from Mr. João Bernardo de
Miranda, Minister of External Relations of the Republic of Angola, addressed to
Mr. Kofi Annan, Secretary-General (see enclosure).

/...

S/1999/871
English
Page 4

Enclosure
Letter dated 26 July 1999 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Angola addressed to the Secretary-General

Further to the last working session we held alongside the thirty-fifth
Organization of African Unity summit in Algiers, I have the honour to inform you
that my Government appreciated positively the results of our meeting.
Accordingly, conditions are now created for the signing of the Framework
Agreement, which will enable the antenna of the United Nations in Angola to
start functioning.

João Bernardo DE MIRANDA
Minister for Foreign Affairs

(Signed)

/...

S/1999/871
English
Page 5

Annex II
Letter dated 2 August 1999 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola

I wish to express my appreciation for your letter dated 26 July 1999 in
which you give a positive assessment of the results of our meeting during the
Organization of African Unity summit in Algiers. I am particularly encouraged
by your clear indication that conditions are now conducive for the proposed
United Nations office to start operating.
Accordingly, I intend to proceed with the establishment of the United
Nations office in Angola in the immediate future. As you will recall, in its
presidential statement dated 21 January 1999 (PRST/1999/3), the Security Council
underlined the importance it attached to a continued multidisciplinary presence
of the United Nations in Angola.
The mandate of the new office would be based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements on Angola. Bearing in mind the
views of the Security Council and those of the Government of Angola (as outlined
by the Director of International Organizations Department of your Ministry to
the Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
on 28 July 1999), it is my intention to staff the new office with the
international personnel necessary to liaise with the political, military, police
and other civilian authorities of your Government. The office will be headed by
a senior United Nations official.
As indicated above, the overall tasks of the United Nations office would be
to liaise with the relevant authorities, with a view to exploring effective
measures for restoring peace, as well as to assist the Angolan people in the
area of capacity-building and promotion of human rights and to coordinate other
activities.
As we discussed in Algiers, pending further consultations between the
United Nations and the Government of Angola, the office would consist of 30
substantive Professional staff, as well as the necessary administrative and
other support personnel. The United Nations Humanitarian Assistance
Coordination Unit, the activities of which enjoy the full support of your
Government, would continue to operate in its present configuration.
As you are aware, the Security Council has on a number of occasions
expressed a keen interest in the earliest possible agreement between the United
Nations and your Government concerning the future United Nations presence.
Accordingly, I intend to inform the Council shortly of the outcome of our
preliminary talks and of the proposed arrangements outlined above. Immediately
thereafter, I would be in a position to initiate the conclusion with your
Government of a status-of-mission agreement.
(Signed)
-----

Kofi A. ANNAN
