S/PV.6984

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6984th meeting

Monday, 24, June 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hague . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Ms. Vallaud-Belkacem
Mr. Carrera
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Amrani
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Kandangha-Bariki
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 7 June 2013 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2013/335)

13-37153 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1337153*

S/PV.6984

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 7 June 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/335)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Ministers and the other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico,
Montenegro, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine and
Uruguay to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in the meeting: Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special
Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees; and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar, of the Women’s
Initiatives for Gender Justice.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas,
Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Téte António,

2

Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite Archbishop
Francis Assisi Chullikatt, Apostolic Nuncio and
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting
in accordance with the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure and previous practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2013/368, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Togo, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America and Uruguay.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2013/335, which contains the text
of a letter dated 7 June 2013 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Foreign
Secretary Hague, for presiding over this meeting
during the United Kingdom’s presidency of the Security
Council. I commend the leadership and efforts of the
United Kingdom in bringing key international support
and momentum to the crucial fight against conflictrelated sexual violence.
I also welcome the tireless work and advocacy of
Ms. Angelina Jolie. For years, she has been a voice
for the millions of people who are forced to flee their
homes due to conflict, and now for the many survivors
of wartime rape whose bodies have been used as
battlegrounds.

13-37153

S/PV.6984

I am pleased, too, that we are joined by Jane Adong
Anywar, a lawyer and civil society activist who works
to bring justice to victims of sexual violence in conflict.
It is through the efforts of people like Ms. Anywar that
we can end impunity for this crime and ensure that
survivors get the legal redress they deserve.
Last month, I briefed the Council on my visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council will
recall that I visited the Heal Africa hospital in Goma,
where I met women and girls who had been raped and
maimed by armed groups on all sides of the conflict.
Many had a condition called traumatic fistula. In
plain terms, they had been torn inside. Experiencing
great pain and often unable to control bladder and
bowels, they are disabled and often shunned by society.
Hospitals such as Heal Africa in Goma, and Panzi in
Bukavu help rehabilitate such women. They mend their
wounds and provide skills that can give them selfworth and a source of income; but they cannot protect
them. That is a job for the Congolese authorities and the
international community, in particular the Council. As
we drove into the hospital the streets were lined with
women. They were angry and they had a clear message:
no more impunity; no more war; give us peace. They
want us to hear and act on their appeal.
Sexual violence occurs wherever conflict rages.
It has devastating effects on survivors and destroys
the social fabric of whole communities. While women
and girls suffer disproportionately from these vicious
crimes, men and boys are also targeted. Sexual violence
is a crime under international human rights law and a
threat to international peace and security. When used
as a weapon of war, it can significantly exacerbate
conflict and seriously hamper reconciliation.
The international community, through resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), has put in
place a solid framework for responding to conflictrelated sexual violence. The mechanisms established
enable us to carry out global advocacy through my
Special Representative, in collaboration with the United
Nations Action Network against Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which she leads. Today’s draft resolution
sends yet another strong signal to perpetrators that
their acts will no longer be tolerated. They will be held
accountable.
Preventing sexual violence in conflict is our joint
responsibility. It must be part of our work in many areas,
from peacekeeping and political missions to mediation,
ceasefire agreements, security sector reform, justice

sector reform and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The United Nations system is committed to
“Delivering as One”, to end the culture of impunity that
prevails in relation to sexual violence. On behalf of the
Action Network, UN-Women and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations have developed the first-ever
scenario-based training programme for peacekeepers.
A senior women’s protection adviser will be deployed
shortly within the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan to join those already in place,
while others are soon to be deployed in the Central
African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia.
The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict is an important tool
for strengthening national justice systems and legal
frameworks. It has provided technical advice to
authorities in the Central African Republic, Colombia,
Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea, Liberia, Somalia and South Sudan.UNICEF
and the United Nations Population Fund are leading the
United Nations system in coordinating the provision
of services for survivors. And the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
UN-Women are providing expertise for investigating
and documenting gender-based violence.
Along with leadership and access to justice,
understanding the extent of the problem is essential for
effectively protecting women and girls.
I have consistently emphasized the importance of
national ownership in preventing sexual violence. I call
on all leaders at the highest political level to voice their
unequivocal support for our cause and to follow up with
deeds. That includes apprehending and prosecuting
perpetrators to deter further crimes. It means helping
survivors by improving medical, psychological, social
and judicial assistance. And it entails providing the
necessary resources to support the work of my Special
Representative and other mechanisms.
Those who hold power and influence have a special
duty to step forward and be part of a global coalition
of champions determined to break this evil. Sexual
violence is a vile, whenever and wherever it occurs. It
must be exposed and met with the anger and action that
it deserves.
I count on the Council’s sustained leadership to
ensure that perpetrators are held accountable and
survivors receive justice and support.

13-371533

S/PV.6984

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. His personal commitment
to this cause ensures that sexual violence in conflict
remain a critical concern for the entire United Nations
system, and challenges us to work in unison.
I would like to thank the Government of the United
Kingdom, especially Foreign Secretary William Hague,
for hosting this open debate on sexual violence in
conflict and for being among the leading torch-bearers
and champions for this agenda.
I also wish to thank Jane Adong Anywar for
representing the essential work undertaken by civil
society groups, which are on the front line of this battle
every day. I also thank Angelina Jolie for being here
today and standing in solidarity. Her voice is a light in
the darkness for many survivors.
Twenty years ago, the United Nations provided
irrefutable evidence that the widespread and
systematic rape of women, girls and men was being
perpetrated in the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
That led to unprecedented advances in international
jurisprudence — the recognition of rape as a war
crime and crime against humanity by the International
Criminal Tribunals established for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Two weeks ago, I visited Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where an estimated 50,000 women were targeted with
rape and other forms of sexual violence during four years
of conflict. But 20 years after peace was re-established,
impunity for those crimes still reigns. There have been
only a handful of prosecutions. While the perpetrators
have enjoyed the fruits of peace and have been free to
rebuild their lives, their victims continue to work in the
shadows and in shame, unable to lay the past to rest and
to move forward.
In their day-to-day lives, survivors of sexual
violence are forced to face the men who raped
them — in banks, in supermarkets and at the schools
of their children, children whose “inheritance” is the
stigma of sexual violence, many of whom are offspring
born of rape. Those women told me that they could
look forward to the future when that future continued
to be determined by many of the very people who had
destroyed their lives.

4

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, the guns may have
fallen silent 20 years ago, but for the survivors of sexual
violence the war has not ended. Their battle continues as
they struggle with physical and psychological injuries,
stigma and isolation, poverty and destitution. That is
what I have witnessed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
in many other countries devastated by war. Conflictrelated sexual violence, when left unaddressed by
justice and reparations, can have a profound impact
on the sustainability of peace and the prospects for
developments.
That is why the theme of today’s debate — combating
impunity for sexual violence — is of the utmost
relevance and urgency. By focusing on impunity, we
make a more concerted effort to put the spotlight on the
perpetrators, that is, on those who commit, or command,
or condone sexual violence in conflicts. In so doing, we
begin to re-direct the stigma and the consequences of
sexual violence from the survivors to the perpetrators.
Over the course of five years, we have seen
significant progress at the political level, advances led
largely by the Security Council. Its engagement has
shattered an enduring myth that has paralysed action
for too long, namely, that sexual violence is culturally or
socially unspeakable, that it is an inevitable by-product
of war for which little can be done, or that it does not
merit such singular focus because in the hierarchy of
human rights violations sexual violence is a lesser evil.
To the contrary, the resolutions of the Security
Council affirm that this crime, when committed
systematically and used as a tool of war, is a fundamental
threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security, and as such requires an operational, security
and justice response. That paradigm shift requires a
new approach to attack the scourge of war-time rape.
Among other things, it compels us to expand the circle
of stakeholders beyond the traditional gender experts,
to also engage uniformed peacekeepers, mediators,
ceasefire monitors, war-crime prosecutors and the full
range of civilian-protection and justice-sector actors.
The draft resolution to be adopted by the Council
today consolidates that approach. It reinforces the
robust conceptual framework, the infrastructure and
the elements of the compliance regime established
by resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960
(2010) — a compliance regime based on reliable and
timely information and analysis, and the political,
strategic and tactical-level actions that must be taken on
the basis of such information. In its scope, operational
13-37153

S/PV.6984

detail and clarity, the draft resolution encapsulates
the evolution of our understanding of conflict-related
sexual violence and what it takes to prevent it. As such
it, outlines a comprehensive operational approach to
tackle the problem.
The draft resolution places emphasis on a more
consistent and rigorous investigation and prosecution of
sexual violence crimes as a central aspect of deterrence
and, ultimately, prevention. Essentially, we must raise
the cost and consequences for those who commit
such crimes. The draft resolution also stresses that
considerations of sexual violence must be explicitly and
consistently reflected in peace processes, ceasefires and
peace agreements. That gives fundamental recognition
to the principle that there can be no viable peace and
security when the security of women is not at the heart
of peacemaking.
The draft resolution emphasizes that sexual
violence must be specifically reflected in other critical
peace and security processes and arrangements, such as
security sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes. That includes ensuring
that those who commit, command or condone sexual
violence be vetted and excluded from positions of
influence and power.
The draft resolution emphasizes the need for
comprehensive and multidimensional strategies for
us to meet our obligations to the survivors of sexual
violence — the critical health, psychosocial, legal and
other interventions that they must have to rebuild their
lives.
Crucially, the draft resolution calls on all parties
to a conflict to make specific commitments to prevent
sexual violence, and challenges the United Nations to
engage with parties to illicit such commitments. Such
an engagement-based approach has already begun to
yield results, with several formal agreements between
the United Nations and affected countries to address
conflict-related sexual violence.
The United Nations Team of Experts plays an
important role in that regard, serving as a ready resource
for national authorities in their efforts to strengthen the
rule-of-law response to sexual violence. That is proving
to be an innovative and valuable tool for Governments,
and should be further reinforced. In the coming
months, we also hope to accelerate the deployment
of women’s protection advisers to the relevant United
Nations peacekeeping and special political missions.

The women’s protection advisers are a new cadre of
specialists combining political and security expertise,
human rights monitoring and gender analysis. Their
principal role is to catalyse the implementation of the
key operational aspects of the Council’s resolutions on
sexual violence in conflict.
Since taking office, in September 2012, I have
placed particular emphasis on engaging national
stakeholders in order to foster national ownership,
leadership and responsibility. My experience to date
reinforces my belief that it is at the country level
that will and resolve are most urgently required to
implement national legislation, strengthen institutions
for the prosecution of crimes of sexual violence and to
enhance capacity to care for survivors.
I cannot overemphasize that the commitment of
the United Nations system, however great it may be,
can never substitute for the political will and action
of national actors. The United Nations, through the
United Nations Action Network of 13 entities, stands
ready to support local efforts. But national actors must
lead from the front, and the international community
must support their efforts with adequate resources and
technical assistance.
Today it is still largely cost-free to rape a woman,
child or man in conflict. Sexual violence has been used
throughout the ages precisely because it is such a cheap
and devastating weapon. But for the first time in history,
we can reverse that reality. It will require leadership
and political courage, and a relentless determination
to match the cold, calculating brutality of those who
would rape the innocent for military or political gain.
I believe that we have the collective will, and
increasingly the tools, to make it an unsustainable
liability for parties to use sexual violence as a weapon
of war. The resolve of the Council and the international
community as a whole has set us firmly on the path of
accountability and prevention. We must stay the course
until we achieve the critical mass of action that will
turn the tide on history’s oldest and least condemned
crime.
The President: I thank Ms. Bangura for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Jolie.
Ms. Jolie: It is an honour to address the Security
Council. I thank Foreign Secretary Hague for the United
Kingdom’s leadership, and Zainab Bangura, Special

13-371535

S/PV.6984

Representative for her important and extraordinary
work.
The Security Council was established 67 years ago
and has witnessed 67 years of wars and conflict, but
the world has yet to take up war-zone rape as a serious
priority. Hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of
women, children and men have been raped in conflicts
in our lifetimes. The numbers are so vast and the subject
so painful that we often have to stop to remember
that behind each number is someone with a name, a
personality, a story and dreams no different from ours
and those of our children.
Let us be clear what we are speaking about: young
girls raped and impregnated before their bodies are able
to carry a child, causing fistula; boys held at gunpoint
and forced to sexually assault their mothers and sisters;
women raped with bottles, wood branches and knives
to cause as much damage as possible; toddlers, even
babies, dragged from their homes and violated.
I will never forget the survivors whom I have met
or what they told me — the mother in Goma whose
five-year-old daughter had been raped outside a police
station in plain view, or the Syrian woman I met in
Jordan last week who asked that I hide her name and
face because she knew that if she spoke out against the
crimes against her, she would be attacked and possibly
killed.
Rape is a tool of war. It is an act of aggression and
a crime against humanity. It is inflicted intentionally
to destroy the woman, the family and the community.
It ruins lives and fuels conflict. The Charter of the
United Nations is clear; the Security Council has
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Rape as a weapon of
war is an assault on security, and a world in which these
crimes happen is one in which there is not and never
will be peace. Addressing war-zone sexual violence
is therefore the Council’s responsibility, as well as the
duty of the Governments and countries afflicted by
it. In fact, the truth is that in many conflict situations
there is no Government to take responsibility, so
there is no protection and no accountability. When
Governments cannot act, the Security Council must
step in and provide leadership and assistance. For those
crimes happen not because they are inherent to war, but
because the global climate allows it.
That five-year-old girl was raped because her
attacker knew that he would get away with it. Because

6

the world has not treated sexual violence as a priority,
there have only been a handful of prosecutions for
the many hundreds of thousands of survivors. They
suffer most at the hands of their rapists, but they are
also victims of a culture of impunity. That is the sad,
upsetting and, indeed, shameful reality.
I understand that there are many things that are
difficult for the Security Council to agree on, but sexual
violence in conflict should not be one of them. That
it is a crime to rape young children is not something
that I imagine anyone in the Chamber would not be
able to agree on. The rights and wrongs of the issue are
straightforward, and the actions that need to be taken
have been identified. What is needed is political will,
and that is what is being asked of Member States today:
to act on the knowledge of what is right and what is
unjust and to show the determination to do something
about it. Every country in the world is affected by sexual
violence in one form or another, from domestic abuse
to female genital mutilation. All countries therefore
have a responsibility to step forward, but the starting
point must be the Security Council, shouldering its
responsibilities and showing leadership. To women in
refugee camps or those struggling to survive in wartorn communities, there is no greater power in the
world that can stand by them. That young Syrian rape
victim is here because the Council represents her. That
five-year-old child in the Congo must count because
the Council represents her. In her eyes, if her attacker
gets away with his crimes, it is because the Council
has allowed it. The Council sets the bar. If the Security
Council sets rape and sexual violence in conflict as a
priority, it will become one, and progress will be made.
If it does not, this horror will continue.
I thank and encourage those countries that are
already setting a powerful example. My plea to all
members of the Council is to adopt and implement the
draft resolution that is before the members today, so
that the perpetrators are finally held to account and
survivors can at last feel that they are on safer ground.
Please, do not let the issue fall to the wayside when
leaving the Chamber. Meet your commitments; debate
the issue in your Parliaments; mobilize people in
your countries and built it into all your foreign policy
efforts, so that together you can turn the tide of global
opinion, shatter impunity and finally put an end to this
abhorrence.
The President: I thank Ms. Jolie for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Anywar.
13-37153

S/PV.6984

Ms. Anywar: I represent the Women’s Initiatives
for Gender Justice, where I work as a legal monitor
in our Ugandan programme assessing the progress
and challenges in establishing an effective national
mechanism to try conflict-related crimes, including
sexual violence, in the Ugandan context.
The Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice is an
international women’s human rights organization that
advocates for gender justice through the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and domestic mechanisms.
In addition, we also advocate for the participation of
women and the integration of gender provisions within
peace processes and reconciliation efforts from the
perspective of victims/survivors and women’s rights
activists in armed conflict situations.
The paucity of domestic prosecutions for crimes
of sexual violence, the limited volume of international
prosecutions for these crimes and the scale worldwide of
crimes of sexualized violence, particularly in situations
of armed conflict, continue to leave an impunity gap
so distinct that in recent years it has become the focus
of several Security Council resolutions. The attention
given by the Council to sexual violence is necessary
and urgent, and with developments such as the United
Kingdom’s Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative, the
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the work of the International Criminal
Court, attention to this issue is becoming increasingly
strategic.
Over the past 27 years, northern Uganda and several
of its neighbouring countries, including South Sudan,
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, have been subjected to armed
conflict, instability, displacement of the population
and widespread and brutal forms of sexual and genderbased crimes committed by a range of perpetrators,
including armed forces, militia groups and the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA).
In the past decade of our work, the Women’s
Initiatives for Gender Justice has worked with thousands
of victims/survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence and monitored accountability for such crimes
in several conflict or post-conflict countries. With more
than 6,000 grass-roots members and partners within
armed conflict situations, we are aware of the demand
from local communities for a reduction in impunity
and more frequent domestic trials for perpetrators
responsible for committing sexual violence and other
grave crimes. Drawing on all of this work, there are

three observations I would like to offer today regarding
accountability for sexual violence in armed conflicts.
The first is that it is well documented that the
commission of rape and other forms of sexual violence
intensify and increase during times of civil war and
armed conflicts, and yet too often impunity for these
crimes continues to be guaranteed through amnesty
laws. Let me provide an example from Uganda.
Under the Ugandan Amnesty Act of 2000,
complete amnesty was extended to members of the
LRA on the condition that they report to a designated
area, surrender their weapons and make a declaration
renouncing and abandoning involvement in the war
or armed rebellion. Unfortunately, there were no
conditions regarding truth-telling; individuals were not
required to make a full declaration of the acts they had
committed or the incidents they might have witnessed;
and no crimes, including sexual violence, were
excluded from qualification under the amnesty regime.
Victims did not even receive an apology through this
process. The granting of amnesty guaranteed impunity
and therefore did not shift the stigma of shame away
from the survivors to the perpetrators of these crimes.
The pardoning facility under the Amnesty Act was
dissolved last year, but while in existence, it provided
blanket immunity from prosecution for sexual violence
and other crimes for the entire period of the Ugandan
LRA conflict.
The second observation we would like to make is
that leadership on accountability for conflict-related
crimes, including sexual violence, must be provided
at the national level, with priority given to resourcing,
adequate legislation prohibiting acts of sexual violence
and capacity-building for police, investigators, lawyers
and judges regarding the adjudication of these crimes.
The inclusion of credible national prosecutions for
conflict-related crimes, including acts of sexual
violence, within the basket of accountability and
reconciliation initiatives is crucial for locating justice
in proximity to victims. Just as crucial is that domestic
courts prosecuting these international crimes do so in
compliance with the established international standards.
Let me again draw on our experience in Uganda.
In 2011, the International Crimes Division within
Uganda became operational, with the jurisdiction to
prosecute war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide in compliance with the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. The creation of that
domestic war crimes court was welcomed by large

13-371537

S/PV.6984

sections of the community, in particular women’s
rights and peace advocates, who described the court
as comforting for victims and a milestone in raising
hopes and expectations for the realization of justice and
meaningful peace.
Since then, the Ugandan court has adopted some
of the procedures practiced by the ICC, including the
use of redacted statements to support witness safety
in proceedings and in the practices regarding the
disclosure of evidence. These processes are new under
the Ugandan rules of procedure and are helping to
strengthen the understanding that successful witness
and victim protection is at the core of any efficient
investigation and prosecution.
However, there are also challenges at the national
level when attempting to prosecute conflict-related
crimes, including sexual violence. These can include
lack of jurisdiction for the prosecution of war crimes and
crimes against humanity, perhaps a lack of familiarity
of the judiciary with the provisions relating to sexual
violence, ongoing myths regarding sexualized violence
and, sometimes, one-sided prosecutions depending
on the outcome of the conflict. There can also be
challenges related to the practice and administration of
justice, and in Uganda, this has meant a lack of court
reporters, professional interpreters and the management
of transcripts.
Some of these issues are resource and capacityrelated, which leads me to my third observation, which
is that the scale of sexual violence crimes committed
during armed conflict is beyond the capacity of any
national judicial system to address on its own.
Domestic efforts must be complemented by
effective international prosecutions; United Nations
interventions empowered to engage militias and other
perpetrators of these crimes; effective protection
mechanisms for civilians, including those targeting
sexual violence; cooperative regional bodies; and,
above all, compliance by the United Nations and
Member States with their collective resolutions and
recommendations on security, women, peace and the
prevention of and response to acts of sexual violence.
Implementing the existing resolutions regarding
the commission of sexual violence in armed conflict,
highlighting its impact on those targeted by these
crimes, especially girls and women, and addressing the
purpose of this particular form of violence are essential
steps for effecting change in this crisis.

8

The President: I thank Ms. Anywar for her
briefing.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, China, France,
Guatemala, Luxembourg, Morocco, Pakistan,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Togo, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2106 (2013).
I shall now make a statement in my national
capacity as Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom.
I should like to thank the Secretary-General and
some of my fellow Ministers for attending this debate;
the fact that more than 50 countries wish to take part
in this open debate once the Security Council members
have spoken shows the growing global interest and
determination to act on this issue.
I pay tribute to Zainab Bangura for the energy,
determination and vision that she has brought to her
role; to Angelina Jolie for her inspirational work on
behalf of the world’s refugees and for campaigning
with me to end rape and sexual violence in conflict;
and to Jane Adong Anywar for her courageous work
and powerful testimony.
In conflicts in nearly every corner of the globe,
rape is used systematically and ruthlessly in the almost
certain knowledge that there will be no consequences
for the perpetrators. If the international community
does not address this culture of impunity, millions more
women, children and men could well be subjected to
the same appalling treatment, now and in the conflicts
of the future. The lead we set and the action we take
therefore has the potential to save lives and change the
course of events around the world; nothing less than
that should be our ambition.
As the international community, we curbed the
development of nuclear weapons, heading off a once
threatened and unstoppable wave of insecurity. We
have binding Conventions against the use of torture
and on the treatment of prisoners. We have outlawed the

13-37153

S/PV.6984

use of chemical weapons and imposed a global ban on
cluster munitions. We have made progress in choking
off the trade in conflict diamonds, which undermines
many fragile countries. Here in the Security Council
we adopted historic resolution 1325 (2000) on women,
peace and security, and this year we agreed a historic
Arms Trade Treaty, to stem the illegal arms trade that
exacerbates conflict and causes such human misery.
No country could tackle those vast problems alone,
and we have shown that we can confront them together.
Today we face another burning need to unite to
improve the condition of humanity; together it is time
to say that rape and sexual violence used as a weapon of
war is unacceptable, that we know it can be prevented
and that we will act now to eradicate it, shouldering
our responsibilities as national Governments, and
collectively as the Security Council.
Sexual violence is used to destroy lives, tear apart
communities and achieve military objectives, in just
the same way that tanks and bullets are.
Like others here I have witnessed the terrible life
sentence of trauma and illness inflicted on victims,
and the devastating impact on their families and
communities.
I am appalled that the vast majority of survivors
never receive justice, support or recognition despite
years and even decades of waiting, and that it is the
victims, not the perpetrators, who still bear the shame
and stigma.
I have also seen the devastating impact that sexual
violence has on prospects for peace and reconciliation,
undermining our efforts as the Security Council to
advance peace negotiations and agreements.
We have seen the world over that unresolved
grievances fuel further cycles of violence and conflict.
Where there is no justice or dignity, the seeds of future
violence are sown. A new consciousness of this issue
and strong action to protect women and children must
run throughout all the Security Council’s peacebuilding
efforts.
I pay tribute to the organizations and individuals
who have worked for years so that the world knows
and understands the scale of rape and sexual violence
in conflict, and have helped persuade Governments to
take it seriously, as many of us are now doing. I applaud
the local organizations that are on the front line of

efforts to support survivors and achieve accountability,
and which need our active support and assistance.
Their efforts, allied with new attention from
Governments and efforts by the United Nations,
means that we are at last poised to be able to make
unprecedented and historic progress on confronting
wartime rape and sexual violence.
We have made important progress. In London in
April, the States members of the Group of Eight (G-8)
pledged to address sexual violence in conflict as a
threat to global peace and security. I am grateful for
the commitments they joined the United Kingdom
in making and for the work that is flowing from that
agreement.
For example, the United Kingdom is now taking
the lead in developing a new international protocol on
the investigation and documentation of rape and sexual
violence in conflict, working with experts from all over
the world. Its aim is to increase the number of successful
prosecutions by setting out practical standards for the
investigation and documentation of such crimes, so
that the strongest possible evidence is collected and
survivors are cared for sensitively.
We have also set up a team of over 70 United
Kingdom experts, including doctors, forensic scientists,
police and gender experts, which can be deployed to
reinforce United Nations and national efforts. It has
already been deployed in Bosnia, to the Syrian border,
and to Libya, Mali and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo this year. Later this year we will carry out
further deployments to support Syrian survivors, and
we will return to Bosnia, Mali and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We are determined to continue and build on
those efforts as the United Kingdom and to build new
partnerships with countries also working in this area.
But we need global action if we are to shatter the culture
of impunity.
That is why we have put this issue at the heart of
our presidency this month, and why I also intend to
convene a global gathering on this issue during the
session of the General Assembly in September.
Resolution 2106 (2013), which we have just
adopted today, sends a powerful signal to the world
of leadership from the Security Council. It recognizes
the commitments made in the G-8 declaration, which
will add to the international momentum that has begun

13-371539

S/PV.6984

to gather but which must now become unstoppable. It
recognizes the responsibility of national Governments
to uphold human rights and the rule of law in their
countries, and it will expand the tools available to
Ms. Bangura to work with them, notably the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Somalia, which have shown
great courage in signing joint communiqués with the
United Nations.
The resolution also recognize s that effective
investigation and documentation of sexual violence
in armed conflict is vital to bringing perpetrators to
justice and ensuring recourse to justice for survivors,
and I hope that the new international protocol will be
able to make a difference in that area.
I hope that there will also be new commitments by
countries around the world support the deployment of
professionals with expertise in the way I have described.
These and other steps listed in the resolution, if
fully implemented, will represent vital new advances.
But it is only a beginning. We need action on all fronts,
from the Security Council and the United Nations as
a whole, and from Governments in conflict-affected
countries. We need to begin to demolish impunity,
create a new culture of deterrence, and at the same time
focus on long-term care and support for survivors.
We need to home in on lack of accountability as
one of the root causes of rape and sexual violence in
conflict, but at the same time not forget that women’s
political, social and economic empowerment across all
societies is essential and that our goal must be the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We need the Security Council to keep showing
the determined leadership that we have called for, and
at the same time must listen to, involve and support
local organizations. Indeed, I strongly support the
development of a network of regional champions to
support their efforts.
Of course, all countries must do more to address
violence against women in all its forms, and not just in
conflict situations.
We can and must do all those things but must never
lose sight of our overriding objective: to consign the
use of rape as a weapon of war to the pages of history.
I believe that has to begin, above all, with a focus on
ending impunity and by bringing to bear the weight,
authority and leadership of the Security Council.

10

Building on today’s debate, I have new hope that
this will at last be possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
Mr. Carrera (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I am
very pleased and honoured to be participating once
again in an open debate of the Security Council. My
presence here on this occasion is due to several reasons.
First, it is a clear signal of our continued support
for this United Nations forum. Secondly, it is in
response to Secretary Hague’s kind and timely personal
invitation, extended some months ago when we met in
London to discuss various multilateral issues of mutual
interest to the United Kingdom and Guatemala; this
issue in particular was very high on the agenda on that
occasion. Thirdly, it highlights the importance of the
issue, which was also addressed during our presidency
of the Council last October, during which the Council
issued presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23.
Fourthly, I should say that in my professional life I
have always been concerned with the grave problem of
violence against women in general and on the impact it
has on every aspect of economic and social development.
This type of violence, which is particularly associated
with the impunity that results from weak rule of law
institutions, will surely form part, among other things,
of the post-2015 development agenda that we will be
debating in the General Assembly. Finally, I can state
that President Otto Pérez Molina views combating
violence against women as an absolute priority of his
Government. If we do not eradicate gender violence
we will not have security and peace in Guatemala or
anywhere else in the world.
Before moving on, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the concept note you have circulated
(S/2013/335, annex), and to express our appreciation to
the briefers we have heard today, especially SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Zainab Bangura. We are
also grateful for the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2013/149), and would like to express our
appreciation to the delegations of India and Rwanda for
having organized debates on the subject during their
respective presidencies in November 2012 and April
this year.
Sexual violence in situations of armed conflict
is an unacceptable phenomenon, a crime against
humanity, and an insult to the world’s conscience, as

13-37153

S/PV.6984

expressed through the actions of the Security Council
and every organ of the United Nations. It has been the
subject of numerous debates, presidential statements
and resolutions of the Council in this very Chamber. Its
development is built on the basic premise of resolution
1325 (2000), which is that without security for women,
lasting peace is impossible. That was followed by
resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010),
and has culminated today in the adoption of resolution
2106 (2013), aimed at expanding the conceptual
framework of the struggle against this scourge. At
the same time, we have established concrete policies,
including the creation of the post presently occupied
by Ms. Bangura and the assignment of experts to many
peacekeeping operations, among others.
However, the phenomenon persists, as we have
sadly seen in situations such as those in Syria, Mali, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of Congo. In other words, the Council is acting, but,
without denying the value of our proactive stance, we
must recognize that our concrete impact on the ground
continues to be relatively modest. The question we must
ask, then, is what more can we do so that our decisions
are translated into concrete action?
One promising approach lies in insisting more
firmly that States make an ongoing priority of rule of
law reform and strengthening their national institutions,
including the civil and military justice systems, in order
to address sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations, and to combat impunity for those that
commit this type of crime. For that we unquestionably
need political will, as we have heard, but we also need
effective institutions. It is equally crucial to act on
current situations where most of the victims of such
crimes face a wall of impunity. We must act so that
the truth comes out regarding the suffering of women
and so that the perpetrators are held accountable for
their acts. Acknowledging the truth and undertaking
efforts aimed at achieving justice and promoting
reconciliation are the minimum we should do to restore
and re-establish the dignity of the victims.
Guatemala’s own internal conflict was resolved
over 15 years ago, but there still are hundreds of
victims of sexual violence committed by various armed
perpetrators. Happily, and as I have already indicated,
preventing violence against women is a priority of
the Guatemalan State today. We recently enacted
a law against murder and other forms of violence
against women, and one prohibiting sexual violence,

exploitation and human trafficking, which has enabled
us to reform the codification of various crimes in the
Guatemalan penal code. Furthermore, in a measure
designed to improve the access of female victims of
violence to justice, various programmes have been
established in the executive and judicial branches to
help eliminate impunity as it affects women. In that
regard, our Ministry of the Interior, the Office of the
Prosecutor and the courts, with technical and financial
support from various United Nations agencies, have
strengthened their capacity for prosecuting crimes
related to violence against women.
As has been done in Guatemala, the issue of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations should
be reflected in concrete decisions included in peace
accords, especially in matters related to security and
transitional justice. We support the Council’s promotion
of peace and reconciliation processes and agreements
ending conflicts that address the issue explicitly and
thus promote respect for the dignity of victims.
Finally, Guatemala strongly supports the
elimination of obstacles to women’s access to justice in
conflict and post-conflict situations. That was one of
the subjects of presidential statement S/PRST/2012/23,
issued under Guatemala’s presidency of the Security
Council in October. As part of the fight against impunity
regarding sexual violence, that statement also included
a firm condemnation of all acts against women and
girls that violate international law on armed-conflict
and post-conflict situations.
Before concluding, I would like to go off script
to mention that my 13-year-old daughter Laura is
with me in this Chamber. At 13 years of age I met a
victim of sexual violence in conflict for the first time,
a woman who was tortured and raped about 40 times.
Subsequently, I have to say that I have witnessed
such victims in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, Brazil and Colombia. We
are thus discussing an issue that many Latin American
women have suffered from. I would like to say here,
before my 13-year-old daughter, that in the twentyfirst century the world needs freedom and dignity for
women and security for them in their lives, so that no
young girl or adolescent can ever suffer sexual violence
because of an armed conflict or any other circumstance.
In conclusion, we cannot sit by impassably in the
face of any kind of sexual violence as a cause or result
of armed conflict. We must combat it with every means
at our disposal, not only by promoting awareness of

13-3715311

S/PV.6984

its scale, scope and characteristics but also by taking
specific actions to address it decisively.
Mrs. Vallaud-Belkacem (France) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this debate on sexual violence, which, as
we understand it, is too often the tragic fate of women
in conflict situations. I would also like to express our
deep appreciation for the briefings by the SecretaryGeneral, by Ms. Bangura, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and by Ms. Jolie and Ms. Anywar.
We live in a world today where rape is used
as a weapon of physical, psychological and social
destruction, a world where in some places where
women’s bodies have become a real battleground. Such
sexual violence committed in conflict should in no way
be forgotten or go unpunished, and that is what we have
come here to say today. The international community, of
course, has been dealing with this question for some 10
years now, through the Council’s adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) and succeeding resolutions, and that has
led to commendable progress — condemning such
violence unanimously, calling for the intensification
of efforts aimed at better protecting women and, of
course, at combating impunity, but also by establishing
an important principle that I would like to recall here,
that of women’s equal participation in the reconciliation
and reconstruction process. We must not forget that the
best way of protecting those women is by making them
stakeholders, rather than only subjects.
Significant progress has been made since then,
above all political progress, due in particular to the
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict. I would like
once again to commend her commitment, as it has
strengthened international awareness on the subject.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
the zero-tolerance policy that has been set forth here
against all forms of exploitation or sexual abuse
attributed to United Nations staff, in particular forces
deployed on the ground. That policy must continue
with the same determination and firmness, because the
United Nations must be nothing more than exemplary
in that context.
There has also been judicial progress. The ad
hoc tribunals established by the Council and the
International Criminal Court (ICC) have gradually
included sexual violence as crimes under their
jurisdiction. The recognition of sexual violence, in
12

particular rape, as a war crime, crime against humanity
or possibly genocide represents a major step forward; it
is an effective tool in the fight against impunity and a
deterrent, which is exactly what we are seeking.
There has also been legislative progress, with the
recent adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty as the first
legally binding treaty to regulate arms transfers. It
recognizes the link between the international arms trade
and gender-based violence, which France has strongly
supported. We very much hope that such analysis will
continue to prevail in our future discussions.
Nevertheless, we are far from done with our work.
The scale and intractable nature of sexual violence in
current conflicts are intolerable. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, despite the mobilization of
the international community, sexual violence remains
ubiquitous. Committed by all parties, it is carried out
by the Mouvement du 23 mars and by the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC).
The Minova tragedy in South Kivu, where more than
130 women were raped in November 2012 by soldiers
of the FARDC who were tasked with their protection,
reminds us of that brutal reality. France will pursue its
efforts to ensure that the perpetrators of those crimes
and their commanders are prosecuted and punished.
I am extremely concerned by the humanitarian
tragedy affecting Syrian women. Women have played
a leading role in peaceful demonstrations; they have
mobilized on the ground to rebuild a new Syria and
to play an important role within the Syrian National
Coalition. They represent a key element of the solution
that we must urgently seek for the country.
It is known that the regime and its militias have
used sexual violence to terrorize the population since
the crisis began. Today, given the militarization and
radicalization of the conflict, Syrian women are being
silenced, whether in Syria itself, where they continue to
be targeted by the Syrian regime, or in refugee camps,
where forced marriages continue and their vulnerability
is magnified.
We should like to see United Nations reports,
particularly that of the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
as well as the information conveyed by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
contains tangible information on the crimes I have
just described, to militate for a swift referral to the
International Criminal Court. The perpetrators of those

13-37153

S/PV.6984

crimes must understand that they will be punished in
a manner commensurate with their savagery. France
also supports the principle of women’s participation in
terms of the Geneva II discussions on Syria.
In Mali, the President of the Republic has
underscored that the French intervention was in fact also
based on the need to defend the rights of female victims
of violence. The deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the political process currently under way and the
elections to come will, we hope, assist in re-establishing
peace and stability in the country. However, the sexual
violence committed by armed groups in the north in
2012 has traumatized Malian society. Justice must be
pursued for all victims of sexual violence. They must
be provided with psychological and legal assistance.
The Malian authorities, with the support of the United
Nations and the ICC, cannot avoid that issue.
In my opinion, and in conclusion, four actions
must be continued in the fight against sexual violence.
These four actions seek four goals, the so-called “four
Ps” rule: preventing violence, protecting victims,
prosecuting perpetrators, and women’s participation in
the peace and reconstruction process.
Those four actions consist of, first, strengthening
protection on the ground. Women’s protection advisers
play a key role. France wishes to see their deployment
in peacekeeping and political missions extended beyond
the missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Mali, and, above all, that they be provided with
appropriate resources to carry out their work.
Secondly, there is a need to ensure victims’ access
to services, particularly sexual and reproductive
health services. Young girls, adolescents and women
victims of sexual violence can suffer, above and
beyond psychological trauma, serious physical harm
from violence. Adolescents and women are exposed to
early, unwanted pregnancies. We must therefore fully
consider all aspects of that reality.
Why do the sexual and reproductive rights of the
victims of sexual violence continue to be contested?
Restricting access to sexual and reproductive health
care is an infringement of a woman’s right to control her
own body. Substantial progress was made in the recent
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, in
forging consensus to affirm those rights at the global
level. We must consolidate those achievements and

ensure that victims of sexual violence have access to
effective sexual and reproductive health care.
Thirdly, we must take to the fight against impunity
with earnest; stigma and shame must switch sides so
that the victims are no longer those who suffer the
consequences of the crimes. That task falls above
all to Governments, which have the responsibility to
prosecute and punish. However, as has been said, if
the State is unable to so act, the International Criminal
Court, which is universal, must and should play its role.
Finally, the participation of women in conflict
resolution efforts is, I believe, the only sustainable
response.
The
international
community’s
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) must
continue uninterrupted. Since its adoption, awareness
of such results has increased, but is slow in having an
impact on the ground. In Mali, Syria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Central African Republic, the Sudan and Libya, women
must fully contribute to their country’s stabilization. I
believe that no transition will be sustainable unless we
take into consideration and ensure the participation of
one half of humanity.
In that respect, national action plans on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) are a crucial
instrument and must be broadened. As part of its plan
of action, France , in partnership with UN-Women, has
undertaken cooperation programmes aimed at combating
violence against women in Africa and the Arab world.
Recently, we allocated specific funds to programmes
in Mali implemented by local non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), in particular to support women’s
participation in political processes. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, more than €2 million have been
earmarked since 2012 to support Congolese NGOs
combating sexual violence and strengthening women’s
participation in decision-making processes. Along
those lines, the President of France recently announced
the convening of a summit on peace and security in
Africa in Paris in December.
In conclusion, I wish to underscore that, in addition
to the indescribable savagery of sexual violence that has
been addressed here, it is also important to recall the
tragic observation made recently by the World Health
Organization that one in every three women worldwide
has been subjected to domestic or sexual violence. No
region has been spared from the violence. However it
is true that, like ignorance, it behaves as an epidemic

13-3715313

S/PV.6984

that can reach epidemic level in some countries. It
is therefore absolutely crucial to continue to work
unfailingly on all of those issues, because women’s
rights, like human rights, are universal and indivisible.
Mr. Amrani (Morocco): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your presence here today and for
organizing this important debate. Your presence among
us denotes a strong commitment to the fight against
sexual violence in armed conflict.
I would also like to express my sincere appreciation
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Zainab
Bangura, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict; Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Ms. Jane Adong Anywar, of the non-governmental
organization Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice,
for their insightful briefings.
Sexual violence continues to destroy, scar and
traumatize the lives of millions around the world,
both victims and survivors, as well as families and
communities. Regrettably, women and girls are the
most affected by such deplorable acts.
Over the years, a number of tools and mechanisms
have been developed to ensure that action is taken against
the scourge of sexual violence in armed conflicts. The
Security Council, through its growing focus on women
and peace and security, has played an important role in
establishing a solid framework to prevent and address
conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, civil
society has also contributed to this noble goal and shed
much-needed light on one of history’s greatest silences.
Yet more needs to be done.
Today we have a legal and moral responsibility to
act collectively in order to prevent the recurrence of
such crimes, to strengthen the repressive measures
against perpetrators of these horrific acts and to ensure
that they do not remain unpunished. My delegation
would like to make the following five points.
First, the commitment of the national Governments
concerned in the fight against sexual violence in armed
conflict and their ownership of the process are crucial
to preventing and putting an end to this phenomenon.
That requires an innovative approach on our collective
part, one that builds upon the gains achieved so far,
enhances national ownership in the process and tackles
the root causes of conflicts, namely, weak institutions,
poverty, marginalization, social discrimination and
exclusion, while ensuring adequate technical assistance
14

and financial support to help States meet their
commitments.
In that regard, Morocco recognizes the important
role played by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
her team in increasing the international visibility of this
important issue, and for the valuable support she brings
to concerned countries and subregional and regional
organizations.
It is crucial that the United Nations system and
the international community continue to support and
assist Member States, while fully respecting their
sovereignty, in the elaboration of relevant national
legislation, action plans and codes of conduct, as well
as in the strengthening of their institutions and the rule
of law.
Secondly, it is important to adopt a comprehensive
approach in dealing with sexual violence in armed
conflict. Success will be achieved only if the countries
concerned are also able to address the root causes of
this scourge. To that end, a coordinated approach is
needed, not only at the national level but also at that
of the United Nations, notably through strengthening
national institutions in order to prevent conflicts. In
that regard, we highly value the goals of the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and
recognize the need for its implementation.
Thirdly, the fight against impunity should be
a priority. We need to break the existing cycle of
violence and prevent the recurrence of such acts in
armed conflict by ensuring that those responsible of
committing crimes against women and children are
brought to justice.
Fourthly, particular attention and priority should
be given to the vulnerability of refugee populations,
namely, women and children, living in the proximity
of combat zones or unsecured borders or territories.
Restriction of access to vulnerable groups, including
women and girls, who often have no registration
documents, poses major risks to the efforts of the
United Nations in the fight against sexual violence in
armed conflict. It is important that all parties ensure
that there is access to refugee camps in order to reduce
their suffering, promote their rights and ensure their
optimal protection.
Lastly, the involvement of public authorities,
national institutions for human rights, civil society
and non-governmental organizations, including local
13-37153

S/PV.6984

women’s associations, in raising awareness to enhance
the protection of women in conflict situations, as well
as the involvement of the donor community, should be
encouraged, as they make a positive contribution to our
common endeavour.
Finally, I cannot conclude without thanking the
delegation of the United States for introducing the
resolution on this important issue. I also commend the
constructive spirit of compromise that made it possible
for us to adopt it today.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me join others in
thanking you, The Right Honourable William Hague,
United Kingdom Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs and President of the Security
Council, for convening this open debate. I would also
like to convey my sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and his Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for their
respective statements. In addition, please allow me to
acknowledge the presence here today of the Ministers
of Guatemala, France, Morocco, Sweden, Ecuador and
Lithuania, as well as that of our special guests, namely,
Ms. Jane Adong Anywar, from the non-governmental
organization Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice,
and Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In recent months, the Security Council has quite
rightly directed considerable energy to the fight against
sexual and gender-based violence. Today’s open
debate on sexual violence in conflict follows a similar
open debate under Rwanda’s presidency in April (see
S/PV.6948), and one month after the Arria Formula
meeting on gender advisers in peacekeeping missions,
organized by Australia and Guatemala. Although we
can never do enough to protect women and girls — in
families, in villages, across communities and at national
and international levels — we hope that debates such
as these, supported by the eager participation of many
States Members of the United Nations, will translate
into concrete action, and that by taking action to protect
women and girls from violence their key role in our
respective societies will be promoted.
The commitment of the United Kingdom to raise
awareness on war-zone rape and on the need to bring
perpetrators to justice is commendable. In London in
May 2012, you, Secretary Hague, launched a campaign
in London to prevent rape and sexual violence in conflict
zones. Last March, you visited our region: first Rwanda,
where you paid tribute to the victims of the genocide

perpetrated against Tutsis, and discussed lasting peace
in the region. Then you visited the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where sexual and
gender-based violence, tragically, remain prevalent,
and reached out in order to hear from the victims of
such violence. Last April, with your leadership, the
Foreign Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of
Eight adopted a declaration on the prevention of sexual
violence in conflict, which urged every State to bring
the perpetrators to justice. Rwanda commends your
leadership on the issue, Sir, and stands firmly beside
you as we pursue a meaningful international response.
During the 1994 genocide perpetrated against
Tutsis, women and girls were forced to endure
inhuman and degrading atrocities. That memory and
history inspire Rwanda in our unyielding and heartfelt
commitment to eradicate sexual violence as a weapon
of war and genocide. Tens of thousands of Rwandan
women and young girls were raped and left for dead
during the months of April to July 1994. Among those
who survived, many were infected with incurable
diseases, some were made pregnant, and many suffered
the humiliation of having been abused in front of their
families. It is deeply regrettable that many of those who
committed those atrocities in Rwanda continue such
practices in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
today, with total impunity.
We take this opportunity to call upon all Member
States, particularly those within the region, to fully
implement resolution 1804 (2008) and to refrain from
providing any military, financial or political support to
the cynically called Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda.
Rwanda has been able to achieve meaningful
reconciliation within our borders only by insisting on
justice and fighting impunity. Rwandans have come to
understand first-hand the importance of strengthening
internal justice mechanisms and building institutions
that enhance accessibility to justice. Fighting against
impunity must be the primary responsibility of States.
The international community, including the United
Nations, should support national jurisdictions, by
helping to build capacity where gaps exist and by
providing guidance and direction drawn from a rich
well of best practices in the field, including those
gleaned from post-conflict societies such as Rwanda’s.
For Rwanda’s part, we have adopted a range of
policies to prevent and respond to violence against
women and girls. One of the foremost priorities is to

13-3715315

S/PV.6984

protect and rehabilitate the dignity of victims. That
figures prominently in our national action plan on
the implementation of the resolution 1325 (2000). To
that end, sexual and gender-based violence centres
were established at the community level throughout
the country, and a 2009 law on the prevention and
punishment of gender-based violence includes penalties
and substantive mechanisms to empower police to deal
with such crimes.
In a recent trip to our region, the SecretaryGeneral was joined by the President of the World Bank
to launch a centre of excellence for the fight against
violence against women and children. This is a bestpractice one-stop centre and a place where all the
relevant Government and non-Government support
services — health, justice and police, counselling and
welfare — converge to provide support for victims of
sexual and gender-based violence. Such centres offer
a non-threatening environment that allows victims to
take full advantage of their legal rights, as well as to
begin the process of healing. As noted by the SecretaryGeneral during his visit, “Rwanda’s strong political
commitment to prevent and combat violence against
women and children” is reflected in all spheres of the
Government.
The Rwanda Defence Forces (RDF) considers the
prevention and mitigation of sexual violence against
women and girls as a key imperative across all its
deployments. The RDF gender desk devises training
programmes to raise awareness of sexual and genderbased violence. Those programmes have been fully
incorporated into the core curriculums of Rwanda’s
military academies and training institutions. That
is considered integral to the preparation of all RDF
battalions bound for peacekeeping missions abroad.
Moreover, Rwanda is among the leading contributors
of female police and correctional officers to United
Nations peace-support and peacekeeping missions,
where they combat and raise awareness about violence
against women and serve as advisers on gender-based
violence, sharing best practices with officers and local
authorities.
For those reasons, we support the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) and resolution 1960 (2010),
which emphasize that all peacekeeping mandates
incorporate provisions that specifically identify steps
to address sexual violence, and that should include
the clear identification of women’s protection advisers

16

alongside gender advisers and human rights protection
units.
The legal and institutional framework against sexual
and gender-based violence has been strengthened over
time. However, as the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral indicates (S/2013/335), sexual violence
remains prevalent in armed conflict, particularly on
the African continent. Ultimately, it is self-evident that
the most effective means to eradicate sexual violence
in conflict zones is to bring those conflicts to an end.
Any comprehensive global response to the problem
must acknowledge that sexual violence, while vile
and unacceptable under any circumstances, is the byproduct of war. Therefore, any meaningful solution
must address the root causes of conflict. Furthermore,
any global approach must include more effective
monitoring of the commitments made by Member
States to prevent sexual violence where possible and
address its consequences where necessary.
Let me conclude by once again thanking
non-governmental organizations, civil society and
other non-State actors for their support to the cause
of women and girls and for their contribution to
justice against perpetrators of sexual and genderbased violence. We hope and trust that their actions,
combined with a genuine commitment by States as well
as by the international community, will hasten the day
when women, girls and children are no longer brutally
targeted in conflicts that they did not at all create.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate and
for the priority that the United Kingdom is devoting to
combating sexual violence in conflict. I also appreciate
the remarks and presence of Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon this morning. I wish to thank Special
Representative Bangura, Special Envoy Jolie and
Ms. Adong Anywar for their briefings and leadership
on this critical issue affecting international peace and
security.
The United States welcomes this opportunity to
reaffirm the indispensable role of women in bringing
peace and security to countries embroiled in conflict
or emerging from it. Women’s active, indeed integral,
involvement in peace processes and transitional justice
mechanisms, including to address sexual violence, is
critical to laying the foundation for lasting peace. The
resolution that we have adopted today reinforces our
collective efforts to prevent conflict-related sexual

13-37153

S/PV.6984

violence, hold perpetrators accountable for their crimes
and provide support and justice to survivors. It also
recognizes that national Governments have the primary
responsibility for addressing the issue.
We see signs of progress as some national
Governments are making justice systems more
responsive and accessible to survivors of sexual
violence. For example, Sierra Leon’s new sexual offence
law gives stiff minimum sentences to perpetrators. Sri
Lanka’s women’s protection units provide female staff
at police stations, and privacy for women to report
crimes. In May, Somalia committed to ensuring the
the protection of victims, witnesses, journalists and
others who report on sexual violence — a necessity for
strengthening legal cases and bringing those issues into
the public sphere.
Special Representative Bangura deserves special
thanks for her significant work with authorities to
reduce sexual violence in Somalia, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We applaud and appreciate the critical role
that civil society, especially local women’s groups,
plays in assisting survivors by providing them with
medical care, counselling and a political voice, and by
facilitating their access to justice. The United States is
proud to support Congolese organizations that provide
free legal aid for survivors, as well as training for
provincial lawyers and mobile courts — courts that
heard almost 3,000 cases in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last year. The efforts of local civil society
remain vital and deserve even greater support from
national authorities and the international community.
We also commend international initiatives that
bolster national capacity on the issue. The United
Kingdom, and Foreign Secretary Hague in particular,
deserves praise for leading the development by the
Group of Eight of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of rape and other forms
of sexual violence in conflict. Through efforts such as
Justice Rapid Response, UN-Women and other entities
have provided valuable technical support for promoting
accountability by helping to document evidence for
judicial processes. And the Security Council has
adopted targeted sanctions against those who commit,
command or condone sexual violence in places such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We strongly
encourage United Nations Sanctions Committees to
expand their use of that tool to fight impunity.

We have indeed made strides in addressing sexual
violence in conflict, but there is still a long way to go.
More countries should criminalize conflict-related
sexual violence. Provisions that prohibit amnesty for
perpetrators must be put into ceasefire and mediation
agreements. And it is imperative that the international
community and senior United Nations officials, at
Headquarters and in the field, support the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The Security Council must continue to treat this
threat to international peace and security with the
utmost gravity. Sexual violence in conflict cannot
and must not be viewed narrowly as just a women’s
issue, since it remains a horrific weapon of war that
destroys individuals, devastates communities and even
destabilizes countries. Above all, let us remember that
sexual violence is not cultural, it is criminal.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for convening this
open debate on women and peace and security and for
submitting a concept note on the topic (S/2013/335,
annex). I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as the Special Envoy of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
representative of the non-governmental organization
Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice, for their
extensive statements.
Azerbaijan welcomes the adoption of resolution 2106
(2013) on sexual violence at today’s meeting and believes
that it will further advance the issue. Civilians continue
to suffer from inadequate protection in situations of
armed conflict, including discriminatory treatment,
torture, sexual violence, extrajudicial executions, mass
population displacement and ethnic cleansing. In many
situations of armed conflict, sexual violence continues
to be used as a tactic of war to terrorize and force
displacement. The increasing attention of the Security
Council and the wider international community to the
issue has led to the development of a solid normative
framework and to raising awareness about the impact
of sexual violence on its victims, their families and
societies.
It is imperative that all parties to armed conflict
strictly abide by their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. Azerbaijan
reiterates its strong condemnation of all acts of sexual
violence in conflict. There can be no tolerance for

13-3715317

S/PV.6984

such acts, and all the necessary measures must be
taken to end impunity. Governments bear the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians, and
national courts are the principal venues for holding
individuals accountable for crimes of sexual violence.
At the same time, inadequate national capacity and
expertise for investigating and prosecuting acts of
sexual violence remains one of the main impediments
to ensuring accountability. In that regard, we note the
efforts of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, established pursuant to
resolution 1888 (2009), to strengthen the capacity of
national rule-of-law and justice actors. However, when
national authorities fail to take action, the international
community should play a more proactive role in
ensuring an appropriate response.
Unfortunately, not all grave violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law,
including acts of sexual violence, receive sufficient
attention and response at the international and regional
levels. More resolute and targeted measures are
therefore required to bring the perpetrators of such acts
to justice; such measures and appropriate protection
efforts must obviously be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches and preferences.
It is essential to establish the truth with respect
to gross violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law, including sexual violence
in conflict, and to provide adequate and effective
reparations. It is also important to ensure that such
reparations are established through judicial or
administrative mechanisms and made available to
victims. Furthermore, past wrongs that have been left
unpunished or unrecognized may impede progress in
achieving long-awaited peace and reconciliation, and
can also play a key role in the eruption of new conflicts
and the commission of new crimes. It is also essential
to address sexual violence in conflict through all
available means, including by mandating international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions,
as well as by supporting the implementation of their
recommendations.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for more systematic and frequent discussions of this
topic and to once again commend the United Kingdom
for convening this open debate.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to say that I am delighted that this open
debate is being held. I would like to thank you,
18

Mr. President, and your Foreign Secretary, as well as
the representatives of the various countries here today.
I also welcome the participation of the SecretaryGeneral, and I am grateful for the statements made by
Ms. Zainab Bangura, Ms. Angelina Jolie and Ms. Jane
Adong Anywar.
I would like here to mention the feminist movement,
to pay tribute to it and to the thousands of women who
risk their lives on a daily basis to defend women’s
human rights and put an end to impunity.
I would like to recall here the principles of the
United Nations initiative to combat sexual violence
against women in conflict situations. Rape is not
an inevitable consequence of war. Gender violence,
including sexual violence, is a violation of women’s
dignity and fundamental human rights. Attempts to
halt and respond to sexual violence must address gender
inequalities and contribute to women’s empowerment.
Women are often leaders in the process of eliminating
sexual violence and ensuring peace; the constructive
participation of men and boys in it is vital to the
prevention of sexual violence in conflict situations. Best
practices against sexual violence must be strengthened.
Sexual violence in conflict situations and impunity for
those who commit such crimes have been met with a
deafening silence. We all have a duty to act.
We know that during the course of history the
definition of human rights and recognition of their
universality did not evolve at the same time. Only
a little more than 20 years ago, and at several world
summits, was a definition developed — not without
resistance and friction — of women’s rights as human
rights. Only recently, in 1993, was the legal existence of
women as subjects of law recognized.
It was at the World Conference on Human Rights,
held in Vienna in 1993, that it was recognized that the
rights of women and the girl child are an inalienable
part of universal human rights. It was stated there that
the situation of women in the world must be analysed
from the gender perspective in order to ensure that
the universality of human rights shall encompass the
specific situations that prevent us, as women, from
fully exercising our human rights.
Six years later, the focus on the human rights
approach and the gender perspective was to imbue the
most important instrument of international criminal
law: the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court.

13-37153

S/PV.6984

Based on that significant progress, violence against
women is now recognized as a human rights violation
in that it flouts a series of rights and fundamental
freedoms, including the right to life; the right not to
be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment; the right to equality before the law; the right
to equality in the family; and the right to the highest
attainable standard of physical and mental health, inter
alia.
Part of the process of recognizing that violence
against women is a violation of human rights involves
stepping back from views that hold that violence
against women represents a kind of cultural expression
or is the unquestionable prerogative of specific groups
or individuals in the context of the exercise of power.
We know that violence against women is woven
into the social fabric and pervades not only judicial
systems but also the way in which we see the world and
relationships between human beings in time of peace
and in time of armed conflict.
In armed conflict, then, appalling violence against
women, mass rape, abduction and sexual slavery must
not be regarded as exceptions but, rather, as a savage
extension of the daily violence against women. Indeed,
violence against women is not a horrifying exception;
it is, rather, a continuum of violence. Thus, we note
that perhaps because of this, although such violence is
repugnant and illegal, it is in cases of sexual violence
that we see the lowest level of protection and the highest
rate of failure on the part of States to implement their
unshirkable responsibility to respect and guarantee the
human rights of women.
Such vulnerability is particularly acute in the
field of criminal procedural law, where a perverse
cycle of victimization of women occurs. In cases of
sexual violence, victims are routinely interrogated
about their participation in the crime; they are exposed
to unacceptable standards of proof; their lives are
investigated and assessed; their testimony is minimized
or rejected; and their claims are silenced. Today, gender
discrimination has reached the level of juris et de jure
presumptions of law, with real and discriminatory
effects.
In the context of armed conflict, violence against
women has particular significance. The worst crimes
are committed in times of war, which exacerbates
the inequality of women. Thus rape is a message of

castration and mutilation of the enemy, a battle fought
among men but carried out on the bodies of women.
We all know that one of the elements used to
legitimize such acts has been the concept of the sexual
honour of women as being the basis of male honour.
Hence sexual violence against women, sexual slavery
and forced pregnancy become acts that are justifiable in
time of armed conflict, on the basis of the argument that
they meet the needs of men. Faced with this horrifying
reality, we as women are throughout the world turning
our sorrow into strength to demand that our human
rights be respected and that an end be put to impunity.
As we move along the road to equality, a key
milestone has been the entry into force of the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. There,
for the first time, it was recognized in the framework
of international humanitarian law that rape and other
forms of sexual and gender violence are crimes as
serious as genocide, torture, cruel treatment, mutilation
and slavery.
That was also a turning point in the context of
impunity — against impunity in law, which has its
origins in norms such as amnesties, and impunity in
act, which runs the gamut from complicity on the part
of public power, to the passivity of investigators, to
selectivity or corruption on the part of the judiciary.
Those important advances are without a doubt the
result of the jurisprudence of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the statements condemning sexual violence
against women made at Beijing and Vienna, and the
active participation of the women’s movement.
Those beliefs are reflected in my country’s decision
to combat impunity by exercising the unshirkable duty
of States to fight impunity. We have done this not only
with respect to criminal prosecution for the crimes
against humanity committed by the civil-military
dictatorship, using State terrorism, with 413 people
already found guilty.
We also recently signed the Arms Trade Treaty,
after having worked together with many present
here, fighting hard to ensure that for the first time
the link between the international arms trade and
gender violence could be recognized. The President
of my country has signed a decree regarding the

13-3715319

S/PV.6984

implementation of our national plan of action on
resolution 1325 (2000) and complementary measures.
Men and women participating in peacekeeping missions
are given training on gender perspectives and human
rights. The strengthening of gender focal points in Blue
Helmets is also a priority.
In the negotiations leading to the adoption today
of resolution 2106 (2013), we held intensive discussions
on the tensions that may occur between the protection
of human rights and the principle of State sovereignty,
both fundamental pillars of the system of international
relations arising from the Charter of our Organization.
However, just as human rights cannot be degraded
to be used as a Trojan horse for foreign interventionism
in the domestic affairs of a country, neither can
sovereignty be invoked to cast a veil over serious
human rights violations or to protect from impunity in a
particular location. Argentina thus voted in favour of the
resolution, in the belief that it respects the sovereignty
of States and protects human rights, particularly those
of women. As our dear friend Zainab Bangura has said,
eradicating sexual violence in armed conflict is not a
mission impossible.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I wish to express my
appreciation, Mr. President, for the United Kingdom’s
leadership and for Foreign Secretary Hague’s own
personal drive to bring more serious and systematic
international focus to the issue of the prevention of
sexual violence. I thank also the Secretary-General and
Special Representative Bangura for their determined
commitment, as well as Ms. Adong Anywar and all
her colleagues for their inspirational work in the
field, so often in the face of the corrosive violence of
indifference, and Ms. Angelina Jolie for her uninhibited
advocacy and reminder to the Council that so many
millions of people rely on us.
We know that sexual violence is both a tactic and
a consequence of conflict. It can prolong and deepen
conflict. Its prevention is intrinsic to the protection
of civilians in conflict, a primordial concern of the
Council, and to rebuilding societies devastated by
conflict. As successive resolutions of the Council make
plain, sexual violence goes to the heart of the Council’s
mandate in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Despite the Council’s clear stance against sexual
violence in conflict, we also know about the terrible
number of women and girls, men and boys, who
continue to be affected by it every day. Sexual violence

20

is not just a grave concern, it is even endemic in many
current situations on the Council’s daily agenda: the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mali, Afghanistan, Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan and Syria. In the face of such violence,
the international community’s strong expectation — it
should be their demand — is that the Council will do more.
The Council’s open debate on 17 April (see S/PV.6948)
addressed many of the most compelling issues that we
should be dealing with. Today’s resolution 2106 (2013)
is a further step towards ensuring that sexual violence
is addressed across the breadth of our work, but in
a very practical, programmatic way. That includes
the consistent application of targeted sanctions and
eliciting and monitoring commitments from all parties
to conflict.
Today I want to focus on the current culture of
impunity. Changing that to one of accountability
is fundamental to deterrence and prevention. We
have recognized that sexual violence can constitute
war crimes and crimes against humanity; we have
recognized that States have an obligation to investigate
and prosecute such crimes; and we have recognized that
ending impunity is a critical part of achieving lasting
peace. But the fact remains that we have seen only a
tiny number of perpetrators brought to justice. That
sends the dangerous message that sexual violence is
still tolerated. As Special Representative Bangura said
this morning, “Today it is still largely cost-free to rape
a woman, child or man in conflict”.
States have the primary obligation to investigate
and prosecute crimes of sexual violence. That requires
that they criminalize each recognized crime — rape,
sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization and other forms of sexual violence
of comparable gravity. It is not sufficient to just have
those crimes on the books. Female victims of sexual
violence must be provided with equal access to justice,
which requires substantive rights to be recognized and
women and girls to be encouraged to exercise those
rights. Measures must be adopted to encourage victims
and witnesses to testify against perpetrators and to
protect those who do so.
National capacity must be developed to translate
substantive laws into successful investigations and
prosecutions. In that context, we commend the work
being done by the United Nations Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
United Kingdom’s own team of experts, Justice Rapid

13-37153

S/PV.6984

Response and the Institute for International Criminal
Investigations, among others. The Australian Civilian
Corps is strengthening its own gender-based violence
expertise to complement these efforts.
Obviously, even the most sophisticated criminal
justice systems will be of little use if the political will
to investigate and prosecute perpetrators is lacking.
National authorities must fight stigmas that impede
the reporting of incidents of sexual violence to law
enforcement authorities. Investigators must be trained
to look for evidence of crimes of sexual violence and to
gather the evidence necessary to sustain prosecutions.
Crimes of sexual violence, like other serious
international crimes, must be excluded from amnesty
provisions. States should also consider complementary
processes, such as truth and reconciliation commissions,
to supplement criminal accountability processes.
Where national jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to
prosecute crimes of sexual violence, the Council should
consider International Criminal Court (ICC) referral,
and ensure that the Council supports subsequent ICC
activities. We commend the ICC on its leadership in
seeking to ensure that crimes of sexual violence are not
neglected in the fight against impunity.
In conclusion, we have focused today on the victims
of sexual violence, who are overwhelmingly female.
But women are not just victims. They are critical
agents in conflict prevention, resolution, rebuilding
and reconciliation. Just as we must ensure women’s full
and effective participation in efforts to address sexual
violence through both prevention and protection, we
must also to utilize their decisive power to bring about
peace. That is fundamental to the Council’s work
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Foreign Secretary Hague and I am grateful for
his coming to New York to preside over today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, and the Special Envoy of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for their briefings. I
have listened carefully to the statement by Ms. Anywar.
Women are a major force for peace, stability and
development in society. The promotion of gender
equality and women’s rights represents a true reflection
of human civilization and progress, and is also closely
related to peace and world development. In situations
of armed conflict, however, sexual violence against
women is employed by parties to conflict as a means

of war more often than not. Vulnerable groups,
including women, bear the brunt of conflict in many
situations. Sexual violence against women and their
sexual enslavement in armed conflict are not only
grave violations of women’s rights but also a flagrant
challenge to the human conscience and social justice.
It is no surprise that such acts have been
unanimously condemned and opposed by the
international community. China strongly condemns
all violence against civilians in armed conflict, and is
resolutely opposed to using sexual violence as a means
of war, as well as to any acts of sexual violence or
sexual enslavement against women. We call for the full
implementation of the Council’s relevant resolutions
and urge all parties to conflict to abide by international
law and international humanitarian law, and to cease all
acts of violence against women immediately. I would
like to emphasize the following three points.
First, combating sexual violence in conflict must
be done with full respect for national sovereignty, and
should rely primarily on national efforts. National
Governments bear the primary responsibility for
protecting women’s rights in their country; it is they,
first and foremost, that should carry out the task of
implementing the Council’s resolutions and fighting
sexual violence in conflict. In assisting the countries
concerned, the international community, including the
United Nations, must fully respect their sovereignty; it
is important to respect their will and the programmes
drawn up by national Governments based on their own
conditions. It is important to strengthen coordination
with the Governments concerned, provide constructive
help and avoid imposing from outside.
Secondly, the Security Council has an active role
to play in fighting sexual violence in armed conflict,
in the light of its own mandate and strengths. However,
it is different from the Human Rights Council and it is
also different from the Commission on the Status of
Women. When addressing sexual violence, the Council
must not encroach upon the responsibilities of other
United Nations bodies. It must effectively implement its
primary responsibility, that of maintaining international
peace and security, and its efforts must focus on
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction, thereby creating a legal, political and
security environment conducive to addressing sexual
violence in armed conflict and to protecting women’s
rights. The various organs of the United Nations must
follow their own mandates and respect the division of

13-3715321

S/PV.6984

labour, making every attempt to avoid any overlap of
efforts.

delegation would like to commend the leadership of the
United Kingdom in addressing the issue.

Thirdly, attention must be paid to the issues
underlying the protection of women’s security and
curbing sexual violence in armed conflict. It is important
to address issues of women’s rights at a deeper level,
in order to promote women’s full development and
eliminate the root causes of conflict. Attention should
also be given to improving the economic and social
development of the countries concerned, in order to
enhance women’s status and fully empower them. The
international community must increase its attention
to the development of women in those countries and
scale up its aid in that area. It should support capacitybuilding for the Governments concerned and ensure
that assistance to women’s development is increased
in their countries so as to effectively enhance women’s
status and protect their rights.

We welcome the declaration of the Group of Eight
(G-8) on preventing sexual violence in conflict, adopted
in April under the United Kingdom presidency of the
G-8. As the declaration recognizes, sexual violence
represents one of the most serious forms of violation
or abuse of international humanitarian law and human
rights law, and there should be no safe haven for
perpetrators of such crimes.

China took an active part in the consultations on
drafting today’s resolution on sexual violence in armed
conflict (resolution 2106 (2013)), and has just voted in
favour of it. We believe that the Special Representatives
and United Nations missions should implement it in
strict observance of the Council’s mandate.
China is ready to continue to play, with the
international community, an active role in fighting
sexual violence in armed conflict.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank the United Kingdom leadership for convening
this meeting. I appreciate the presence here today of
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, Mr. William Hague. I would also like to express
my sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative, Ms. Bangura, for their
informative briefings, as well as to Ms. Angelina Jolie
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar for their powerful and
moving statements.
Rape, sexual slavery and other forms of sexual
violence in conflict are strictly prohibited under
international humanitarian law and can constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and constitutive
acts of genocide. Ensuring accountability for those
responsible is crucial to eradicating conflict-related
sexual violence. However, it is a disturbing historical
fact that, in many cases, national and international
justice systems have failed to bring perpetrators of such
sexual violence to justice. Against that backdrop, my

22

I would like to underline the following three points.
First, we underscore the importance of accountability at
the national level. States bear the primary responsibility
to protect women and girls from conflict-related sexual
violence and bring those responsible to justice. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the stress placed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on national ownership, leadership and responsibility in
combating sexual violence as one of her priorities. All
States should include the full range of acts of sexual
violence in national penal legislation and ensure the
investigation and prosecution of those responsible for
violations through proper legal and policy frameworks.
We believe that political will is crucial. The lack of
adequate national capacity to investigate and prosecute
sexual violence may also be one of the main challenges
to ensuring accountability for crimes of conflict-related
sexual violence. We welcome the fact that the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict has been focusing its efforts on strengthening
the capacity of national rule of law and justice actors.
The long-term prevention of sexual violence is
equally important. We also commend UN-Women for
its increasing contribution to the promotion of gender
equality and women’s political, social and economic
empowerment, as well as their participation in every
sector of society.
Secondly, we would like to stress the significance
of the international justice mechanism. When national
justice systems are unwilling or unable to fulfil their
responsibilities, international mechanisms, including
the International Criminal Court (ICC), as well as
the ad hoc and mixed tribunals, should play the role
of ensuring accountability. The fact that charges of
sexual violence are included in nearly every case
of investigation and prosecution indicates both the
prevalence of conflict-related sexual violence and the

13-37153

S/PV.6984

significant role of the ICC in holding perpetrators of
those crimes accountable.

the crucial need to ensure justice for survivors is, in our
opinion, particularly appropriate.

The Security Council should play its role by referring
serious sexual violence to the ICC and by adopting
targeted and graduated measures of relevant sanctions
committees. Furthermore, the Security Council needs
to systematically reflect sexual violence in conflict
in all relevant country resolutions and ensure the
inclusion of specific language on addressing conflictrelated sexual violence, including the accelerated and
extended deployment of women’s protection advisers in
all peacekeeping and political mission mandates.

I also take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement, and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura
for her remarkable work as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Finally, I welcome the contribution of Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar, of the NGO Women’s Initiatives for Gender
Justice, and Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Thirdly, fighting impunity and ensuring
accountability should be given critical importance in
ceasefire and post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Ending impunity is crucial if a society recovering from
conflict is to come to terms with the past and to prevent
future abuses. Sexual violence should be included in
the definition of acts prohibited by ceasefires and in
provisions for ceasefire monitoring. Furthermore,
crimes of sexual violence need to be excluded from
amnesty provisions in the context of conflict resolution
processes.
In that context, my delegation would like to stress
that delivering justice for victims of sexual violence
is not just about holding perpetrators accountable, but
also ensures reparative justice. We fully support the
recommendation in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) that reparations awarded through judicial
or administrative mechanisms be established and made
available to victims of sexual violence in conflict.
My delegation welcomes resolution 2106 (2013)
adopted today, and commends the leadership of the
United States delegation for effectively steering the
negotiation process. We believe that the resolution will
mark another significant milestone in our difficult but
victorious journey towards ending sexual violence and
the culture of impunity the world over.
Before closing, my delegation would like to
commend the excellent work of Special Representative
Bangura and extend its full support to her in fulfilling
her mandate. The Republic of Korea will remain
committed to fighting conflict-related sexual violence,
in cooperation with the international community.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Sir, for having organized this
important open debate on sexual violence in armed
conflict. Its focus on the fight against impunity and on

My delegation fully aligns with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
It is important that the Council reiterate today its
most firm condemnation of sexual violence. That abject
and cowardly war tactic ruins the lives of hundreds of
thousands of women and girls, as well as of many men
and boys, who become not only the powerless witnesses
of the harm inflicted on their spouses, mothers,
daughters and sisters, but also, with greater frequency,
direct victims of sexual violence.
Sexual violence in armed conflict is indisputably
a subject directly linked to international peace and
security, as underscored in resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), and today’s resolution
2106 (2013). The fight against sexual violence in
conflict is complex undertaking requiring various
levels of action, including combating impunity, which
is especially important.
Both restorative and punitive, justice can play a
prevention role in terms of future conflict by deterring
potential perpetrators from committing crimes. By
the same token, justice must enable victims to gain
recognition for wrongs they have experienced, and
thereby facilitate the process of remembrance and
reparation, eventually leading to reconciliation and
peacebuilding. As the representative of a victims
organization in Guinea once said, “before turning
the page, we must read the page”. Unfortunately, at
present the vast majority of victims are deprived of this
basic right and the vast majority of the perpetrators of
these crimes do not answer for their actions. That is
inacceptable.
We all know that regardless of cultures and
backgrounds, cases of sexual violence are not always
reported, either because the survivors fear being
ostracized or because they fear for their lives or those
of their relatives, or for both reasons at once. We must
therefore make every effort to ensure protection for

13-3715323

S/PV.6984

victims. It is also important to protect the human rights
advocates who struggle daily to make the survivors
heard. A crime that is not denounced and documented
is a crime that can never be prosecuted and will never
be the subject of reparations.
National courts are primarily responsible for
prosecuting and trying the perpetrators of sexual
violence associated with armed conflict. States must
likewise assume their responsibilities by taking the steps
necessary to incorporate into their national legislation
provisions criminalizing sexual violence and excluding
amnesty laws for the most serious crimes, including
sexual violence. The international community, for its
part, must continue to support national authorities in
their efforts to fight impunity. At the United Nations,
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict can play a particularly useful
supporting role in this regard.
But we must be clear — whatever the reason, many
countries in post-conflict situations do not have and
will not have in the medium term a legal system capable
of judging, with all the guarantees of fair justice, the
perpetrators of these crimes. In such circumstances,
under the principle of complementarity, international
criminal justice must fulfil its supplementary role.
My delegation applauds the efforts made in this
regard by the International Criminal Court (ICC). The
actions and proceedings before the ICC have clearly
helped to strengthen the fight against impunity. I recall
in this context that the issue of a second arrest warrant
against General Bosco Ntaganda includes counts of
crimes against humanity, rape and sexual slavery.
Bosco Ntaganda is now in The Hague being tried for
his crimes, thanks to the cooperation of Member States
that have contributed to his transfer to the ICC. This
is critical matter, and I reiterate the call on States to
cooperate with the Court in accordance with their
respective obligations.
Finally, in the fight against impunity and to end
sexual violence related to conflict, it is important for
the Council to continue to discharge its responsibilities,
provide concrete follow-up to its decisions, adopt, if
necessary, targeted measures to increase the pressure
on perpetrators, and systematically inscribe the alleged
perpetrators of sexual violence on sanctions committee
lists, taking into account the information provided by
the Special Representative in this regard. Resolution
2106 (2013), which we have just adopted, is important in
that repsect, and Luxembourg is proud to be a sponsor.
24

It sends a clear signal to all parties who commit sexual
violence that the Security Council will not relax its
attention to these acts. Impunity will not prevail.
Mr. Kadangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I want to thank your country, the United
Kingdom, for having organized today’s debate on the
theme “Women and peace and security”, especially
sexual violence in armed conflict, and to welcome your
presence among us to lead our work. I also welcome
the Ministers of France, Guatemala and Morocco. Their
presence in this debate reflects the interest that their
countries attach to this alarming issue.
I also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab
Bangura, Ms. Angelina Jolie and Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar for their respective briefings.
I also thank the United States delegation for
its leadership in the preparation and negotiation of
resolution 2106 (2013), which we have just adopted.
Women and girls continue to be the victims of
violence of all kinds during and after armed conflict,
despite all the efforts being made to prevent it. The
emergence of new armed groups in old conflicts, such
as those in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Central African Republic, and the emergence
of new conflicts, such as those in Mali and Syria,
have undoubtedly increased the number of women and
girl victims of sexual violence. These armed groups,
with their generally undisciplined fighters, engage in
countless acts of violence that constitute crimes under
international law. We cannot exonerate national armed
forces from such human rights violations, since they
too harbour so-called rogue elements who commit
the same abuses as those committed by armed rebel
groups, particularly rape, which has now become a
tactic common to all belligerents.
As we noted in our statement on this issue in April
under the Rwandan presidency (see S/PV.6948), the
main underlying causes of the violence include poverty,
poor governance, the democratic deficit, revenge and
the desire for racial domination and to impose one’s
culture or religion. This reality is common to all
countries in conflict, and such problems should be
taken into account by all Governments while their
countries enjoy peace and stability.
There can be no doubt that atrocities against
women and girls will continue to be committed if their
authors have no fear of being caught and if aggressors
are not prosecuted and punshed. We believe that verbal
13-37153

S/PV.6984

condemnations and promises to act are no longer
enough. We must go further by seeking to further
educate not only military and Government leaders,
but also rebel movements. Raising awareness among
the commanders of these forces on the protection of
civilians, respect for international legal instruments,
humanitarian law and human rights law, as well as
the effective implementation of relevant agreements,
should be favored and supported.
Peace missions are already working in these areas,
and we thank them for it. However, we believe that
capacity-building would contribute further towards
that goal. We stress and welcome the particular role
of women’s protection advisers and gender advisers
in peacekeeping operations, as was highlighted at the
Arria formula meeting of 17 May organized by Australia
and Guatemala under the Togolese presidency of the
Security Council. These advisers should be present in
all peace missions.
We must address the issue of impunity through
the adoption of strict provisions. In this regard, the
United Nations should assist States in developing
or establishing mechanisms of cooperation through
bilateral or regional agreements for the arrest and
extradition of alleged perpetrators of violence against
women and girls. and by strengthening the capacity of
national courts, whose weaknesses with respect to this
issue tend to perpetuate the violence.

Despite all the difficulties and the need to ensure
the protection of women and girls in armed conflict
and to prosecute their attackers, there is still the hope
that combating such violence will succeed thanks to the
commitment and efforts of the international community.
We wish to commend the efforts of UN-Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and many
international and non-governmental organizations to
that end. However, their advocacy must include a plea
for the universalization of the Arms Trade Treaty,
because its implementation by all States, particularly
those where weapons are manufactured, could make a
big contribution to ending the sale and illegal trafficking
of arms in countries in conflict. Such weapons fuel
conflict and violence, particularly against women and
girls.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we thank the Secretary-General
and the briefers who have been invited to the Council for
their statements and useful information on combating
sexual violence in armed conflict.
The Security Council, over the past five years,
has repeatedly considered the topic of sexual violence
in armed conflict. The Russian stance was fully laid
out during a similar Security Council open debate in
April this year (see S/PV6948), under the Rwandan
presidency. For that reason, today we would like to
simply touch on some key points.

However, we believe that if the fight against
impunity is to succeed, we must establish effective
cooperation between national and international
courts, and between them and States, including in the
enforcement of arrest warrants and other decisions. All
too often, unfortunately, we note a lack of political will
in that regard. We must remember that every State must
try and prosecute the perpetrators of serious human
rights violations on its territory. States must cooperate
to that end.

The diverse nature of violence in armed conflict
requires us to pay particular attention to all of its
manifestations. We should base our consideration of the
issue of women, peace and security on a comprehensive
approach, as stipulated in resolution 1325 (2000).
Sexual violence is one such manifestation of cause,
warranting firm condemnation and harsh punishment.
Painstaking investigations of all cases and punishment
for the perpetrators are the keys to success in combating
that heinous practice.

Women and girls are the primary victims of
violations of their fundamental human rights in armed
conflict. They must therefore be part of the solution.
As the French representative has pointed out, they
must be stakeholders and not passive subjects. It is
therefore important to involve them in every mediation
and peacebuilding process in the aftermath of conflict.
We welcome the Security Council’s commitment to
ensuring the greater involvement and higher numbers
of women in peacekeeping operations so that they can
play a significant role in victim protection.

We believe that attempts to expand the
interpretation of the relevant scope pertaining to armed
conflict and post-conflict situations that has been
agreed in intergovernmental processes and laid down in
resolutions of the Security Council are unjustified. We
consider that such an approach could have a negative
impact not only on the work of the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole, but also and more
practically on the effectiveness of combating sexual
violence.

13-3715325

S/PV.6984

It is important for all structures involved in the
matter to avoid excessive bureaucracy, which replaces
the real fight against sexual violence in armed
conflict. We consider that it is not possible to combat
sexual violence in armed conflict without the active
involvement of national authorities in the process.
The work of the representatives of the United Nations
system on the ground and cooperation between United
Nations missions and country teams and non-State
armed groups should be carried out with the consent
of and in close cooperation with the Governments of
the affected States. They should also be consulted on
providing assistance or services.
It is important that the primary responsibility
in protecting civilians in their territory be borne
by Governments. Respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Member States is a fundamental
and indivisible principle of the United Nations work.
These principles will be vigorously upheld when they
can foster the development of effective international
cooperation in combating sexual violence.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
United Kingdom Secretary of State of Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, Mr. Hague, for presiding over
today’s debate and the Ministers of Guatemala, France
and Morocco for their statements.
We deeply appreciate the Secretary-General’s
special briefing today, his leadership on combating
sexual violence in armed conflict and his recent
visits to meet the victims of sexual violence. Special
Representative Zainab Bangura has, in a short span of
time, injected a sense of urgency for intensified action.
We pay a tribute to her for her passion and hard work.
Ms. Angelina Jolie’s personal commitment and strong
advocacy of women’s rights have produced results.
The United Kingdom delegation’s succinct concept
note (S/2013/335, annex) has guided our preparations
for this debate. We especially applaud the leadership
role of the United States in the Security Council on
women, peace and security. We thank the United States
delegation for working skilfully and inclusively to forge
consensus on resolution 2106 (2013), adopted today.
As the briefers have substantiated once again
today, the vile crime of sexual violence in armed
conflict is a growing phenomenon. Women, girls, men
and boys are all targeted, but women bear the brunt of
sexual atrocities in wars and armed conflicts. They
are harassed, molested, raped, maimed and disabled.

26

Other forms of violence — sexual slavery, commercial
sexual exploitation, forced pregnancies and enforced
sterilization — are rampant. Such violence assaults
human dignity, ruins the lives of survivors and their
families, and subjects communities and societies to
torture and trauma. Sexual violence in armed conflicts
is used to force the displacement of populations,
illegally acquire natural resources, eliminate political
opponents and punish ethnic and religious groups.
Security Council resolutions over the years have
established that systematic sexual violence, used as
an instrument of war, is a grave threat to international
peace and security. By now, we have developed a
strong normative and institutional framework to fight
that scourge. The erroneous thesis that sexual violence
in armed conflict is a cultural phenomenon has been
rejected. Yet, we know that the implementation of
decisions has been slow and monitoring indifferent.
Those who commit, command and condone sexual
violence still, by and large, act with impunity.
Resolution 2106 (21303), adopted today, will
have an impact on implementation as it translates the
Secretary-General’s recommendations into concrete
decisions. The Security Council, by today’s resolution,
calls for targeted sanctions against perpetrators. It
equips different bodies and entities with tools to oppose
impunity, empowers women to seek redress, strengthens
international political response and fosters national
ownership. The Council’s call for the immediate
cessation of acts of sexual violence and implementation
of time-bound commitments should be heeded by all
parties to armed conflicts. Those calls are not abstract.
They should resonate to real life situations in the
Syria Arab Republic, Guinea-Bissau, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic
and other armed conflicts.
It is important that measures against sexual violence
be made an integral part of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform processes.
Before these exercises are started, mechanisms should
be put in place for women’s protection. More women
should sit at the table where decisions are made on peace
and ceasefire accords, peacekeeping, stabilization and
reconstruction. As the French Minister said so aptly,
women should be stakeholders, not subjects.
It is imperative to mainstream a gender perspective
into peacekeeping operations. As one of the largest
troop-contributing countries, Pakistan can testify that
the appointment of gender advisers in the field has been
13-37153

S/PV.6984

very useful. Adequate resources should be allocated
for that purpose. Pakistani women peacekeepers have
served as police officers, doctors and nurses in missions
in Asia, Africa and the Balkans. We have made gender
sensitization a mandatory part of the training of our
peacekeepers.
To conclude, I emphasize that we should also devote
energies to addressing the root causes of conflicts.
While the Council takes punitive measures against
perpetrators, its efforts are strengthened by the voice
of the global citizens who help us nurture a culture
of zero tolerance of unconscionable acts of sexual
violence. In this context, the perspective of Ms. Jane
Adong Anywar of NGO Women’s Initiatives for Gender
Justice is important and directly relevant to our work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate.
At the same time, I would like to reiterate the position
of Ecuador that the Security Council, in recognition
of the value of keeping the discussion of the serious
topic before us today alive, must constrain its actions in
keeping with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in this as in all contexts — that is to say, with
respect to matters posing a threat international peace
and security.
The Ecuadorian Constitution defines our country
as a territory of peace. Likewise, as a member of the
Union of South American Nations, we have set out to
build a region of peace where the peaceful resolution
of disputes is promoted. We believe that this approach
is fundamental to avoiding conflict. We understand
that peace is not simply the absence of war, but that it
requires us to work to eradicate poverty and inequality
at the national and international levels. We must
recognize that armed conflicts often arise in contexts
of inequality between States resulting from an unjust
international economic system and various forms of
social exclusion and ethnic, religious and gender-based
intolerance, which are determining factors at the root of
armed conflicts and acts of violence. We must therefore
call on States to avoid wars of aggression and the use
of force against supposed threats and to respect the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples.
The current situation of conflicts around the
world is extremely worrying. In this scenario, where
the inequalities among States manifest themselves

in asymmetric struggles in which those who control
resources impose their force and will, the environment
of conflict is influencing economic dynamics. Countries
in crisis resort to the arms trade to strengthen their real
economies. This leads us to wonder what has happened
to the sense of global ethics. Nothing harms human
rights more than fueling the economy with weapons.
Global military spending in 2012 totaled
$1.753 trillion, which is more than 2.5 per cent of global
gross domestic product. The five countries with the
highest military expenditure together represent more
than four-fifths of total global military expenditure.
As we address the problem of sexual violence in
conflict against this backdrop, it must be borne in mind
that there exist social conventions whereby violence
against women is permitted and has, unfortunately,
come to seem normal and commonplace. Rapes
committed during conflict are intended to terrorize,
break families and communities apart, and transmit
infections, and, at times, change the ethnic composition
of populations. However, beyond the motivations for the
use of such acts as weapons of war, they also contribute
to the possession and control of women as pawns of
war.
Sexual violence is a violation of fundamental human
rights, and of the human rights and dignity of women
in particular. Efforts to use international humanitarian
law and international criminal law to protect women
from sexual violence must be redoubled.
All States are responsible not only for ending such
violence but also for ending impunity for war crimes,
including those related to sexual violence. In Ecuador,
the Constitution recognizes the right of people to live
free from all forms of violence. Our Constitution also
designates the armed forces as an institution to protect
the rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens, and that
members of the armed forces may be judged only by the
legal system, which is why the Military Justice Court
was abolished in 2008. This reflects the determination
of the State to ensure the impartiality of judges and to
prevent impunity.
In keeping with these constitutional foundations,
reforms to the penal code were introduced in 2010, and
a chapter was included on crimes against people and
goods protected by international humanitarian law,
incorporating the crimes covered by the Rome Statute
and providing for the severe punishment with extended
prison sentences of 16 to 25 years for any military

13-3715327

S/PV.6984

personnel who commit acts of a sexual or reproductive
nature, including rape, against protected persons during
an armed conflict.
It is crucial to bear in mind that the participation of
women on an equal footing with men is indispensible for
achieving peace. The State of Ecuador has incorporated
the gender perspective into its National Plan for Good
Living, but also has a national plan for the eradication
of gender-based violence, which was established as
State policy in 2007. The Ministry of National Defence
promotes the concept of defence as a public good, and a
gender approach is therefore incorporated into defence
policy. Human rights are seen as an area for action in
policy implementation, including through the promotion
of policies of gender equality, coexistence and respect
for cultural identity and the effective implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889 (2009).
In March this year, we established the Ecuadorian
Armed Forces Gender Policy, based on the principles
of equality and non-discrimination, especially
non-discrimination against women. The Policy
emphasizes the strategic political importance of the
participation of women in the military sphere, with equal
rights and opportunities. The Gender Policy promotes
change in the cultural patterns that lead to gender-based
violence, is incorporated into the education of military
personnel, and promotes educational programmes on
preventing sexual violence, in particular in training
troops.
To measure the impact of the Gender Policy with
indicators, the Ministry of Defence has a computerized
system for monitoring human rights, gender equality
and intercultural matters. This system allows us to
link cases of suspected human rights violations and
gender-based violence, serving as a useful tool for
building respect for human rights and gender equality
in the armed forces and for eradicating violence
against individuals, communities, ethnic groups and
nationalities.
We believe that if each State establishes a national
framework, international ones will be strengthened.
No one should be beyond the reach of national or
international justice in cases of gender violence,
particularly sexual violence in situations of conflict.
Hence Ecuador, as a State party, supports the
International Criminal Court and calls on those States
that have not yet done so, particularly those involved in
conflict of any sort, to accede to the Rome Statute.

28

Finally, Ecuador stresses that combating impunity
is vital in order to deal with the issue of sexual violence
in conflict. But even more important is to address
the causes of conflict, that is, the arms economy and
violence committed by the powerful. Our commitment
is to build a true culture of peace and new ways of
coexistence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Enstrom (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
I would like to begin by thanking the United
Kingdom presidency for having organized this open
debate and the Secretary-General for his briefing. I
also express warm thanks to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bangura and Special Envoy
Jolie as well as to the representative of civil society
for their crucial role in developing, advocating and
implementing this agenda.
We welcome the adoption today of resolution 2106
(2013), which, together with resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1960 (2010) complement
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace
and security. All five Nordic countries are sponsors of
today’s resolution.
We also welcome the United Kingdom’s initiative
on preventing sexual violence in conflict and the
subsequent Group of Eight declaration, which we hope
will enforce the already existing array of mechanisms
within the United Nations and at the regional and
national levels. The focus on sexual violence is
important but should not come at the expense of the
broader agenda on women, peace and security.
In my statement, I would like to focus on three
issues: the need to strengthen the participation of both
women and men in efforts to prevent sexual violence;
the need to strengthen national ownership and to
build capacity at the national level to effectively fight
impunity; and the need for accountability, to end the
culture of impunity for such crimes.
The full and equal participation of women and men
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding is fundamental
to combating sexual violence. Solutions must encompass
all sectors of society, both in peacetime and in times of
conflict. Women must not be seen merely as victims but

13-37153

S/PV.6984

as active participants who are central to all efforts to
combat sexual violence in conflict.

the gender provisions contained in the recently adopted
United Nations Arms Trade Treaty.

Experience shows that women’s involvement in
peace processes can lead to more legitimate and lasting
agreements. We need women to participate actively not
only in United Nations field operations and missions,
but also in national and local institutions.

We commend the contribution of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as the Justice Rapid Response, which
serves to support the strengthening of the national
capacity to investigate and prosecute such crimes.

Efforts to end sexual violence in conflict must
include scrutiny of how gender roles are shaped
and upheld in peacetime. Societies that view men as
superior create an environment that is conducive to
sexual violence in armed conflict.

Let us not forget the importance of providing
justice for those men and women who are victims of
crimes of sexual violence. The crime itself causes pain,
trauma and psychological stigma for survivors. It is
crucial that services be in place, including access to
emergency contraception and safe abortion. The right
to make decisions about one’s own body, life and sexual
health is a basic human right. Survivors must know that
they are not alone and that justice can be done.

As Minister for Defence, I would like to emphasize
the importance of integrating a gender perspective in
peacekeeping operations. If we neglect information
from 50 per cent of the local population, missions
will be less successful. If we do not include half the
population in our security assessments, we cannot
address the security needs of the whole population.
Two months ago, I visited Mali, a country whose
northern regions are currently experiencing conflict.
As in any conflict situation, it is the international
community’s responsibility to ensure accountability
for the atrocities committed, including sexual violence.
We welcome the United Nations-led peacekeeping
operation to Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and the
deployment of a senior women’s protection adviser
from the outset. It is in all our interests that operations
include a gender perspective and awareness of sexual
violence in conflict.
The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations, established last year, supports military
organizations in applying a gender perspective in
operations. The centre is a hub for the exchange of
knowledge and experience in this area.
On the issue of accountability, if a State is
unwilling or unable to investigate and prosecute such
international crimes, the ICC and other international
tribunals play a crucial role. But the ICC is a court of
last resort. Together we must build political support
and technical capacity so as to enable the effective
prosecution of sexual violence at the national level.
We also call on the Security Council sanctions
Committee to focus on sexual violence crimes and to
use its powers to combat impunity, and we welcome

In closing, let me commend the Council’s crucial
work in advancing the women, peace and security
agenda. But let me also reiterate our expectations that
the Council will make use of its powers in order to
achieve our common goal: to end sexual violence in
conflict once and for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Germanas (Lithuania): I would like to start by
congratulating the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council for the month of June for holding this
important debate.
Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
made later by the observer of the European Union.
In my national capacity, let me express Lithuania’s
full support for the recommendations contained in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/149).
Let me also commend the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, for her personal dedication and
commitment.
To tackle impunity, sustained comprehensive
efforts are needed at the national level to guarantee
the prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence and
support for survivors. The Council could make a major
difference by supporting the early establishment of
national reparations programmes as well as developing
a more robust monitoring and reporting system.
National action plans on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) are an important tool that

13-3715329

S/PV.6984

should be fully utilized. Lithuania’s national action
plan, adopted in December 2011, contains a variety
of measures aimed at women’s empowerment through
literacy, education, networking and the development
of skills. It has direct linkages with Lithuania’s
development cooperation programmes, which include a
strong gender element.
All pre-departure training for Lithuanian military
and police personnel participating in international
missions includes specific training on gender issues.
Lithuania strongly supports the inclusion of genderbased violence and violence against women and
children among the mandatory assessment criteria for
arms exports in the international Arms Trade Treaty.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and security sector reform processes, including
stringent vetting of personnel, provide an important
window of opportunity for effective justice for victims
of sexual violence in conflict. Security sector reforms
must include provisions on the personal accountability
of the police and the military, all the way up to the
leadership.
Establishing effective oversight, transparency,
and human rights and gender training for security
sector personnel is instrumental in countering the
culture of impunity. My delegation welcomes the
Secretary General’s recommendation that blanket
amnesties should not be applied where conflict-related
sexual violence is in question. My delegation strongly
supports the implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy towards sexual misconduct in the United
Nations peacekeeping ranks, including the relevant
provisions in all peacekeeping mandates. We call on
the Security Council to use the tools at its disposal
in a more systematic way, including the setting-up of
commissions of inquiry, individual targeted sanctions
and referrals to the International Criminal Court.
We must show iron-clad determination and political
will to stamp out impunity for sexual crimes as a tool of
war. Statesmen, political and religious leaders, women’s
groups, community elders and human rights defenders
must join forces to generate global consensus on the
need to end impunity and pursue accountability at all
levels. By doing so, we shall give restore the voices of
the victims of sexual violence in conflict and create a
powerful deterrent for all those who may be tempted to
resort to sexual crimes as a tactic of war.

30

The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. The presidency will cut off those delegations
that speak for significantly more than four minutes.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Machado (Brazil): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks. We are grateful to Special
Representative Zainab Bangura for her presentation.
My delegation also thanks Ms. Jane Adong Anywar and
Ms. Angelina Jolie for their participation.
Sexual violence is probably one of the most
shameful facets of armed conflict. Despite the progress
achieved since the adoption of resolution 1820 (2008),
the deliberate use of sexual violence as a tactic of war is
still widespread. Effectively addressing the remaining
challenges requires combining prevention, justice and
support to victims.
As with any other type of violence against
civilians, conflict prevention is the best way to ensure
the protection of women and girls. First and foremost,
parties and the international community, especially the
Council, must actively seek to prevent conflict from
arising and, if conflict emerges, resolutely commit to
settling their differences by peaceful means. This is
an ethical imperative and an objective international
obligation under the Charter.
The effective prevention of sexual violence in
armed conflict also requires the strengthening of
national institutions and capabilities so that States can
lead in designing and implementing comprehensive
domestic strategies in this domain. The international
community’s duty is to provide adequate support to
local authorities, when requested, and cooperate with
national efforts in areas such as awareness-raising,
education campaigns, reconciliation and early-warning
systems.
Furthermore, through peacekeeping operations and
special political missions, the United Nations can play
an important preventive role. To that end, Member States

13-37153

S/PV.6984

must ensure that sufficient resources are allocated to
activities in this area in the United Nations budget. We
must also adequately train our peacekeepers in women,
peace and security issues. The Secretariat and missions
throughout the world must continue to improve
prevention tools. In this regard, Brazil is pleased at
the progress made on the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements.
In our prevention efforts, the interlinkage between
security, development and sustainable peace must not
be overlooked. Prevention can greatly benefit from
women’s empowerment and gender equality, which in
many cases depend on social inclusion and economic
opportunity. Adequately responding to the needs of
women in areas such as education, employment and
health services helps create favourable preconditions
for their long-term protection.
The consistent prosecution of sexual crimes is
a strong deterrent to future incidents. The United
Nations is in a unique position to cooperate with
national authorities, as appropriate, in strengthening
national justice systems. Brazil welcomes the work of
Ms. Bangura’s office in this area, as well as the valuable
role that the United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict can play.
National Governments should also focus on seeking
to improve services for victims. Authorities and
societies must be ready to provide the critical health,
psychosocial, legal and other support needed by women
and girls who have been subject to the horrors of sexual
violence in conflict situations.
Brazil is seeking to do its part. Our Ministry of
Defence has signed a letter of intent with UN-Women
to deepen our cooperation regarding the training of
peacekeepers on gender issues and the promotion of
South-South cooperation on this subject. In Haiti,
we have been helping to build local capacity to deal
with victims of gender-based violence in areas such as
health, justice and security. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, more than 400 victims of sexual violence
have benefited from the Brazilian contribution to the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The international community must continue
to work together to translate the increasing global
awareness of the scourge of sexual violence in conflict
into actual improvement of the security of women in
armed conflict. Brazil remains committed to this cause.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative Zainab Bangura for their remarks.
I commend all Council members for the adoption by
consensus of resolution 2106 (2013) today, which
Portugal has co-sponsored and which will help us to
further implement our common fight agains sexual
violence.
Portugal obviously shares the views that will be
expressed by the observer of the European Union,
but allow me to underline some aspects of particular
significance to my country.
In recent years, Security Council resolutions have
recognized sexual violence as a tactic of war and its
potential to undermine peace and security. We need to
recognize that much has been accomplished since 2010.
Monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements have
been established in a number of conflict or post-conflict
situations to collect more consistent information on
conflict related sexual violence. A list of parties to
conflicts that are credibly suspected of committing
sexual violence on a repeated basis has been set up.
A dialogue with those parties has been established
by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to obtain protection commitments and the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict has been formed to
assist national authorities to reinforce judicial systems.
Last but not least, the Council has adopted sanctions
against perpetrators that have been identified or that
are credibly suspected of having committed sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on its agenda.
Portugal values those significant achievements
because there is no real security without women’s
security. The achievements will increasingly make
sexual violence a liability for armed groups by
exposing their leaders to international scrutiny and
pressure. Another accomplishment that we value is
the knowledge that has been developed on the issue
in the past three years by the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The different
dimensions of the problem are now better understood,
and by better understanding the problem, the
international community will be in a better position to
fight it efficiently.

13-3715331

S/PV.6984

Portugal recognizes that, while the Council has
been quite successful in discharging its responsibilities,
much more can be done to reinforce the effectiveness of
our common fight against sexual violence. We strongly
support, in that regard, the five-point priority agenda
carried out by Special Representative Zainab Bangura:
ending impunity, empowering women, mobilizing
political leadership, increasing recognition of rape as a
tactic and consequence of conflict and ensuring a more
coherent response from the United Nations system.
Those five elements represent fundamental goals that
are complementary and mutually reinforcing.
We should start to work towards the effectiveness
of our fight against sexual violence by making full
use of the existing tools — for instance, by ensuring
the deployment in relevant peacekeeping operations
of women’s protection advisers, who will strengthen
the prevention and the response to sexual violence.
Many challenges have delayed the deployment of those
advisers, even when specifically requested by the
Council. That should not be acceptable. Constraints
in the establishment of peacekeeping missions should
not be at the expense of women’s protection advisers,
especially if sexual violence has been identified as a
major concern in a conflict or post-conflict situation.
Anther promising tool at the disposal of Member
States that could be further engaged is the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict. The lack of capacity at the national level to
investigate and prosecute sexual violence remains the
main obstacle to ensuring accountability, and leads to
the prevalence of impunity. It is, therefore, extremely
encouraging that a number of countries have already
requested technical cooperation from the Team to
respond promptly and effectively to conflict-related
sexual violence and to strengthen the capacity of
their national rule of law and justice actors. Portugal
commends the three United Nations entities — the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Development Programme — for
their work in providing assistance in preventing and
addressing that form of violence.
Urgent action in another dimension of the broader
women, peace and security agenda will also have a
positive impact on our common fight against sexual
violence. Indeed, the full and effective participation
of women in formal peace processes will allow
peacemakers to benefit fully from their knowledge

32

and experience. By empowering women and upholding
women’s rights, we will also fight sexual violence more
efficiently.
Women are often — intentionally or by a lack of
security structures — placed at risk. It is striking that
sexual violence has been absent so often from peace
talks and peace agreements, including those that have
followed conflicts where sexual violence was a major
feature of the fighting. The Security Council and the
United Nations can, in general, play an important
role in changing that situation. Sexual violence needs
to be included in the definition of acts prohibited
by ceasefires, and needs to be reflected in specific
provisions of peace agreements related to security
arrangements and transitional justice.
In past years, some notable actions have been taken
to combat impunity at national and international levels.
Governments have prosecuted senior officers of their
armed forces for crimes of sexual violence, and leaders
of parties to armed conflict have been arrested and
transferred to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Subsequent verdicts of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone and the ICC constitute important landmarks of
international justice and demonstrate that accountability
for sexual violence is possible. They send a clear signal
to many parties to armed conflict throughout the world
that impunity is unacceptable. But they also send a
powerful signal to the victims of sexual violence that
no political or military leader is above the law. That
fundamental political message needs to be constantly
emphasized by the United Nations, and by the Security
Council, in particular.
I conclude this intervention with a word for the
victims and the survivors of sexual violence. There
is a need for recognition and reparation. There is a
crucial need to extend affordable and accessible health
services to survivors. Our aim is, certainly, to bring
the perpetrators of sexual violence to justice; but also
to bring justice and adequate care to the survivors and
victims of such hideous crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank Minister Hague for his focus on inscribing the
prevention of sexual violence on the international
agenda. The statement recently adopted by the Group
of Eight (G-8), the Minister’s visit to the Great Lakes
region and the decision to hold a debate of the Security

13-37153

S/PV.6984

Council on the issue are all extremely useful initiatives
in the context of the international campaign against
sexual violence in conflict.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2013/149) and for his briefing this morning. The
recommendations in his report are included in resolution
2106 (2013), which the Council has adopted today.
Belgium welcomes the comprehensive operational
framework outlined in the resolution to fight sexual
violence in conflict, and is proud to co-sponsor the text.
My thanks also go to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, for her unwavering commitment.
In clearly emphasizing the importance of national
leadership, she has successfully negotiated specific
commitments with the Governments of the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea and Somalia.
As the Special Representative is aware, my country
has always been a strong advocate of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security; she also
knows how wholeheartedly Belgium supports her
mandate and her action plan. I note that my country is
currently finalizing its second national action plan for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), covering
the period 2013-2016.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union.
I shall therefore limit my remarks to four points of
particular importance for Belgium.
First, conflict-related sexual violence can amount
to crimes against humanity and war crimes. Such
violations of international law are imprescriptible and
perpetrators incur heavy penalties. During Minister
Hague’s visit to the Great Lakes region, he saw for
himself how the lives of women and children continue
to be destroyed every day by such crimes. We remain
convinced that national courts must remain the locus
of prosecution of perpetrators of serious international
crimes, such as sexual violence. In that context, it is
important to strengthen the judicial systems of those
countries in order to allow trials to take place in the
best possible conditions. The Special Representative
has announced the important signing by the Congolese
authorities of an agreement in principle to fight against
sexual violence. In the light of recent human rights
violations in the region, we nevertheless believe that

the implementation of the agreement must be constantly
monitored.
Secondly, the International Criminal Court is
complementary to national criminal courts. The broad
definition of sexual violence in the Rome Statute should
be applied in this context. We invite those countries
that have not yet done so to ratify the Statute without
further delay.
Thirdly, I would also like to thank the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict for its determined and courageous actions.
We also attach great importance to the activities of
the intergovernmental organization Justice Rapid
Response, which specializes in the deployment of
the panels of experts where sexual violence has been
committed. Belgium supports all efforts to build the
capacities of national actors and all initiatives to aid
the victims.
Fourthly, Belgium would also like to recall that any
sexual violence is a serious violation of human rights.
In that context, everything must be done to ensure that
victims have access to all necessary services from
multiple sectors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the delegation of the United Kingdom for bringing
this important matter to the attention of the Security
Council. Also allow me to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, for
their briefings. My country welcomes the adoption today
of resolution 2106 (2013), which sends a resounding
message concerning the fight against impunity and
the need to focus our efforts on the prosecution of that
crime as a fundamental aspect of prevention.
My country deplores and condemns the recent,
numerous cases of sexual violence recorded by the
Secretary-General in his current report (S/2013/149).
Mexico recognizes that the perpetration of acts of
sexual violence in a post-conflict society impedes
the restoration of peace and the security of the
population, as well as the establishment of solid
governmental institutions. The support of the agencies
of the Organization and of regional organizations
are fundamental elements in eradicating the social,
cultural, economic and political dynamics that give rise
to this these types of acts.

13-3715333

S/PV.6984

Mexico commends the efforts and actions of the
United Nations, its agencies and the Governments
of States in conflict. However, much remains to
be done in order to ensure full access for victims to
systems of justice and reparation and to ensure that
the perpetrators of the acts are brought before the
corresponding tribunals. To that end, it is fundamental
that States provide the necessary training and skills
for armed and security forces in order to combat the
perpetration of those crimes. Of equal importance is
the training of magistrates and other agents of justice
in order to ensure effective, independent and impartial
judicial systems that are well versed in that area.

This fall will mark 13 years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1325 (2000) and three
years since it adopted resolution 1960 (2010). Those
resolutions reflect the international community’s
desire to advance gender equality and denounce sexual
violence in conflict. While those aspirations are the
subject of frequent discussions and debates within these
halls, on the ground — where it really counts — women
continue to be marginalized and victimized. Around
the world, at least one woman in every three has
been beaten, coerced into sex or otherwise abused in
her lifetime. International resolve must be met with
concrete action.

International criminal justice and mixed tribunals
are undoubtedly an indispensable complement to
those efforts. Mexico welcomes the progress that has
been made in the implementation of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

We cannot hope to tackle the issue of sexual
violence in conflict while even in times of peace women
are victims of gender bias and discrimination. The first
step is to address the significant gaps that exist in many
countries’ legal systems. Violence against women takes
root in cultures of discrimination that relegate women
to second-class citizens and deny them the political,
legal and economic rights that men enjoy.

The Security Council must continue to use all
resources at its disposal in targeting the perpetrators
of acts of sexual violence through the adoption of
selective and phased measures through its sanctions
committees, the ad hoc and mixed tribunals, and the
special chambers of national tribunals.
Mexico emphasizes the relevance and usefulness of
the International Criminal Court and its complementary
competency in order to investigate and prosecute the
perpetrators of international crimes, including the war
crime of sexual violence. We encourage those States that
have not yet done so to accede to the Rome Statute as
soon as possible in order to achieve the universalization
of that important instrument. We encourage States to
cooperate so that the Court is able to effectively fulfil
the mandate for which it was established.
Allow me to conclude by reiterating that Mexico
is convinced that there can be no lasting peace without
justice and that there is no room for amnesty for
international crimes, such as that of sexual violence in
conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Waxman (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
you, Sir, for convening this important debate. It brings
much needed awareness and attention to an important
subject. I would also like to recognize the excellent work
done by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura,
and her team.
34

Israel believes that women’s rights are integral to
building a just society in which all citizens live free
of violence and their human rights are respected and
protected. Israel is proud to sponsor resolution 2106
(2013) as we have with all previous resolutions on
women and peace and security.
It is the legal and moral obligation of all States to
protect women and girls from sexual violence. There
must be a system of law and justice that leaves no doubt
that sexual intimidation and violence aimed at women
is inexcusable. In the Middle East, many legal systems
do not meet basic international standards when it comes
to protecting women. In some instances, marital rape
is not regarded as a criminal offence, and there are
no procedures in place to deal with cases of domestic
sexual abuse.
In certain States, thousands of women are victims
of so-called honour killings. Owing to weak and
indifferent justice systems, perpetrators who claim to
have preserved family honour are rarely prosecuted,
or if they are, they receive light sentences. In those
instances, women are victimized twice — first by the
perpetrator of the crime and then by an indifferent
justice system. Often, rape survivors are forced to
marry their rapists, and there are countless examples
in which women and girls have been imprisoned for
so-called moral crimes.

13-37153

S/PV.6984

In Syria, under Bashar Al-Assad’s brutal regime,
the death toll has surpassed 93,000, and more than
one-third of the population requires humanitarian
assistance. The Syrian army and its State-sponsored
militia, known as the Shabbiha, have employed sexual
violence as devastating weapons in a ruthless campaign
of intimidation. As described in the Secretary-General’s
report on sexual violence in conflict of March 2013
(S/2013/149), Syrian forces have committed rape,
torture and other inhumane acts that constitute war
crimes. Approximately 1.5 million Syrian refugees
have fled their homes. Thousands of women and
children who escaped sexual violence in Syria now live
in constant fear of kidnapping, assault and rape inside
refugee camps.
As a family of nations, our responsibility to one
another stems from our common humanity. Our moral
imperative supersedes whatever politics, religion or
geography may divide us. There can be zero tolerance
for sexual violence. We must tirelessly persist until the
day when women are the agents of peace rather than the
victims of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Right Honourable William Hague, Secretary
of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the
United Kingdom, for holding this very important debate.
Japan appreciates the United Kingdom’s initiative on
preventing sexual violence in conflict, including the
Group of Eight (G-8) process.
I also would like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict for their respective briefings. I would also
like to thank and welcome the participation of the
representatives from civil society.
Japan welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
2106 (2013), which further strengthens the framework
established by the previous relevant resolutions and
contains critical operational guidance. As described in
the historic Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence
in Conflict adopted at the Group of Eight Summit, held
in London on 11 April — the early implementation
of which was encouraged by the G-8 leaders last
week — despite various efforts, sexual violence in
conflict continues to occur in the twenty-first century,
and we share the view that more must be done to address

these ongoing crimes. Japan is committed to holding
perpetrators to account and to supporting victims.
First, in order to prevent sexual violence, we need
to raise the cost to perpetrators and end the culture
of impunity. In this regard, it is essential that we
support national Governments in meeting their own
challenges in terms of justice and accountability, and
that we strengthen international justice mechanisms.
With regard to the former, Japan is helping national
Governments to develop their legal systems and
facilitate security sector reform. With regard to the
latter, Japan attaches great importance to the role of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). Japan, as a leading
contributor to the ICC, believes that there is a need to
further promote the Court’s universality, and expects
the dialogue and collaboration between the Security
Council and the ICC to deepen.
Furthermore, the effective investigation and
documentation of crimes of sexual violence are
instrumental in bringing perpetrators to justice. To that
end, developing the capacity of national Governments
to investigate crimes and raising awareness of and
sensitivity to sexual violence are both essential. In
that regard, Japan believes that providing standard
guidelines would be useful, and therefore supports
the development of an international protocol on the
investigation and documentation of sexual violence in
conflict.
Secondly, we also recognize the importance of
providing relief to the victims of sexual violence. Japan
is committed to ensuring that multi-sectoral assistance
and services are provided to victims. In this connection,
we would like to mention that, in April of this year,
Mr. Motoo Noguchi, a former judge in the Supreme
Court Chamber of the Extraordinary Chambers in the
Court of Cambodia, was elected Chair of the Board of
Directors of the Trust Fund for Victims.
Thirdly, Japan recently made a contribution
of $1 million to the United Nations Trust Fund to
End Violence against Women, which is managed by
UN-Women. We are also currently taking part in efforts
to raise awareness of the Fund, and to expand its donor
base, including private sector donors.
In closing, Japan reiterates its full support for
the mandate of Special Representative Bangura and
commends her proactive engagements. We would also
like to underline the important role played by the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in

13-3715335

S/PV.6984

Conflictin fostering national ownership, leadership
and responsibility in addressing sexual violence. Japan
strongly supports their efforts and will cooperate
closely with them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank Great Britain for
organizing this debate and Secretary Hague in particular
for his personal commitment. I also congratulate the
United States on having so ably negotiated resolution
2106 (2013) adopted today.
We also thank the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative Zainab Bangura and commend
them for their leadership, as well as today’s briefers.
Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the focus of today’s debate on
addressing accountability and the fight against
impunity. Let me be clear — our ultimate goal has to
be, first and foremost, the prevention of sexual violence
in conflict. In cases where acts of sexual violence have
already occurred, it is indispensable that perpetrators
be immediately brought to justice and survivors receive
adequate support and redress. Only effective criminal
prosecution during and after conflict will lead to an
equally effective prevention system that can help to
create long-term peace.
Let me stress some important points and provide
some practical examples. First, it cannot be stressed
enough that part of any effective prevention of sexual
violence is the equal involvement of women. Not only
the consideration of their special needs, but also their
participation in all stages of decision-making processes
are essential. This also applies to programmes such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform and transitional justice. In this
regard, Germany has supported, inter alia, a regional
project in the Horn of Africa to empower women by
helping them to gain access to political and economical
decision-making processes.
Secondly, when sexual violence constitutes a crime
against humanity, a war crime or even genocide, it has
to be subject to punishment and has to be excluded from
amnesty provisions. Whenever States are not willing
or capable to fulfil their responsibility to prosecute
perpetrators accordingly, the international community
must react in order to prevent a culture of impunity, as

36

was recently stressed at the Group of Eight meeting in
the United Kingdom. Regional justice mechanisms and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) can also play an
important role. We also welcome the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict in Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bangura’s Office in this regard.
The German Centre for International Peace
Operations offers special pre-deployment courses on
establishing the rule of law, which emphasize the need
to prosecute sexual violence and raise awareness for
gender-based violence.
Thirdly, appropriate medical and psychosocial
support for survivors of sexual violence, including
access to sexual reproductive health services, as well
as access to justice and reparations, are fundamental
prerequisites for the effective reintegration of women
into their respective societies. Germany has, for
example, funded several medical counseling centres
in Congo, where women can receive medical and
psychological support, as well as emergency HIV postexposure prophylaxis. We also support transitional
justice mechanisms, such as truth and reconciliation
committees, and dialogue between these and women’s
rights organizations.
Lastly, our full support is needed by those who
are essential to the fight against the scourge of sexual
violence, such as human rights defenders, doctors and
journalists, who are themselves at special risk.
Let me end by stressing that the Security Council
has a role to play in monitoring the commitments made
by parties to conflicts. In this regard, it can and should do
more to hold perpetrators accountable. Without having
to create a new mechanism, it could already make use
of the tools at hand, for example by reacting to cases
of sexual violence in a certain country with Security
Council press statements, by writing specific letters to
concerned Governments or by referring specific cases
more frequently to the Sanctions Committees and, as a
last resort, to the ICC.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes the presence of Foreign Secretary Hague,
and the attention paid to this important issue by the
Group of Eight and the United Kingdom in particular.
We also welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and Special Representative Bangura, who has been a
13-37153

S/PV.6984

fearless advocate on sexual violence in conflict. We
applaud the passion that they and many others have
brought to this discussion.
As my delegation said in the April debate on sexual
violence in conflict during the Rwandan presidency
(see S/PV.6948), it is vitally important that the Council
send a clear message on the issue of sexual violence
to the entire international community and that it does
so through, inter alia, the strong statements made in
debates like this. We welcome the United Kingdom’s
concept note (S/2013/335, annex) and the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report on sexual violence in
conflict (S/2013/149), both of which correctly highlight
that national Governments have primary legal and moral
responsibility for the protection of civilian populations,
including from sexual violence in conflict.
Indeed, as the Secretary-General’s report identifies,
the lack at the national level of capacity to investigate
and prosecute is one of the principal impediments to
ensuring accountability for conflict-related sexual
violence. We agree with Portugal and others that the
United Nations, across its relevant divisions such as the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, must
continue its efforts to focus on supporting national
efforts.
We have received excellent information and
recommendations from today’s briefers and from
Member State interventions, often, as I have said, with
considerable passion. Against that background, I wish
to make a few specific points.
The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict provides important
technical assistance to national authorities attempting
to bolster national civil and military justice systems.
Building national capacity remains one of the best and
most comprehensive ways to address sexual violence
in conflict, so we very strongly support the assistance
regarding national capacities being provided to various
Governments by the Team of Experts. Indeed, to
underscore its importance, we encourage continued
further reference to the work of the Team of Experts in
relevant Council outputs.
Next, accountability for sexual violence does
not lend itself to a one-size-fits-all approach.
The Council must be agile, inclusive and open to
considering alternative courses of action. Presidential

and public statements from the Council give voice to
the international community’s abhorrence for sexual
violence and send a very strong signal that it will not
be tolerated. But words alone are not enough, and, in
appropriate circumstances, where national authorities
are unwilling or unable to act, the Council should
consider referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Similarly, the Council should also consider the use of
mixed tribunals and truth and reconciliation processes,
and any judicial measures should be clearly victimfocused.
We also encourage the Council to include this topic
in its annual consultations with the African Union’s
Peace and Security Council. The perspectives and
expertise of regional organizations are valuable in
developing comprehensive strategies for addressing
accountability for sexual violence in conflict.
We also highlight the important role that
non-governmental organizations and civil society
groups can play in drawing attention to some of the
worst abuses, and their related role as an important part
of the accountability landscape — sometimes, as the
representative of Germany has pointed out, by putting
themselves at considerable special risk.
New Zealand welcomes the Council’s consideration
of this specific aspect of the women, peace and
security agenda, and we urge that it give consideration
to the specific issues we have raised and that it also
remain seized of the wider agenda, including women’s
participation in political processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
We join other delegations in commending the United
Kingdom for its outstanding, persistent and welcomed
championing of this critical issue. We welcome the
Foreign Secretary to New York, and we are also grateful
to the Secretary-General and to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zainab Bangura for their
comments and insights this morning.
I will not delve into the scope of the mandate
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura, a United Nations official whom we admire
greatly and support, nor even speak of the very
necessary role of the International Criminal Court,
which, for us, is a logical given. What I hope to do in
the next few minutes is pose a most basic question and
make three broad suggestions.

13-3715337

S/PV.6984

I begin by asking this: do we, as a collective
membership, bound together in this Organization and by
its Charter, have the credibility to offer strong opinions
on this subject matter? Do we have the credibility when
together we have all refused to undertake the complete
range of actions necessary to ensure that sexual abuse
and exploitation by our own peacekeepers, United
Nations peacekeepers, be reduced to zero?

I would never disgrace their efforts. I know only too
well and first-hand what they do and can endure. But I
also know that we have long treated those individuals
who dare commit sexual abuses too lightly. Indeed,
while it is they who in the end disgrace United Nations
peacekeeping, we on occasion also contribute to it
by our clear indifference. I hope that this debate will
restart this discussion.

Can we not be accused by others of brazen hypocrisy
when we condemn in this Chamber all expressions of
conflict-related sexual violence committed against
women, girls and boys, and speak of them as unjust
and intolerable — and we have done this for 13 years
now — and then down the hall, only a few metres from
here, in the Sixth Committee, we do next to nothing,
year in and year out, on the draft convention on criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission, a draft which has been on the agenda of the
Sixth Committee since 2007.

So what must we do regarding United Nations
peacekeeping? We must adopt the convention on
criminal accountability as soon as possible; we must
make the United Nations a co-examiner of the facts,
even when the allegations involve United Nations
military personnel. We must be more transparent
regarding the severity and nature of the crimes being
committed by United Nations peacekeepers. We must
do better on matters relating to paternity. In situ courtmartials for military offenders must be the rule and not
the exception for sexual offences, and we must consider
again the proposal that all United Nations personnel
destined for field service submit a sample of their
DNA to the United Nations before they embark, both
to serve as a deterrent to the commission of crimes and
also for the sake of possible subsequent investigations,
including establishing paternity. And, lastly, we, the
Member States, need to report to the UN clearly and
at the earliest possible time, what judicial steps were
undertaken by our authorities with respect to the
alleged crimes.

Do we have any credibility when we insist that the
United Nations has no business in relation to the conduct
of investigations into alleged crimes committed by our
own United Nations uniformed peacekeepers, knowing
that in the past we, the Member States, were not reliable
enough in guaranteeing that justice was done in respect
of the victims?
Are we credible when in 2012, the last Office of
Internal Oversight Services reporting period, we still
had 42 cases of sexual exploitation and abuse involving
United Nations peacekeepers being investigated by that
Office? By now, some seven years after we identified
both the challenge and the plan needed to eliminate
this odious phenomenon, there should be practically
no cases at all. I do not wish to be misunderstood: if
we had done everything we should have done over the
past seven years to ensure the total elimination of this
abominable practice by our own peacekeepers, and
they still occurred, then we could accept that there is
little more we can do. But we, as Member States, have
not done everything, and so we cannot make that claim.
The United Nations is required to set an example
before our publics as an Organization that will without
question pay special attention to the most vulnerable
and defenceless protected persons in war, with, first,
a guaranteed protection provided by ourselves, from
ourselves and then from others. My intention here is
not to cast doubt on or belittle the outstanding service
and contributions of United Nations peacekeepers. As
a former peacekeeper myself, I would never do that;
38

Beyond United Nations peacekeeping, what else
should the United Nations do to assist societies or
countries in war, or emerging from war, to address
sexual violence and end impunity?
The United Nations, in our opinion, requires a single
vehicle for the delivery of judicial and legal advice.
My delegation has been saying this for many years
now. So crucial is a functioning, credible judiciary to
every State’s existence, it is remarkable that, 68 years
after the founding of the United Nations, while we
have single-purpose departments and agencies for
almost everything, we do not have one for this: only
a hodge-podge of rule-of-law offices, representatives,
units and experts scattered throughout the Secretariat
and specialized agencies.
It would be like having a major modern hospital
containing wings dedicated to every known
medical specialty and sub-specialty, but with no
division dedicated to cardiology or cardiovascular
surgery — only a few cardiologists scattered throughout
13-37153

S/PV.6984

the hospital — because somehow we thought the heart
did not merit it. What we have is simply insufficient.
The United Nations needs a service, a full-fledged
department that, on request, can advise Member
States that seek to upgrade or reform their judiciary
or prosecution services or wish to improve their penal
codes. United Nations missions of every variety would
also require its services. If we are to be serious about
ending impunity for sexual crimes in the context of war,
that is what we need. Teams of experts are a good start
where the action of the Security Council is concerned
but fall woefully short of what is required, and I myself
have seen this in United Nations field operations.
Secondly, we must support all and every effort
aimed at the creation of an international repository for
evidence — a complicated business, we know, owing to
concerns relating to contamination and admissibility.
Nevertheless, we must try to set it up. We would then
be in a position to better assist national jurisdictions
that are incapable of or unwilling to prosecute during
conflict, but would in some cases be better able to do so
post-conflict. Such a facility could also be of service to
the International Criminal Court.
Finally, while my delegation believes that it is of
course necessary to focus on women, girls and boys as
the obvious victims of sexual violence in the context of
war, there is an unfortunate aspect to that view, which
is that we give the impression that only the young count.
In all conflicts, in our experience, it is the elderly,
women and men, who are often the most vulnerable
to the horrors of war, simply because their immobility
in many cases means they cannot flee. Elderly women
can therefore be, and often are, more easily assaulted
sexually and then murdered, than younger women.
Without, of course, taking our eyes off the young, we
should all also pay more attention to the elderly and
disabled in war than we have done thus far.

is particularly pertinent in that it specifically addresses
the issue of impunity as one of the key components in
the fight against sexual violence in conflict. Combating
impunity must be addressed with a comprehensive
approach that promotes an education system that
promotes the dignity and equality of men and women, a
social system that condemns sexual violence and a legal
mechanism aimed at ensuring the protection of victims
and the punishment of perpetrators.
There are two key instruments in the fight
against impunity for crimes of sexual violence in
conflict — legal codes and training. An adequate legal
code ensures that the necessary legal tools are in place
in order to bring perpetrators to justice. I reiterate
Spain’s support for the conclusions of the fifty-seventh
session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which highlighted the inclusion of crimes of sexual
violence in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and the fact that the ad hoc international
criminal tribunals recognize rape and other forms of
sexual violence as possible war crimes, crimes against
humanity or acts of genocide or torture.
The most recent reform of Spain’s military code
of conduct includes the obligation to provide specific
protection to women and children against rape, enforced
prostitution, humiliating and degrading treatment or
any other form of exploitation or sexual assault within
the context of armed conflict.

I now give the floor to the representative of Spain.

Regarding training, we must realize that in a postconflict scenario, where legal systems are broken, it is
essential that the reconstruction of national capacities
includes specific training on cultures of impunity. Spain
has therefore given support to specific programmes
in that area through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)/Spain Millennium Development
Goals Achievement Fund. To cite but two examples,
in South Sudan efforts have been focused primarily
on educating and raising awareness in indigenous
communities on gender equality, while in Colombia
the programme has involved training women in human
rights and violence prevention so that they can later
replicate such teaching in their communities.

Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Sexual
violence in conflict is a phenomenon that should
receive more and urgent attention, and Spain welcomes
every effort of the international community to continue
working to combat this scourge more effectively. We
also welcome the Council’s adoption this morning of
resolution 2106 (2013), of which Spain was a sponsor. It

Since combating impunity should be specifically
included in humanitarian and development programmes,
the Spanish Humanitarian Aid Office has drafted a
guide to addressing sexual violence in humanitarian
interventions. Legal codification and training are
indispensable in the fight against impunity, but beyond
that there is a need for clear political will in order to

The President: I wish once again to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes.

13-3715339

S/PV.6984

see that perpetrators are prosecuted and to guarantee
legal and social protection for victims. Therein lies the
importance of including the subject of responsibility in
peace agreements and supporting the participation and
advancement of women in peacebuilding processes.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, through the
UNDP/Spain Fund I just mentioned, we have promoted
the establishment of a number of assistance centres
aimed at providing psycho-social support and training
for women victims of acts of sexual violence, in order
to facilitate their social and economic reintegration.
The commitment of States and international
organizations to fighting impunity must be further
strengthened through an ongoing debate within the
international community, so as to create mechanisms
that can effectively prosecute any form of sexual violence
in conflict. Spain will do its utmost to participate
actively in the various forums addressing the issue. At
the most recent session of the Human Rights Council
in Geneva, Spain took part in both the interactive
dialogue based on the thematic report of the Special
Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes
and consequences (A/HRC/23/49), and in the panel on
women’s rights that took place in the same context.
In both forums Spain emphasized the importance of
criminalization and deplored the deficiencies that
emerge when dealing with violence against women,
due to a lack of specific training and education, and
to the patriarchal and stereotypical patterns that hinder
appropriate approaches to such cases, both in terms of
prosecution and investigation. Such debates must help
raise awareness of the importance of firm condemnation
of such crimes and result in the Council’s renewed
support for advancing the fight against impunity and
maintaining a proactive stance to help reduce the
incidence of sexual violence in conflict and refer such
cases to the International Criminal Court.
Finally, the observer of the European Union will be
delivering a statement that Spain naturally aligns itself
with and has actively contributed to.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
holding this important debate, and all the briefers for
their statements.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I

40

would also like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) paints a grim picture. Women and girls
suffer from sexual violence in armed conflict. Victims
are often left alone and unprotected when pursuing
legal action, or are otherwise effectively denied access
to justice. Perpetrators benefit from a climate of
impunity. It is essential that we address the problem
comprehensively. In my own country, in the heart of
Europe, rape was used as a method of intimidation
and terror during the aggression to which we were
exposed at the beginning of the 1990s. Today, Croatia’s
strong commitment to gender equality, domestically
and internationally, is well established. Our work on
the agenda of women and peace and security is a key
priority, and we are ready to contribute.
Croatia welcomes the Group of Eight (G-8)
Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict,
announced at the ministerial meeting held in London in
April. It is an important signal from some of the world’s
most powerful countries that the G-8 is ready to take
a prominent role in preventing and combating sexual
violence in war and conflicts.
Women are often victims of armed conflict, but they
can also play a central role in preventing and resolving
violent conflicts, as actors in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. The continued high incidence of horrific
sexual violence against women and girls in conflicts
demands the international community’s attention as
a human rights matter and as a question of ensuring
respect for international humanitarian law. It is an issue
that bears directly on peace and security. The Council’s
landmark resolution, 1325 (2000), is still not being
fully implemented.
It is clear that the use of rape and sexual violence
exacerbates conflicts and perpetuates them long after
active hostilities are over. Such crimes inflict indelible
scars on individuals, families and societies that make
reconciliation and peacebuilding much more difficult.
A special effort is required to tackle the culture of
impunity head-on. We can no longer tolerate impunity
for the worst acts of violence against women and girls,
as set forth in the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. I wish to pay special tribute to all
women and girl victims of the brutal violence in
Syria. We must all join forces to end impunity for such
crimes. The Statute of the International Criminal Court

13-37153

S/PV.6984

explicitly states that rape and other forms of sexual
violence can be prosecuted as war crimes or crimes
against humanity. Amnesties should not extend to
crimes of sexual violence.
We also underline the importance that all relevant
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations properly
address the impact of conflict on women and girls, and
that the increased participation of women be encouraged.
It is an approach that is reflected domestically
through our National Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security, which we launched in 2011. The plan is
Croatia’s blueprint for practical implementation of our
obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).
We need much greater progress in ensuring the
adequate participation of women in peace talks. The
inclusion of relevant issues in peace agreements is the
exception rather than the rule. Peace accords that fail
to include women in post-conflict governance often
neglect their access to economic opportunities, justice
and reparations. We need to have more women as lead
negotiators and ensure adequate gender expertise for
peace processes.
Clear guidance on how to operationalize the
protection of civilians mandate, including the protection
of women and girls from sexual violence, is also needed
for peacekeeping missions. We have the opportunity to
use United Nations expertise, including such human
rights mechanisms as the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Violence against Women. All Member
States should ensure that the training of peacekeepers
includes training on resolution 1325 (2000).
Sexual violence is linked to the illicit extraction
of natural resources and leads to the displacement
of civilian populations. Armed groups use forced
marriages, rape and sexual slavery as tactics during
detentions or interrogation. The plight of children
born of wartime rape, about which there is little or
no information available and therefore no meaningful
programmatic intervention, is a matter of our deepest
concern.
Croatia welcomes the emphasis on the urgency
of ensuring that sexual violence considerations are
explicitly and consistently reflected in peace processes,
ceasefires and peace agreements, and in all security
sector reform and other processes in which the United
Nations is involved. In that regard, we commend the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013), which we are proud
to have co-sponsored.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
The Security Council, through its resolutions, has
developed a robust framework to prevent and address
sexual violence in armed conflict. However, gender
crimes remain an enduring part of most armed conflicts.
The leading role the United Kingdom is playing
in international efforts to combat sexual violence
is therefore much needed and appreciated. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ms. Bangura, Ms. Jolie and Ms. Anwar for their
statements, and passionate and inspiring commitment
and dedication.
Special Representative Bangura has repeatedly
underlined that there is no way to end sexual violence
unless one ends impunity. Two weeks ago in the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, the Special Rapporteur
on Violence against Women, Ms. Rashida Manjoo,
underlined that States need to be held accountable not
only for investigating all acts of violence against women,
but also for failing to prevent such violence. In recent
years, sexual violence and its threat have continued to
be employed as a weapon of war. Armed conflicts have
made evident the need to protect civilians, especially
the most vulnerable groups of women and children.
Estonia calls on States to take further political steps
to fulfil the promise of Security Council resolutions on
ending sexual violence as a tactic of war, and also calls
on everyone to adhere to those tenets of international
humanitarian law that prohibit rape and other forms
of sexual violence. As to the United Nations, the next
important step would be the further implementation of
monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence. We would also urge
the further deployment of women’s protection advisers
to the Security Council-mandated missions.
Despite the increasing international focus on sexual
violence in conflict, perpetrators of sexual violence are
rarely held accountable. The vigorous investigation and
prosecution of perpetrators are, however, necessary to
deter and halt such violence. We share the assessment
of Special Representative Bangura that national
ownership, leadership and responsibility in addressing

13-3715341

S/PV.6984

sexual violence are some of the most important aspects
of the fight against sexual violence.
In a similar vein, in his report of March 2013 on
sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149), the SecretaryGeneral notes that national courts remain the principal
venue for holding individuals accountable for crimes of
sexual violence and that the national authorities should
be supported in that regard. This is crucial, as the lack of
adequate national capacity and expertise to investigate
and prosecute acts of sexual violence remains one of the
main impediments to ensuring accountability for gender
crimes. To date, sexual violence in armed conflict has
been prosecuted primarily at the international level
through hybrid courts and international tribunals. These
tribunals do indeed play an important complimentary
role to national efforts.
The International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda developed groundbreaking
international jurisprudence outlawing rape and sexual
violence during war. Investigating and prosecuting
gender crimes has also been an integral part of the
investigative and prosecutorial strategy of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone. The Rome Statute, the founding
treaty of the International Criminal Court (ICC), built
upon the recognition of sexual violence as a serious
international crime by the ad hoc tribunals and
expanded the scope of sexual violence-based crimes in
international law. The Rome Statute specifies a greater
number of sexual violence crimes than the statutes
of the ad hoc tribunals, and acknowledges that these
crimes can be committed against men and women. It
is important that the Rome Statute’s gender sensitivity
be translated into national prosecutions to make sure
that national proceedings take into account the gender
dimension of atrocity crimes to the same extent as the
Rome Statute does.
The ICC has also proven itself to be sensitive to
gender crimes in practice. The Prosecutor gives priority
to sexual and gender-based crimes from the outset of its
preliminary investigations. Charges for gender-based
crimes have so far been brought in cases arising from
six of the eight situations. Estonia joins the SecretaryGeneral in his call on the Council to employ all means
at its disposal to address sexual violence in conflict,
including through referrals to the ICC.
The ICC is, however, not only about punishing
perpetrators, but also about empowering victims of
atrocity crimes. The Court is committed to ensuring

42

victims a participatory role in its proceedings, and the
Rome Statute contains a relatively broad reparations
provision. The Trust Fund for Victims established
under the Rome Statute has been doing important
work in countries where the court is conducting
investigations to alleviate the suffering of victims.
Among other activities, it is providing assistance to
the victims of rape and to children born as a result of
rape. In replenishing the Fund, Estonia has paid special
attention to the needs of victims of sexual violence, who
are very often stigmatized by their own communities.
The trust fund is dependent on voluntary donations
in order to effectively fulfil its mandate, and Estonia
welcomes voluntary donations to the Fund.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this very important
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Bangura, the Special Envoy
of the High Commissioner, Ms. Jolie, and Ms. Anywar
of the NGO Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice for
their insightful statements.
In the twenty-first century, sexual violence is,
sadly, still widespread, particularly in armed conflict,
including its early stages and aftermath. Unfortunately,
in conflicts, national judicial and security systems
are often characterized by incapacity, leading to a
culture of impunity. Legal codes on sexual violence
do not exist or cannot be implemented. An absence of
efficient criminal procedures and institutional capacity
is common. Even when laws and judicial and security
institutions are in place, a selective application of laws
and a lack of accountability often prevail. As a result,
victims are discouraged from seeking civil remedies,
and a culture of impunity prevails.
To address this problem, comprehensive solutions
should be sought by both ensuring the supremacy of
the rule of law and by building judicial and security
institutions. Gaps in legislation and implementation
must be addressed. Criminal responsibility must be
increased. Impunity must be ended both for perpetrators
and those in the chain of command. The investigative
capabilities of national institutions must be increased.
Additional services such as legal support, protection
for survivors of violence and training should be put in
place. This is quite a formidable list of tasks.

13-37153

S/PV.6984

It takes personnel, resources and time to end the
culture of impunity. The continued support of the
international community is essential. Punishment for
the crime often serves as the most important deterrent.
To address sexual violence during conflicts and ensure
that these crimes can be prosecuted in the post-conflict
phase, the necessary documentation and evidence
must be gathered while the conflict is ongoing. The
United Nations, other international organizations,
humanitarian agencies and civil society have an
important task in this respect.
The Security Council deserves special credit
for connecting the concepts of sexual violence and
impunity to international peace and security, passing
numerous resolutions and addressing the issue in
various meetings. We also welcome today’s adoption
of resolution 2106 (2013). The Council’s efforts help
strongly convey the message that sexual violence and
impunity are unacceptable.
I would also like to commend the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
for its valuable work. Acting in close partnership with
all relevant stakeholders, including national judicial
and security institutions, international and regional
organizations, humanitarian agencies, civil society and
the private sector, the United Nations should continue
its technical assistance to countries suffering from
conflict. International justice mechanisms are essential,
especially when sexual violence is used as a war tactic
in the form of systematic rape and forced pregnancies.
In addition, especially in post-conflict set-ups, their
work complements that of national systems in the fight
against the culture of impunity.
I would like to touch upon three more concepts that
we deem necessary when addressing impunity. The first
is reparations. They are a form of transitional gender
justice and contribute to truth and reconciliation.
Secondly, monitoring and reporting on incidents
of sexual violence is important, as highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2013/149).
We extend our full support to the endeavours of
the United Nations in this area. In this respect, as a
neighbouring country, Turkey took note with concern
of the findings of the recent report of the independent
international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic. In that regard, access should be granted to
the commission to conduct on-site investigations with
respect to the allegations of all human rights violations
in Syria, including sexual violence against women.

Finally, raising awareness at the local, national,
regional and international levels is key to combating
impunity. Many remain silent before sexual violence,
in the fear of being targeted, attacked, stigmatized or
shamed. We must ensure that raising one’s voice against
this despicable crime becomes the norm, rather than the
exception.
The elimination of the root causes of conflict is
the best way to prevent sexual violence and address
impunity. The establishment or restoration of the rule of
law, good governance and socio-economic development
is essential for sustainable solutions.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Member States and all relevant United
Nations bodies, in addition to all relevant stakeholders
at the local, national, regional and global levels that
have prioritized the issue of sexual violence against
women in conflict. Special thanks go to Special
Representative Bangura, whose exemplary dedication
to fighting sexual violence in conflicts, including by
combating impunity, we continue to support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): We welcome this
open debate and thank your delegation, Mr. President,
for its useful concept paper (S/2013/335). While a
continued emphasis on protection issues is crucial, we
call at the same time for the same level of emphasis on
the participation pillar of this agenda.
In recent years, we have witnessed an alarming
increase in the documented use of sexual violence in
armed conflict, often as a method of warfare to achieve
military goals. Much remains to be done in terms of
an effective response. Ending impunity is clearly a
central element in this respect. Unfortunately, however,
we must acknowledge that, in practice, the fight to end
impunity has barely begun. Effective justice for victims
of sexual violence in conflict continues to be a great
exception to the rule.
The necessary work to that end is closely linked
to broader efforts to strengthen justice and the rule
of law. An effective judicial response requires States
themselves to strengthen domestic justice systems in all
their aspects, where appropriate, with the assistance of
international donors and agencies. Particular emphasis
should be placed on procedures that allow victims and
witnesses to come forward while minimizing the risk

13-3715343

S/PV.6984

of reprisals and that take into account the severe trauma
that may have been inflicted on them.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) also has an
important role to play, and we were therefore somewhat
surprised not to see the ICC mentioned explicitly in
the concept paper. The work of the Court can serve in
particular as an incentive for Governments to deliver
accountability at the domestic level. The Court can also
assist such work by providing information and evidence
for use in domestic proceedings, and it is well known
that the ICC Prosecutor has made the fight against
sexual violence a focus of her work.
The Security Council should more often call on
Governments to prioritize the strengthening of domestic
justice systems, but it should also be more assertive
where national systems fail, through the establishment
of fact-finding commissions, commissions of inquiry
and referrals to the ICC. Where domestic justice
systems have broken down completely, such measures
may often be the only way of creating deterrence and
enabling longer-term justice. Evidence needs to be
professionally collected at the earliest possible stages,
a process that may be assisted inter alia by the Justice
Rapid Response initiative.
The Council’s ability to respond depends on
the availability of objective, accurate and reliable
information. Monitoring, analysis and reporting
arrangements and the work of the women’s protection
advisers are therefore of continued relevance.
There seems to be a major design flaw in our current
national and international efforts to bring about justice
for crimes of sexual violence — the voices of victims are
rarely heard. This is lamentable and counterproductive,
because a greater role for victims in this discourse
could have a strong impact on the willingness of the
relevant actors to bring about change.
To conclude, I would briefly like to recall that
sexual violence also affects men and boys, as stated
in the concept paper. In this context, we would like to
inform delegations about the next session of our lecture
series on women and peace and security. It will take
place on 8 or 9 July and will focus on the role of men
as perpetrators but also as victims of sexual violence
in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

44

Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation would
like to thank the United Kingdom’s presidency of the
Council for convening this important open debate. We
would also like to commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, Ms. Bangura, for her commitment and efforts
in addressing these egregious crimes.
While the Security Council has adopted the
requisite resolutions to address those crimes, including
resolution 2106 (2013) today, full and effective
implementation of the key resolutions underpinning the
women, peace and security agenda is critical to closing
the existing protection gaps. The Secretary-General’s
report (S/2013/335) correctly alludes to a systemic
United Nations response to that problem. However,
we cannot agree more with the Secretary-General’s
observation that Member States bear the primary legal
and moral responsibility for preventing and addressing
conflict-related sexual violence.
We concur with the five-point priority agenda
of the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
but we believe that priority must be given to fostering
national ownership, leadership and responsibility in
addressing sexual violence in conflict, thereby ensuring
its sustainability. The role of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict becomes
crucial in enhancing the capacity-building of civilian
and military justice systems to address sexual violence
in conflict afflicted communities.
The
technical
assessment
missions
of
peacekeeping operations should, as a matter of
standard practice, include an agenda adviser whose
primary task must be situational awareness, analysis
and recommendations regarding the threat of or acts
of sexual violence in conflict. As part of a systemic
response, multidimensional peacekeeping missions
should incorporate a public awareness campaign at the
field level that encourages community involvement
in monitoring and reporting of the threat of or actual
incidences of all forms of sexual violence.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights lessons
that could be learned from security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes that went wrong in specific peacekeeping
missions. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Security Council and other relevant United Nations
entities should take stock of those lessons and ensure
that subsequent mandates, renewals and transitions
13-37153

S/PV.6984

involving security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes prevent any
escalation of threats to vulnerable communities.
While scenario-based training for peacekeepers
is essential to enhancing operational readiness and
prevention, it can never be a panacea for eliminating
sexual violence in conflict. The reach of the national
Government throughout its territories and its ability
to exercise control over those territories through its
national security apparatus, including law enforcement
and military capabilities, will always remain integral to
preventing and arresting sexual violence.
We support the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral as contained in his recent report. We believe,
however, that the effective implementation of resolution
1960 (2010) will require greater involvement of women
in conflict resolution, mediation and peacebuilding
processes. While there is value in the Security
Council’s developing monitoring mechanisms to ensure
the implementation of the provisions of resolution
1960 (2010), the greater involvement of women in
negotiation and peacemaking processes brings with it a
greater infusion of gender concerns and interests in the
resolution process.
In closing, every effort must be made to end
impunity by perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict.
Making parties live up to their commitments in peace
agreements, which include the prohibition of sexual
violence in such agreements, is certainly one of the
tools that must be utilized with fervour. The Security
Council must also include measures that bring pressure
to bear on perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict,
especially on individuals and parties, through targeted
and graduated measures, as well as for the Security
Council to immediately and unambiguously pronounce
on those acts as and when perpetrated.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate the United Kingdom
on its presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
for their briefings, as well as others who spoken today.
Colombia endorses the repeated rejections by the
Security Council of all acts of sexual violence and other

forms violence against civilians in armed conflict, in
particular against women and children. My country
deplores the fact that these situations continue to arise
in armed conflict in various parts of the world, and
believes that the international community should adopt
an attitude of strict condemnation and seek, through all
means, to abolish violence, ensure the protection of and
reparations for victims, and see to it that perpetrators
are brought to justice.
Colombia is aware of the impact of sexual violence
in conflicts on international peace and security, and
believes that we must not lose sight of the fact that the
primary responsibility to put an end to that scourge and
to protect the victims lies with States. We believe it
necessary for international cooperation in this field to
be developed and implemented, not just in a constructive
way, but also on the basis of an open dialogue with the
Governments concerned, so as to ensure that effective
solutions are found and that national institutions and
processes are strengthened, while respecting States’
policies and priorities.
Colombia also joins in the repeated condemnations
by the Security Council of violations of international
humanitarian law committed against women and girls,
and the need to bring to justice those who are responsible
for such crimes, in particular the perpetrators of
sexual violence against women. We also underscore
the importance of enhancing the role of women in
peacebuilding and in providing assistance to victims,
in particular the victims of sexual violence. It is clear
that in order to ensure that those cases are managed
properly, information has to be gathered by United
Nations agencies on the ground in a timely, precise,
reliable and objective way. In that way, the United
Nations entities can address each case individually,
conduct related criminal investigations, and ensure due
process and follow-up, as required.
The resolutions that have been referred to in the
framework of this debate call up the Secretary-General
to conduct dialogues, “as appropriate”, with the parties to
armed conflict. Currently, the Government of Colombia
is holding a peace dialogue with the spokespersons of an
illegal armed group. From the outset, we have believed
that the ownership and autonomy of the Government are
essential in this process, as an any outside intervention
lacking the consent of the Colombian Government
would negatively interfere in that process. When we
believe support or mediation to be appropriate, we
will make that known. Therefore, we are grateful for

13-3715345

S/PV.6984

offers of good offices, and we welcome those voices
that support the peace process and the international
pressure to put an end to those violent acts and in
particular those against women.
Along those lines, it is worth mentioning some
of the good practices introduced by Colombia to
prevent, investigate and sanction sexual violence in
armed conflict. For example, our National Council for
Economic and Social Policy has used about $1 million
to coordinate all the institutional forces within our
country to implement the national public policy for
gender equality and the comprehensive plan to ensure
a life free of violence for women by implementing the
law on reparations for victims.
Strengthening the role and ability of women and
promoting the enjoyment and observance of their
rights is particularly important to the Government of
Colombia. In that regard, the contribution of the United
Nations system and the international community is
key within a framework of respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of all
States. As can be seen and has been underscored by
the Secretary-General in his reports, Colombia has
different measures and safeguards that mark a decisive
step forward in its efforts to comprehensively and
consistently address that problem.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
thanks the United Kingdom presidency for convening
this important open debate of the Security Council
on the topic “Women and peace and security”. We
support the Security Council’s role regarding women
and peace and security and the work accomplished by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura. We
also support the United Nations Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Chile attaches great importance to the prevention
of sexual violence in conflicts and to the care,
protection and compensation of victims of sexual
violence in conflict. On earlier occasions we have
drawn attention, inter alia, to the progress made by our
national legislation on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). We particularly support the role being
played by the women serving as protection advisers for
their work with survivors of acts of sexual violence in
places affected by conflicts, and we attach the greatest

46

importance to ending the culture of impunity for sexual
violence in conflicts in all its manifestations.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s March
report on sexual violence in conflict (S/2013/149)
that national courts remain primarily responsible for
investigating and judging crimes of sexual violence in
conflicts, and we value the important complementary
role played by the international tribunals in combating
crimes of that kind. We attach the greatest importance
to the contribution made by resolution 1960 (2010)
in that regard, which represented great progress in
establishing a political commitment to the prevention
and handling of the atrocities of rape in wartime and in
establishing the basis for ensuring the accountability of
perpetrators.
We also wish to highlight the work of the International
Criminal Court. Its Rome Statute includes within the
category of war crimes and crimes against humanity
crimes involving acts of sexual violence against women
and children. We emphasize the contribution made in
that connection by the International Criminal Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, with their
valuable rulings on the subject.
We wish to express concern, however, about the
fact that in several areas it is still difficult to investigate
and judge crimes of sexual violence committed against
women and children because the national courts lack
skills and expertise. That continues to make it difficult
to bring perpetrators of such crimes to trial. For that
reason, we emphasize the support needed from the
United Nations as regards capacity-building in that
area.
In recent years, efforts have been made to modernize
Chilean institutions to conform to the human rights and
gender focus of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the subject in a forward-looking approach
reflecting our national and regional reality. This year
we will be launching our national plan based on that
resolution, updated for the period 2014-2018, with
specific indicators for effectively measuring various
types of activity. That, in turn, will be the basis for
the next national plan for the period 2019-2022. The
indicators represent five specific goals: prevention,
participation, protection, help and recovery. They will
be implemented globally and jointly, with the aim of
creating a strong foundation for combating sexual
violence committed in pre-conflict and post-conflict
situations.

13-37153

S/PV.6984

Although that action concerns the national sphere,
we also attach great importance to the enhancement of
the international humanitarian response capacity and to
the role of international cooperation in achieving those
goals, particularly in the context of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In accordance with
the principle of gender equality, Chile has included a
female military contingent in the Mission and supports
the zero tolerance policy of the United Nations towards
cases of sexual abuse and improper conduct in which
some members of its contingent have been involved.
In that connection, Chile’s national plan provides
expanded training in peacekeeping operations for
soldiers and for members of the forces of law and order
and security in the pre- and post-deployment stages.
It also places greater emphasis on the distribution of
information on the international instruments concerning
gender, security and peace, and we are promoting
gender mainstreaming in the institutions performing
these roles. We believe that such a policy should be the
general norm for all peacekeeping missions in which
the United Nations participates.
The subject of women and peace and security and
sexual violence poses many challenges and covers a
number of areas. I refer in particular to the existence
of and access to compensation and justice mechanisms
for women and girls, especially in situations of armed
conflict; the operation and supervision of compensation
systems; and combating impunity for those responsible
for crimes.
For that reason, my delegation would like to
conclude by expressing our satisfaction with the
adoption of resolution 2106 (2013) this morning, which
Chile co-sponsored.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to thank all of the
briefers in today’s debate for their powerful messages,
which the Security Council should take into account
in its future deliberations. I would also like to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing this important and
timely debate, while acknowledging their important
contribution to combating sexual violence in conflict
situations during its tenure leading the Group of Eight.
I would also like to commend Australia and Guatemala
for organizing an Arria formula meeting on experiences
drawn from the work of gender experts in peacekeeping
operations. Slovenia joins others in welcoming

resolution 2106 (2013) adopted this morning. Slovenia
also fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the European Union.
One of the key priorities of Slovenia in the United
Nations is to address issues of importance to women
around the world. It has been acknowledged many
times that global stability, peace, and prosperity depend
on protecting and advancing the rights of women and
girls. But many times we find ourselves too late in
implementing preventive measures, which may include
efforts to promote the rights of women or other means,
and find ourselves in the midst of armed conflicts,
where particularly vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, are disproportionately impacted.
Needless to say, in such circumstances social
norms get stripped away and sexual attacks all too often
become a weapon of war. Such violence leaves behind
hundreds of thousands of victims, all of whom are left
traumatized and stigmatized for life. Those hideous
acts affect whole communities and remain vividly
remembered for generations, as seen in the Western
Balkans and Rwanda.
It is therefore of paramount importance to look
beyond prevention. The investigation of cases of sexual
violence in conflict and the holding of perpetrators
of sexual violence in armed conflict accountable are
also of great importance. Ending impunity is pivotal
in addressing sexual violence in conflict. Only that
can serve as a strong deterrent for such actions. In
that regard, we would like to commend the work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as well as Justice Rapid Response,
an intergovernmental standby facility of active-duty
criminal justice and related professionals.
The International Criminal Court is the only
international tribunal whose statute explicitly refers
to sexual and gender violence as crimes against
humanity. The use of the Court in such cases should be
an important aspect of establishing peace and security
and the rule of law, whereby special attention should
be given to the principle of complementarity and to the
issue of closing the legal gaps regarding accountability
for the most serious international crimes. However, the
most important area of focus must remain the victims.
Let us recall that Slovenia, together with
Netherlands and Belgium, presented an initiative aimed
at improving the international framework for mutual
legal assistance and extradition in cases involving the

13-3715347

S/PV.6984

investigation and prosecution of the most serious crimes
of international concern, including sexual and gender
violence as crimes against humanity. As suspects,
evidence, witnesses and assets related to those crimes
are usually not restricted to the territory of any one
State, strengthening mutual legal assistance between
States is indispensable for States, if they are to be truly
effective in the national prosecution and investigation
of those crimes.
Finally, let me inform the Council that these
pertinent issues will also be on the agenda of the
Bled Strategic Forum, a high-level strategic dialogue
among leaders from the private and public sectors to
be held in Slovenia in early September of 2013. A panel
discussion entitled “International criminal justice as a
precondition for a prosperous economic future?” will
be organized, and it will, inter alia, address the issue of
sexual and gender violence, with a particular emphasis
on violence against women and children. We see the
meeting as an opportunity to continue this important
dialogue and also as a sign of my country’s continuous
involvement in matters that promote women’s rights.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): My delegation
welcomes this debate and would like to make a few
remarks in addition to the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, with which
my delegation aligns itself, and to others that have
underlined the importance of the topic of women and
peace and security.
The recent cases of sexual and gender-based
violence in countries in conflict such as Syria and
Mali continue to illustrate that fighting such violence
remains a priority. It is evident that sexual violence
exacerbates conflict and perpetuates insecurity. It
holds entire communities hostage and has an economic,
social, cultural and inter-generational impact. Women
are excluded from communities and cannot engage in
economic activity or access markets; girls cannot go to
school safely.
Sexual and gender-based violence can be seen from
two perspectives. On the one hand, we see women
as victims of such violence, from the perspective of
violence against women. On the other hand, however,
we often tend to underestimate the role that women can
play in finding solutions through conflict prevention,
resolution and transformation — in fact, by using the

48

reverse perspective, of women against violence. That
capacity is underutilized, decreasing the effectiveness
and likelihood of success of any peace and reconstruction
process. The Netherlands recognizes that women play
active roles as peacebuilders, politicians, activists
and quite often also as combatants. We should listen,
therefore, to the priorities that women define, and we
should understand the barriers that women perceive.
Their participation in finding solutions to conflicts and
in reconstruction processes is indispensable.
The Netherlands considers sexual violence in
conflict as a sign of a failure to implement all the
elements of the agenda for women and peace and
security. In today’s debate, therefore, we would like
to stress four points. First is the importance of taking
urgent action in key areas, especially those of women’s
participation and equality and of prevention, response
and accountability. Another important area is national
and regional efforts to end impunity, including through
referrals to the International Criminal Court, and by
emphasizing the importance of reparations.
Secondly, we should give specific attention to
the importance of providing effective support and
protection to women-led organizations and defenders
of women’s human rights, particularly given the threats
such defenders face and their lack of resources. Thirdly,
there is a need for a comprehensive multisectoral
response for survivors, including medical care, in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and
access to emergency contraception, safe abortion
and HIV treatment, as well as access to justice and
psychosocial health care services for women and
girls. Lastly, and equally important, is strengthening
the gender components of security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, not least through ratification and full
compliance with the Arms Trade Treaty, which gives
substantive attention to gender dimensions.
Through policies such as its human rights and
gender strategies, the Netherlands pays particular
attention to issues such as gender equality, women’s
political role and leadership, economic empowerment
and ending trafficking of and violence against women
in post-conflict countries and unstable areas. In that
regard, we are actively implementing resolution 1325
(2000) through a second national action plan for 20122015, signed by three Dutch ministries and 41 civil
organizations. The plan focuses on six countries:
Afghanistan, South Sudan, the Sudan, Burundi,

13-37153

S/PV.6984

Colombia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as on the Middle East and North Africa region.
I will cite three examples.
In Afghanistan, a group of Dutch signatories to the
plan are working with a local telephone and Internet
provider to start a programme connecting poor rural
women and men with more modern young people in
large towns via an SMS platform. The objective is keep
the rural poor better informed about national women’s
issues and to foster dialogue between them and urban
young people on issues such as violence against women
and the role women can play in fighting it.
My second example is that together with the
Funding Leadership and Opportunities for Women’s
Fund and the Human Rights Fund, the Netherlands
supports many women’s organizations in their struggle
to combat violence against women. When women’s
political and economic empowerment is supported,
their vulnerability to sexual violence is reduced. For
example, the Netherlands has funded the Bell Bajao
campaign, which combats violence against women
with a very successful media effort. Started in India,
it consists of small clips that are nested in various
popular television talk shows and programmes such as
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire. The clips have become
very popular and have spread to other countries in the
region.
My third example is that in the Middle East and
North Africa region we have started, with a Dutch
non-governmental organization and an accounting
firm, a new fund with a budget of about €5.8 million,
designed to strengthen the financial and organizational
management of women’s organizations in the region.
In conclusion, women can be powerful actors for
peace, security, and prosperity. When they participate
in peace processes and other formal decision-making
processes, they can play an important role in initiating
and inspiring progress on human rights, justice, national
reconciliation and economic revitalization. They can
also build coalitions across ethnic and sectarian lines
and speak up for marginalized and minority groups.
Investing in women’s leadership is therefore smart
security as well as smart development.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Ms. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Sexual violence is one of the most devastating

weapons of war. It wreaks intense destruction on the
bodies and souls of the victims. It disrupts families,
displaces communities and destroys entire societies’
basis for reconciliation. That is why Switzerland would
like to thank the delegation of the United Kingdom
for organizing this debate and for making conflictrelated sexual violence a priority for both the Security
Council and the Group of Eight. We would also like
to thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers
for their valuable contributions. We hope that today
we can together generate a strong political will that
can enable us to improve the implementation of the
existing Security Council instruments, strengthen
the mechanisms of national and international law and
increase assistance to the victims.
In an unprecedented partnership, civil society
organizations, the Council and the United Nations as a
whole have put in place a visionary framework based on
five resolutions on women and peace and security. That
framework not only asks us to fight sexual violence
effectively in times of conflict, it also commits us
to supporting women as active agents for change.
The United Nations has developed indicators; the
Security Council has created a mandate for a Special
Representative and made the decision to establish
the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
mechanism. With our partners from Liechtenstein,
Switzerland has supported the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security, PeaceWomen and the
Global Network of Women Peacebuilders in making
available to Council members a bulletin of monthly
action points, a handbook and even an iPhone app, and
in ensuring close ties between policymaking levels in
New York and the realities on the ground. All these
instruments and resources should be utilized in order
to implement the framework based on resolution 1325
(2000) without further delay. We therefore gratefully
welcome today’s resolution 2106 (2013), which will
support those efforts.
First and foremost, however, prevention is essential.
We must break the cycles of violence. All parties to a
conflict must make specific commitments to combat
sexual violence and hold perpetrators accountable. I
would also like to voice a particularly serious concern
about the fact that the risk of systematic sexual violence
often increases considerably after or around high-level
visits. It is therefore imperative to ensure careful followup and to prevent acts of revenge by strengthening local
capacities.

13-3715349

S/PV.6984

In his latest report (S/2013/149) the SecretaryGeneral encourages Member States to include specific
training courses for their peacekeeping troops.
Nevertheless, our methods have not been sufficiently
successful in fighting these crimes. That scourge
continues to undermine the credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping missions — not to mention the
immense harm done to the individuals and communities
affected by the behaviour of those who were deployed
in the field to protect them and ensure peace. The zerotolerance policy must be urgently implemented, and
everyone must be resolutely committed to bringing
perpetrators to justice.
International humanitarian law prohibits rape
and other forms of sexual violence. Such crimes can
constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity or
genocide. International tribunals, especially the
International Criminal Court, play a key role in
punishing and preventing such crimes. For that reason,
it is crucial that all States lend their full support to
those institutions, not forgetting that the fight against
impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence must
primarily be carried out at the national level.
Let us never forget that the very raison d’être of
the United Nations, as set out in its visionary Charter,
is the abolition of war and all related crimes. As John
Lennon sang,
(spoke in English)
“You may say I’m a dreamer, but I’m not the only
one”.
(spoke in French)
All around the world, men and women, communities,
civil society organizations, United Nations staff
and representatives and country representatives are
working hard to prevent and abolish war. Switzerland
is steadfastly committed to joining in those efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to take
the floor.
(spoke in English)
Canada wishes to thank the United Kingdom for
holding this open debate on the prevention of conflictrelated sexual violence, an issue of great importance
to our country, as it includes the despicable acts
50

of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced
pregnancy, forced sterilization and any other form
of sexual violence of comparable gravity. Those acts
are deplorable, prohibited by international law, and
constitute an impediment to conflict resolution,
development and transition to peace and democracy.
Canada, which is a proud member and Chair of the
Group of Friends against Sexual Violence in Conflict,
recognizes that women’s social, political and economic
empowerment, their equality with men and the active
participation of men and boys in combating all forms
of violence against women are central to long-term
prevention efforts. Preventing sexual violence requires
promoting and protecting the human rights of women
and girls. Prevention also requires supporting survivors
on their path to recovery from such crimes, assisting
their access to justice and holding perpetrators to
account.
(spoke in French)
The Security Council and the United Nations
system should act systematically and comprehensively
to address gaps and challenges in its work on
women, peace and security, as well as to monitor the
commitments by parties to conflict to prevent and
address conflict-related sexual violence.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/149) details the global scope of conflict-related
sexual violence, including many instances of early and
forced marriage of women and girls. Canada is gravely
concerned about reports of forced marriage, rape and
sexual slavery and condemns the early and forced
marriage of women and girls in all situations, including
the practice of forcing rape survivors to marry their
perpetrators or other family members. We welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General to focus attention on
the practice of early and forced marriage in the context
of armed conflict.
(spoke in English)
The primary responsibility for the prevention
of sexual violence in conflict lies with national
Governments as well as with the leadership of non-State
armed groups. Where those leaders fail to respond to
sexual violence or are party to the crimes, they must be
held to account. Often, however, Governments lack the
capacity to respond adequately.
Conflict significantly weakens national justice
systems, resulting in a limited number of perpetrators

13-37153

S/PV.6984

facing justice. In such cases, Member States
could request the assistance of trained experts for
investigations and prosecutions and to strengthen the
capacity of local law enforcement.
Canada welcomes the engagement of the Security
Council on the issue of preventing sexual violence. We
urge the Council to ensure the inclusion of prevention
and response to sexual violence in its mandates and
resolutions and to ensure that those elements are
implemented. The Council should take concrete
measures to support women’s opportunities for equal
participation and decision-making in all conflictprevention and -resolution processes. It must ensure the
health, safety, human rights and dignity of survivors
and should hold perpetrators to full account.
In that regard, Canada calls on the Council to ensure
that Sanctions Committees add criteria pertaining to
acts of rape and other forms of sexual violence to their
existing criteria. Further action at the international
level is imperative to end sexual violence in conflict,
to tackle the lack of accountability that exists for those
crimes and to provide comprehensive support services
to survivors. For its part, Canada is active in the
prevention and response to sexual violence in conflict.
For example, Canada is contributing $18.5 million to
the United Nations Development Programme to support
the fight against sexual violence in the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, at
the London launch of the Group of Eight declaration
on preventing sexual violence in conflict, Canada
announced an additional $5 million contribution to
international efforts to be programmed this year.
Canada urges all Member States to join the
international effort and we look forward to working
together to stop sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organizing this open debate
on preventing sexual violence in conflict — an issue
that is affecting civilians more frequently, particularly
women.
At the outset, I would express my appreciation
at seeing you, Sir, preside over the work of the
Security Council in June. Your presidency reflects
the commitment of your country in supporting
peace throughout the world. Allow me also to pay
heartfelt tribute to the leadership of your predecessor,

Ambassador Kodjo Menan of Togo. I also warmly thank
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for her excellent briefing. We also encourage her tireless
efforts in continuing the work of her predecessor,
Ms. Margot Wallström.
Armed groups have always used pressure tactics
of rape, forced marriage and sexual slavery against
populations, especially women, to impose control
over their communities. Those horrendous practices
have also been used to force populations to move,
which has led to unbearable humanitarian situations in
neighbouring countries.
In that context, I express my condemnation of the
new trend of using sexual violence in order to gain
illegal access to natural resources. Beyond undermining
morale and trampling the dignity of the people who are
the victims, those crimes also seriously undermine the
development efforts of countries already suffering the
effects of poverty.
As timely highlighted by the Secretary-General
in his report (S/2013/149), the failure of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform efforts in many countries has led, as we know,
to violations against women. In addition, there is a risk
of reprisals against the victims of sexual violence.
Only a strong message, backed up by a holistic
strategy on the part of the international community, will
lead to the control of that phenomenon, which entails
such disastrous consequences for maternal and child
health, populations, international peace and security as
well as for our people’s well-being.
That leads me to welcome resolution 2106 (2013),
which the Council has just adopted and which places
victims at the heart of efforts to combat sexual violence
and to improve conflict resolution. On that basis, efforts
to combat this scourge should be based on adequate
prevention as well as on accountability, which helps
to dissuade people from committing these crimes once
again. Prevention is first and foremost the responsibility
of Governments, particularly of security forces, which
have a duty to protect their own citizens. We need to
support the countries affected in establishing the rule
of law by enhancing the capacity of the security forces
in a substantive way and by developing their legal
capacities. The basic goal is to fill the gaps in terms of
their protection and judicial mechanisms, particularly
in the spheres of intelligence, investigations and

13-3715351

S/PV.6984

prosecution of perpetrators. In that regard, we are happy
to see the significant progress achieved by various
countries thanks to the United Nations campaign on
sexual violence in conflict, which includes “firewood
patrols” in Darfur and an early-warning system in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Moreover, it is important to underscore the fact
that the prevention effort is also a collective one, as it
transcends borders and deals with a phenomenon that
poses a serious threat to peace and security throughout
the world. Worse yet, acts of sexual violence constitute
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
genocide, in line with the decision handed down by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in the
Jean-Paul Akayesu case.
This shows the importance of taking into account
sexual violence in the context of preventive diplomacy,
particularly when ceasefire agreements are reached
between warring parties. In that connection, I support
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General to
establish monitoring mechanisms for the commitments
entered into by parties during the good offices process,
in line with resolution 1960 (2010). That also applies
to peacekeeping missions and to special political
missions, which should have a sufficient number of
women’s protection advisers.
Combating impunity at the international level
continues to be a major pillar, indeed an indispensable
one, in combating sexual violence. Those who tolerate
or perpetuate these serious and unacceptable crimes
must be held accountable for their acts. In that regard,
the International Criminal Court must, in accordance
with the principle of complimentarity with national
jurisdictions, play a leading role in administering justice
for the benefit of the many victims of sexual abuse in
conflict. In that connection, I would like to pay tribute
to the Group of Eight agreement on sexual violence in
conflict, which reflects the Group’s commitment in the
light of this serious phenomenon.
I would like to encourage the Council to adopt a
holistic approach in combating sexual violence, as well
as to reiterat the unfailing determination of my country
to protect future generations from this longstanding
legacy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom, Mr. President, for scheduling this
52

important debate. I would also to thank the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura, Ms. Angela Joli
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar for their illuminating
introductory presentations on sexual violence in
conflict. Their presentations, together with the concept
paper you circulated, Mr. President (S/2013/335, annex),
has undoubtedly guided our deliberations today.
Sexual violence, wherever it is committed, is a
crime against humanity. When committed in conflict
situations, it is more than a double-edged sword for
the victim. As highlighted in the concept note, this not
only affects a large number of women and girls, but
also men and boys. Without downplaying the impact
of sexual violence on men and boys, women and girls
are often more disproportionately affected because the
impact of such acts and the consequences with which
they have to live are often much more severe than for
men and boys. However, no human being should be
subjected to such a heinous and disgraceful crime. It is
a pure manifestation of evil that cannot be justified or
tolerated in the twenty-first century.
In conflict situations, the dignity of women and
girls must be respected; they cannot be treated as
subhuman. First, they are human beings endowed with
the right to pursue happiness in every possible way.
Secondly, they are grandmothers, mothers, wives,
sisters and little girls in the eyes of their parents and
in their communities in general. In conflict situations
too, the family bond remains and it must be accorded
adequate protection.
My country has made its modest contribution
to the issue of women in peace. During Namibia’s
presidency of the Council in October 2000, a discussion
was initiated and an open debate held (see S/PV.4213)
that culminated in the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). The Council has also adopted resolutions 1820
(2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), which highlight
the seriousness of sexual violence as a threat to
international peace and security. The urgent question
confronting the international community today is, what
are the appropriate strategies to end sexual violence in
conflict?
The international justice mechanism should
support the restoration or establishment of justice and
accountability at the national level. The empowerment
of women and girls, as well as the education of boys
about the rights of girls and women, are some of
important elements that instil nurturing and responsible
13-37153

S/PV.6984

behavioural patterns. We welcome the call by the
Group of Eight for urgent action to address impunity
and to hold perpetrators of sexual violence in armed
conflicts accountable. There can be no sympathy for
any person or group of persons who commit sexual
violence anywhere. My delegation acknowledges the
important role that the Council plays by encouraging
the development of joint Government-United Nations
comprehensive strategies on combating sexual violence.
We encourage the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to work with Governments and
armed groups to seek their commitment to becoming
accountable in the quest to prevent sexual violence. We
also support the proposal to deploy women’s protection
advisers to United Missions missions, as well as to
address sexual violence in the context of security
sector reform. Furthermore, my delegation supports the
establishment of a mechanism to monitor commitments
by parties to a conflict, including issuing clear orders
through the chains of command and enacting codes
of conduct prohibiting sexual violence. Those who
have been identified and proved beyond a reasonable
doubt to have perpetrated or condoned acts of sexual
violence should in future be excluded from any security
institutions, or from holding positions of influence.
Specific measures to impose targeted sanctions on
those committing or condoning sexual violence should
be taken against the perpetrators. When the use of
legal mechanisms are insufficient to fight against
sexual violence in the quest for justice, reforms in the
administration of justice and the legislative process
may become necessary.
While this debate is mainly addressing issues
of sexual violence, we must also focus our attention
beyond the realm of conflict periods. However, we are
concerned about the continued low representation of
women in all structures and phases of the peacebuilding
processes. In spite of the disproportionate impact of
conflict on women, they continue to hold their families
and communities together, often undertaking initiatives
between warring factions under extremely difficult
conditions. When included in formal peace processes,
they bring their experiences to bear on the parties.
It is therefore imperative that they be included at all
peacebuilding levels.
It is unfortunate that, more often than not, the efforts
of women are insufficiently recognized and supported,
both politically and financially. As a result, women’s

rights are rarely integrated into peace agreements or
post-conflict support structures.
In conclusion, my delegation urges the Security
Council to act expeditiously on the information
presented to it. The paramount consideration should be
that more needs to be done to protect women and girls
and men and boys from the scourge of sexual violence.
I support the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
open debate on sexual violence in conflict in the
broader context of the discourse on women and peace
and security. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the other
briefers who made remarks this morning.
The resolution of conflict situations requires the
adoption of a sustainable and holistic approach to
conflict resolution and the overall reconstruction of
impacted societies. In our view, gender equality and
women’s empowerment are integral to the pursuit of
this objective. The participation of women in peace
processes and post-conflict reconstruction efforts is
imperative for laying the foundation for durable peace.
Economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy cannot be achieved without the active
engagement of women.
Thirteen years ago, resolution 1325 (2000)
highlighted the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women and children, and the need for
effective institutional arrangements to guarantee
their protection and the full participation of women in
peace processes. That resolution also contained several
detailed recommendations on how to deal with various
aspects of this issue.
As reports made to the Security Council since
resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted show, we have
not made enough progress on implementing its
recommendations. Take, for example, the peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council. As
one of the major contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping operations for over six decades, India
and its peacekeepers serving under the blue flag have
also had to deal with this pernicious problem under
challenging circumstances. Based on our experience

13-3715353

S/PV.6984

on the ground, we are of the view that the Security
Council must make available the resources required
to implement the expanded scope of peacekeeping
mandates. Specifically, we require greater commitment
to the deployment of women’s protection advisers in
peacekeeping operations.
In resolution 1325 (2000), the Security Council
called for greater participation by women in the fieldbased operations of the United Nations in terms of
the deployment of police personnel. We are proud of
the fact that India was the first State Member of the
United Nations to successfully deploy an all-woman
police force as part of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Liberia, where sexual violence had been
one of the hallmarks of the conflict. Apart from the
effectiveness of the force, which has been acknowledged
by many, we believe that the functioning of such an allwoman force has also sent a strong deterrent message
to those who indulge in the egregious crime of sexual
violence in conflict. By deploying women to deal with
conflict situations, we have demonstrated that we can
push forward the goal of empowering women to deal
with the crime of sexual violence in conflict and play
a major role in the post-conflict reconstruction of
traumatized societies. We hope that this example will
encourage others to follow suit.
In earlier debates, India drew the attention of the
Security Council to the impact of so-called militia
groups on the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. As the reports made to the Council since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) show, that impact
has been felt especially in crimes of sexual violence in
conflict situations where peacekeeping mandates are in
force.
It is in that context that we take the view that
national Governments have the primary responsibility
for prosecuting and deterring such crimes in conflict
situations on their territories, even if these are alleged
to have been committed by so-called militia groups. We
believe that national Governments should be assisted
by the United Nations in augmenting their capacities
to deal with this issue. That would play a vital role in
ensuring better governance and the stabilization of
post-conflict situations. The United Nations should
focus its efforts in this area.
We would like to reiterate our principled position
that debates such as that of today in the Security Council
should focus on issues related to mandates specifically
given by the Council. We would urge caution in going
54

beyond such mandates in reports submitted to the
Council, which can only serve to blur the focus of
the Council and which contain the potential to divert
much-needed resources away from the task at hand. It is
critical, therefore, that such reports remain focused on
the situations of armed conflict that are on the agenda
of the Council, and not stray into so-called “situations
of concern” on the basis of sweeping generalizations.
In conclusion, I would like once again to reaffirm
India’s commitment to positively contribute to our
collective efforts to tackle the crime of sexual violence
in situations of armed conflict, in the overall framework
of the work of the United Nations on peacebuilding and
the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Allow me to begin by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate of the Security Council. I also wish to
thank the speakers for their important and passionate
statements, as well as to reiterate Italy’s full support for
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Italy welcomes the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2106 (2013), regarding sexual violence in
conflict, which signals the commitment of the Council
to address an issue that is key to international peace
and security.
While Italy aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, I wish to
make the following additional remarks in my national
capacity.
We appreciate the focus of this debate on impunity
for crimes of sexual violence. Impunity makes those
responsible for crimes confident enough to use sexual
violence as a tactic of war. Impunity takes away any
hope for justice from victims and survivors. Impunity
is a stumbling block in rebuilding peaceful societies
after conflicts. In order to make a full contribution to
our discussion, I will focus on six specific points.
First, it is important that the Council be provided
with timely and accurate information. Regular briefings
to the Security Council by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and by UN-Women; enhancing
the United Nations monitoring, analysis and reporting
mechanism; and the systematic inclusion of women’s
protection advisers on peacekeeping and political

13-37153

S/PV.6984

missions could strengthen the capacity of the Council
to effectively respond to impunity.
Secondly, there must be strict implementation of
zero-tolerance policies towards sexual misconduct by
peacekeeping, political and peacebuilding personnel.
Those actors are the face of the United Nations for the
people who are plagued by conflict. They must ensure
the highest standards of respect for human rights and
humanitarian law and be accountable for their violation.
Thirdly, sexual violence should be addressed in
peace agreements. Sexual violence should be included
in the definition of acts prohibited by ceasefires. The
principle of no amnesty for the perpetrators for crimes
of sexual violence should always be respected. The
participation of women in peace negotiations and
ceasefires are the best way to ensure that these issues
are not traded off for other agendas.
Fourthly, national authorities should be supported
in their efforts to fight against impunity. Governments
have the primary responsibility to protect their
populations from sexual violence and to ensure that
justice is done. The international community must stand
ready to provide technical assistance and capacitybuilding, and to help strengthen the rule of law. The
United Nations has a key role to play, as proven by the
work done by the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict. Peacekeepers shouldd
be trained and tasked with investigating crimes of sexual
violence. Cooperation with civil society organizations,
particularly those led by women, is also essential.
Fifthly, cooperation should be enhanced between
the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court (ICC), in particular when dealing with cases
of sexual violence. The perpetrators of large-scale
sexual violence should never benefit from differences
of opinion within the Council on a specific situation.
Well-documented crimes should act as a clear basis for
fast-track referrals by the Council to the ICC.
Sixthly, and lastly, comprehensive strategies are
needed. While we are thoroughly committed to bringing
to justice the perpetrators of sexual violence, we must
give equal priority to the health, safety and the dignity
of survivors. National and international programmes
for post-conflict reconstruction must ensure that the
needs of victims are met and their voices heard. All
forms of reparation and redress must follow a victimcentred approach.

Italy has placed a high priority on the protection
of women against sexual violence in its human rights
policy. Last week, the Italian Parliament ratified the
Council of Europe convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and domestic
violence. We strongly encourage States to ratify this
important instrument. Moreover, the Italian national
action plan on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) includes specific provisions addressing sexual
violence in conflict.
Finally, Italy will enhance its support for the United
Nations Trust Fund in Support of Actions to Eliminate
Violence against Women, which is the global grantmaking mechanism dedicated to addressing violence
against women and girls in all of its forms, including
sexual violence.
To conclude, today we must all send a strong
message to the perpetrators of sexual violence. They
must know that sexual violence is not cost-free. The
more seriously we endeavour to make this message a
reality, the closer we will come to finally relegating
rape in war to history books.
The President: Before I give the floor to the next
speaker, I would like to remind all speakers to follow
the example of Italy and limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate the
text in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber. The presidency will cut off
those delegations that speak for significantly more than
four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mrs. Anđelić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I would like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for organizing this important debate, and we
welcome the valuable contribution of the Honourable
Foreign Secretary, Mr. Hague. I also thank the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Bangura, who visited Bosnia and Herzegovina
recently, as well as Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar from the Women’s
Initiatives for Gender Justice for their statements.

13-3715355

S/PV.6984

Violence against women is certainly the most
brutal manifestation of discrimination, and we are
fully committed to addressing all forms of violence
against women and girls, including sexual violence in
conflict. The protection of women in conflict situations
and ending impunity remain our utmost priorities.
Sexual violence in armed conflict represents one of
the most serious forms of the violation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Furthermore, impunity for sexual violence in conflict
is unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. Therefore, we
advocate recognition of the importance of women’s
access to justice in conflict and post-conflict settings.
We also believe that more has to be done to address these
ongoing crimes, including by permanent opposition to
the traditional account that sexual violence in armed
conflict is a cultural phenomenon, an unavoidable
consequence of war or a less important crime.
Bearing all this in mind, we fully support the work
of the United Nations in addressing sexual violence in
armed conflict, particularly the mandates of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and we continue to closely cooperate with them. We
acknowledge their active advocacy efforts, inter alia
with Governments, in order to address these horrible
crimes.
The Security Council’s recognition of this matter as
a serious concern for international peace and security
is of great importance for building a solid framework
for preventing and addressing this gruesome tactic
of war. Therefore, the Council has a significant role
to play, in accordance with the relevant resolutions,
particularly in emphasizing the importance of national
and international authorities strengthening the rule
of law response. All appropriate mechanisms and
procedures for monitoring commitments by parties
in conflict should be supported by the Council. Also,
United Nations officials should be more engaged in
dialogue with States and other stakeholders who may
exert influence to elicit such commitments.
At this point, I would like to elaborate on the
achievements of my country in this regard.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is committed to promoting
the role of women in peace and security through the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions. To illustrate our genuine commitment
in this regard, we need to point out that Bosnia and
Herzegovina was the first country in South-East
56

Europe to adopt an action plan aimed at implementation
of the aforementioned resolution. The plan was used as
sample document for other countries of the region that
drafted similar action plans. In addition, my country
has also adopted a gender action plan and enacted laws
regulating the prevention of violence against women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Involving women in conflict prevention and
mediation and deploying women’s protection advisers
to United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions is crucial to building and reinforcing peace.
We believe that women should play a greater role as
legitimate partners in international and national efforts
to maintain peace and security, which is fundamental
for more effective performance on the ground.
Recruiting women in the civil, military and police
components of peacekeeping missions can encourage
local women to report incidents of sexual violence and
contribute to establishing better communication with
local communities. We spare no effort in advancing
this issue and, as result of our commitment the relevant
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina have adopted
a policy that one-third of candidates nominated for
peacekeeping missions must be women.
We are aware of the fact that national Governments
bear the primary legal and moral responsibility for the
protection of civilian populations. In this regard, and
with the aim of improving the overall situation of women
who are victims of rape, we are undertaking efforts to
finalize the drafting of a document entitled “Programme
for victims of rape, sexual abuse and torture in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for the period 2013-2016”, which will
seek to improve the position of all victims. One of the
goals of the programme emphasizes the obligation of
the State to provide access to reparations programmes
for victims of war and the need to provide legal and
psychological support to victims and/or witnesses in
court proceedings and after them.
We recognize the positive steps in holding
perpetrators to account at all levels. However, we
believe that greater efforts need to be undertaken in this
regard, including through the work of the International
Criminal Court, the ad hoc tribunals and the national
tribunals.
Finally, we would like to point out that the
international community must continue to work on
strengthening United Nations efforts to address sexual
violence in armed conflict, and Bosnia and Herzegovina
stands ready to contribute to those efforts.
13-37153

S/PV.6984

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank
you for convening this open debate on the important
issue of women and peace and security. I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his remarks and
Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict;
Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees; and Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar of the Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice,
for their invaluable briefings on the issue.
Malaysia is deeply concerned about the effect of
sexual violence — the physical, psychological and
emotional terror and trauma that it creates for women
and girls. We strongly condemn acts of sexual violence
against women and girls and underline the need for
a deeper examination of the emerging incidence of
sexual violence perpetrated against male victims and
the plight of children born as a result of rape and the
practice of forced marriages by armed groups.
Without a doubt, ending impunity is critical in
ending sexual violence, whether it is committed by
individuals, groups or States. Nonetheless, Member
States bear the primary legal and moral responsibility
for the protection of their civilian populations. Malaysia
therefore welcomes the continuous work of the United
Nations and other stakeholders, including the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, which focuses its efforts on strengthening the
capacity of national rule of law and justice actors. We
feel that its engagement with relevant Governments will
strengthen the latter’s capacity to effectively address
sexual violence against women and girls.
In our effort to secure peace and security, we must
move urgently to replace the prevailing culture of
impunity with one of deterrence that promotes the need
for the rule of law, justice and accountability. Malaysia
views accountability as a duty of Member States under
both domestic and international law. The national
system in that regard should be steered towards meeting
international standards in ensuring accountability and
justice. The perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence
should never go unpunished.
Malaysia believes that the equal, full and active
participation of women is key to peacekeeping and

peacebuilding. My delegation is of the view that women
should not just be seen as victims, but as central to all
efforts to end this global phenomenon. It is crucial
to bring women into peace processes. They must be
active participants in all efforts to combat this horrific
phenomenon.
We consider the routine deployment of women’s
protection advisers as crucial in addressing sexual
violence. At present, only eight such advisers have been
deployed in the United Nations Mission in the Republic
of South Sudan. It is therefore encouraging to learn that
more are being recruited for the United Nations missions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire
and the Central African Republic. Malaysia supports
appointing more women’s protection advisers, as the
positive value they bring in creating greater awareness
about sexual violence issues, reporting incidents of
sexual violence and implementing Security Council
resolutions on the ground cannot be overstated.
In that context, we welcome today’s adoption
of resolution 2106 (2013) on the issue discussed. My
delegation hopes that there will be sufficient impetus
for the actual realization of the relevant resolutions,
including the landmark resolution 1325 (2000), to
increase women’s participation in the area of peace and
security. We should also seriously consider appointing
more women to senior positions in United Nations
missions, lest we be accused of ignoring experienced
and potential women leaders in the security and defence
sectors.
Malaysia reaffirms its strong commitment to the
efforts to address sexual violence in conflict and postconflict situations. We strongly believe that the subject
of women and peace and security deserves the Security
Council’s sustained attention. In that regard, the
Council can be assured of our continuous engagement
and unrelenting support for the advancement of the
issue in our pursuit of achieving peace and security at
the national, regional and international levels.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States. Croatia, Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine and
Georgia align themselves with this statement, the full
version of which is being circulated in the Chamber.

13-3715357

S/PV.6984

I thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the representative on Women’s
Initiatives for Gender Justice and the Special Envoy of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees for their statements delivered earlier today.
Today’s debate addresses the root cause of recurring
and pervasive sexual violence in conflict — the often
predominant culture of impunity that allows these
crimes to go unrecorded, unpunished and, at worst,
tolerated by the community. We cannot combat sexual
violence and ensure effective conflict resolution and
peacebuilding without tackling this gap at all levels.
Such actions must include the following.
With regard to ensuring adequate information, factfinding and documentation, sexual violence in conflict
remains universally underreported. Inter alia, that is the
result of the threats faced by those who come forward
to report this crime. We reiterate the need to take all
measures for the protection of survivors, human rights
defenders and journalists, who contribute to collecting
information on sexual violence.
With regard to ensuring the prosecution of
crimes of sexual violence and punishing perpetrators
of crimes against women and girls under national
and international law, we emphasize the significant
advancement in international law made by the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
which includes sexual violence in the definition of
crimes, in particular as a crime against humanity,
and note that the ICC, as well as the non-permanent
International Criminal Tribunals, continue to be
important mechanisms in combating sexual violence
in conflict. We furthermore acknowledge the national
efforts to implement the Rome Statute. The crimes
of sexual violence must be excluded from amnesty
provisions in conflict-resolution processes. We support
the continued application of targeted and graduated
measures by the relevant Security Council Sanctions
Committees aimed at perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict, as well as other measures at its disposal
including referrals to the ICC and steps towards the
systematic monitoring of commitments by parties to
conflict under resolution 1960 (2010).
With regard to ensuring women’s leadership and the
participation of women in peace processes and conflict
resolution, those processes should also recognize
explicitly the need to address crimes of sexual violence,

58

as they lay the foundation for future institution-building
and political and legal reforms.
There is a need to ensure the availability of
reparations as a form of transitional gender justice, as
well as accessible services, including health, education,
psychosocial, legal and economic support.
We must raise awareness and combat the
normalization of sexual violence, including beyond
the end of the conflict, to counter stigmatization,
shame and fear of social exclusion, which perpetuate
the underreporting of sexual violence. We continue to
underline the importance of the continued deployment
of women’s and child protection advisers.
The European Union continues to implement its
dedicated policy on women and peace and security, as
well as to support initiatives to strengthen international
criminal justice and the rule of law. The EU now has
gender advisers and/or human rights focal points in
each of its crisis management missions and operations.
The EU supports the swift deployment of human
rights observers in Mali by the African Union and the
United Nations and provides financial support for the
deployment of observers. The EU training mission in
Mali includes training on gender and human rights for
the Malian armed forces.
We continue to support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and of the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/335) and the recommendations contained
therein. We also welcome the Council’s adoption of
resolution 2106 (2013) today as an expression of the
Council’s continued determination to keep this issue
under close scrutiny.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Kelly (Ireland): I want to thank the United
Kingdom for its leadership on this important issue. We
were pleased to sponsor resolution 2106 (2013).
Ireland aligns itself with the statement just made by
the observer of the European Union.
Significant progress has been made across the
women and peace and security agenda, with a steady
spotlight now being shone on rape and other forms
of sexual violence in conflict. But progress has been
uneven and inadequate.
13-37153

S/PV.6984

The Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2013/335) makes a series of further useful
recommendations, but we are disappointed to see
little evidence of progress regarding the very first
recommendation, that is, that the Security Council
should identify ways to target suspected perpetrators
with sanctions and other measures in countries where
no sanctions regime applies. Council members should
also ask themselves whether the maximum pressure
possible is being applied to the 32 parties named and
shamed in the annex to the Secretary-General’s March
report (S/2013/149).
Despite the broad range of activities and efforts
under way, the scourge of sexual violence remains
pervasive in many conflict and post-conflict situations.
How does impunity for those crimes persist? What
explains the reluctance to take decisive action to
address that impunity — to send a definitive signal that
sexual violence will no longer be tolerated?
The Secretary-General and Special Representative
Bangura have long emphasized that a radical challenge
to impunity can only be delivered at the national level.
The real imperative in that regard is the assumption by
national political leaders of ownership of this agenda.
While there has been a welcome shift towards
acknowledging conflict-related sexual violence as
an issue of peace and security, rather than viewing it
simply as a women’s issue, it is undeniable that sexual
violence touches women and affects women far more
profoundly than men. It is therefore appropriate that
women take the lead in driving the necessary national
political change.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region, which might be considered
the cockpit of conflict-related sexual violence, is a
case in point. On 4 June, the Permanent Mission of
Ireland convened a high-level panel discussion on
women and peacebuilding in the Great Lakes region.
A report on the event is available on our website. At
the event, Special Envoy Mary Robinson explored
the opportunities provided by the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. In particular, she
highlighted the importance of bringing together women
civil society leaders as part of a regional platform for
peace. At the panel discussion, Special Representative
Bangura described the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework as a new opportunity to tap into the vast

potential that is African women. Lina Zedriga, a civil
society leader for Uganda, offered powerful personal
testimony and called for women to be given the
opportunity to speak for themselves, saying “We are
not victims; we are stakeholders”.
In support of Mary Robinson, Lina Zedriga and
women’s leaders like her from the region intend to join
forces to change the national political calculus. They
aim to encourage and pressure national political leaders
to take ownership of the issue of sexual violence and
to implement the full range of commitments they
have made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. To help kick-start the process of engaging
women, Ireland is pleased to co-fund an event in
Bujumbura next month organized by Femmes Africa
Solidarité.
While the greatest potential for change lies at the
national level, we must all assume more responsibility
and do so with a keener sense of urgency. For our part,
Ireland recently published an independent mid-term
progress report on implementation of our national
action plan, based on resolution 1325 (2000). We are
one of a very small number of countries to publicly
share the lessons we have identified — where we have
done well and where we need to improve. We hope
that other States will benefit from the report, which
is available on our website. We will focus, too, on
preventing and responding to gender-based violence in
the immediate aftermath of humanitarian emergencies,
including through a roundtable on 28 June in Brussels
that Ireland, as current President of the Council of the
European Union, will co-host.
As Zainab Bangura pointed out, it is still largely
cost-free to rape a woman, child or man in conflict, and
sexual violence is used so widely precisely because it
is “such a cheap and devastating weapon”. Although
there are many worthwhile initiatives being pursued to
combat sexual violence, they are not enough.
At the Security Council debate last week
(S/PV.6980), the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
announced the launch of a campaign to galvanize
concerned Governments, interested Member States and
the United Nations system to end the recruitment and
use of children by State forces in armed conflict by
2016. Do we dare to challenge ourselves in a similar
fashion and to raise the level of our ambition?

13-3715359

S/PV.6984

The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.

rather than upholding it. The death of innocent unborn
children only visits further violence on women already
in difficulty.

Archbishop Chullikatt: At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to join other delegations in congratulating you,
Sir, and the United Kingdom delegation on presiding
over the work of the Security Council this month.
Today’s discussion provides a welcome opportunity for
the wider membership to collaborate on the means to
end the ongoing proliferation of sexual violence.

Through its institutions, particularly female
religious institutions, the Catholic Church is firmly
committed to compassionate outreach to victims, to
alleviating their sufferings and accompanying them as
far as possible on the way to recovery and rehabilitation,
and to resuming their own lives in freedom and dignity.
We hope that future discussions of the issue will remain
focused on the topic under discussion in a holistic
manner, rather than being diverted towards promoting
political or ideological agendas that serve only to harm
human dignity and are already under discussion in
other United Nations forums.

The Holy See, while operating within the family
of nations, constantly strives to promote peace,
security and the rule of law as a base for enhancing
development, freedom and the dignity of all peoples
and each person, from conception to natural death.
While firmly opposing recourse to armed conflict as
a means of resolving international or national disputes,
the Holy See recognizes the tragic and sad evidence
that, in many parts of the world, war is still an appalling
reality.
The international community as a whole and this
body in particular have a grave responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and,
where conflict occurs, finding the means for restoring
a peace based on justice and solidarity.
Within that framework, the Holy See appreciates
the Security Council’s commitment to enhancing
international awareness of — and the resolve to
address — the victimization of women and girls, as
well as men and boys, by the heinous acts of sexual
violence so often found in situations of armed conflict.
A just response to sexual violence must be motivated
not by revenge, which would simply perpetuate a chain
of hatred, but must rather seek to build the common
good. That responsibility demands that perpetrators
be held accountable for their actions in order to deter
future violence, while at the same time repairing the
damage done to victims and the community as a whole
by providing the necessary reparations, support and
care, in recognition of their human dignity and worth.
A truly human-centred approach to providing
assistance to victims and their communities includes
respect for life at all stages of development. In that
regard, we regret that resolution 2106 (2013), adopted
today, bypasses that noble concept and instead seeks to
promote a potentially destructive notion of health care
under the banner of sexual and reproductive health,
which too often is used as a justification for taking life

60

Secondly, respect for the rights of victims and
offenders requires that penal processes be guided
by a meticulous search for truth and conducted in a
timely manner. Those accused must be able to defend
themselves, and judges given the independence
necessary to enable them to avoid ruling for reasons
other than justice itself. Public pronouncements of
guilt by the media or political groups, at the national
or international level, before tribunals reach their
decisions, can seriously hamper our collective efforts
to combat the scourge of sexual violence.
Thirdly, in recognition of the principle of
complementarity, international tribunals must support
the role of national systems as the primary authority
in holding individuals accountable. To that end, States
must be provided with the necessary technical and
legislative resources for addressing sexual violence in
conflict settings and for upholding humanitarian law
and internationally agreed human rights standards.
Such respect for national authorities helps to restore
trust in national and local judicial systems and enables
victims and affected communities to participate more
fully. It is only when such national systems prove
unable or unwilling to shoulder their responsibility to
defend innocent victims and the common good that the
international community has an obligation to intervene
to protect victims and safeguard human dignity.
That obligation does not fall on States alone;
international organizations such as the United Nations
must also adhere to it. This is particularly important in
the area of peacekeeping operations, so that those sent
to protect people from violence do not become a source
of it themselves. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
the measures outlined by the Secretary-General in his
13-37153

S/PV.6984

report on “Special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse” (A/65/742).
I would like to thank you once again, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting and focusing our discussion
on such an important topic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Solomon Islands.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom for its ongoing leadership on the
issue of women and peace and security. I also commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate of
the Council on sexual violence in conflict.
The Solomon Islands agrees that sexual violence is
widespread in conflicts and is often used as a tool to
deliberately humiliate opponents. A number of Council
resolutions speak to that, particularly resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010), as well as
resolution 1325 (2000). It is also correct to say that
the vast majority of victims and survivors of sexual
violence do not see justice come their way.
Turning to the purposes of this debate — to examine
the mechanisms and processes by which countries
have dealt with the victims and survivors of sexual
violence — I would like to share some of the experience
of the Solomon Islands in dealing with victims of
sexual violence during and after a period of conflict.
The Solomon Islands went through an ethnic conflict
between 1998 and 2000. In 2009, with the support of the
United Nations, and particularly of Australia, currently
a member of the Security Council, the Solomon Islands
established a Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
The Commission provided a mechanism for the
victims’ stories to be heard and for efforts to be made to
restore the dignity of survivors of that ethnic conflict,
including those who had been sexually violated, with the
Commission listening in compassion and respect and
providing a space for expression in a traditional society
where shame and humiliation often prevent victims
from coming forward. The Commission, established
by law in the Solomon Islands, has since presented its
findings and recommendations to my Government.
Secondly, while primary responsibility in this
area lies with States, I would like to underscore that
in 2003, at the invitation of the Government of the
Solomon Islands, a regional assistance mission, as
provided for under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and led by Australia and strongly

supported by New Zealand and all the Pacific small
island developing States, was deployed to the Solomon
Islands. The mission, which included military, police
and civilian components, undertook peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and peacemaking initiatives. One of its
roles was to strengthen the country’s security apparatus
and address gaps in the system, including regional
support for strengthening the rule of law, such as
institutional training of police and corrections officers
and building court infrastructure and police stations
all over the country. That support has enabled the
Solomon Islands to conduct a strong campaign aimed
at protecting victims and dealing with perpetrators of
gender violence, while working with all the relevant
stakeholders. We have a policy in place and are now
holding consultations on a draft bill on gender violence
that we hope will address our high rates of gender
violence.
I would like to say that the regional assistance
mission is now in a transitional phase. After 10 years
of its regional partnership with a post-conflict country
such as ours, our economy has grown and stability has
been maintained. The mission’s military component
will be withdrawn this year. The regional Pacific police
force will shift into more of an advisory role, and other
components of the partnership will slowly be absorbed
into bilateral assistance with various partners.
The role of UN-Women in combating sexual
violence remains important, but its task in the Pacific
is challenging. It has one inter-country office managing
13 countries. We continue to push for it to establish
itself in more countries in the region.
Finally, to answer the question posed in the concept
paper (S/2013/335, annex) — yes, the Solomon Islands
and the Pacific have a story to tell and a model that tries
to address the issue of sexual violence comprehensively
through regional cooperation. I would like to close
by stating that sustainable peace and stability can
be achieved only through embracing all three pillars
of sustainable development, and by addressing the
security threats connected to climate change by calling
for stronger mitigation targets to avoid the possibility
that the world will reach a point of no return. Failing
that, the threats we see today will continue to increase
as States’ capacity to respond will become more
challenging.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.

13-3715361

S/PV.6984

Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank the United Kingdom delegation, especially
His Excellency Mr. William Hague, Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, for presiding
over this meeting. It is an important opportunity to
strengthen the Council’s efforts on sexual violence
in conflict situations, and to highlight the challenges
faced by States in conflict and post-conflict situations
in addressing that crime.
I also thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their
valuable briefings and their eagerness to participate in
the meeting.
The latest report of the Secretary-General, entitled
“Sexual violence in conflict” (S/2013/149), contains
many recommendations and significant information. In
the report, he stresses that the lack of adequate national
capacity and expertise to investigate and prosecute
acts of sexual violence has remained one of the main
impediments to ensuring accountability for related
crimes. He also indicates that Member States bear the
primary legal and moral responsibility for preventing
and addressing conflict-related sexual violence, and
reiterates the need for national ownership, leadership
and responsibility in that context.
We cannot consider the issue of women, peace and
security without addressing the root causes of their
suffering and insecurity. Consequently, improving
women’s protection is not merely a humanitarian
task, but one that requires focused efforts in several
areas — first and foremost, the enforcement of the
laws necessary to protect them in armed conflict,
without discrimination or selectivity, and calling upon
all parties to the conflict to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence
during the conflict.
In that context, I reiterate the importance
of ensuring access to health care, social support
services and justice for victims of sexual violence in
conflict-affected areas. I also note the importance of
strengthening cooperation among humanitarian actors,
exchanging experiences and lessons learned, as well as
initiatives to prevent sexual violence in conflict.
It is sad that today, even as we speak, many people
in various countries of the world are being subjected
to acts of sexual violence. In those countries, ongoing

62

conflict has led to the displacement of populations
and to increased security risks faced by refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs), including the risk
of sexual violence. It is clear that our Arab region is
not immune to the dangers posed by armed conflict
and its devastating effects on civilians, irrespective of
their social group or whether they are men, women or
children.
We are deeply concerned by acts of violence that
include kidnapping, rape and sexual violence in the
context of armed conflict. Women bear the brunt of
such acts, which constitute human rights violations.
In our Arab region, as one of the most prominent
examples of this phenomenon is that women in the
sisterly country of Syria, who have not been spared by
the brutal onslaught being waged against the Syrian
people by their own regime, which has adopted a
repressive military solution in addressing the demands
of the people.
In that context, women constitute the majority
of Syrian IDPs and refugees. The regime’s officials,
security apparatus, loyalists and thugs subject them to
discrimination, physical and sexual assault, violations
of their right to privacy, arbitrary arrest and detention
as a means of forcing their male relatives to turn
themselves in. Such acts amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity and their perpetrators must
be held accountable. The Secretary-General stresses
in his report that in Syria, such acts constitute the
main reasons why women and girls have fled conflictaffected cities, including the high level of insecurity
and access constraints.
I reiterate the State of Qatar’s support for all efforts
aimed at strengthening the rule of law and preventing
and responding to sexual violence in conflict situations.
I also stress the importance of continuing to fight
the impunity that hampers access by victims of such
crimes to justice, security and safety. To be sure, the
prosecution and trial of the perpetrators of sexual
violence are key steps contributing to strengthened
efforts to prevent sexual violence and protect women
and girls.
In conclusion, the ongoing global interest in the role
of women in peace and security, and the improvement
we are witnessing in their participation in policy efforts
to prevent and resolve conflicts will have real and
positive impacts on peace and security and will shape
the typical disastrous outcomes in various conflict
regions throughout the world.
13-37153

S/PV.6984

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mrs.
Adhikari
(Nepal):
My
delegation
wishes to express its sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate.
My delegation expresses its profound gratitude to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Angelina
Jolie, Special Envoy of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees; and Ms. Jane Adong
Anywar for their remarks.
Sexual and gender-based violence in situations of
armed conflict not only affects the dignity and honour
of the victims, but also leaves negative impacts on
families, communities and societies. The report of the
Secretary-General to the Security Council (S/2013/149)
depicts the pervasiveness of sexual violence and its
interconnection with the maintenance of international
peace and security.
After the signing of the Comprehensive Peace
Accord in 2006, the Government of Nepal has traversed
a long path towards empowering women. The interim
Constitution of Nepal 2007 has ensured the maximum
participation of women in decision-making positions in
all walks of national life, from grassroots to national
levels. Peace committees at the district level play a
very important role in managing post-conflict issues,
including one-third representation by women. Nepal is
committed to increasing the number of women in the
Nepal army and police and United Nations peacekeeping
operations in order to make them more inclusive.
Protecting and promoting the rights of the people
and ensuring inclusive development is at the core of
our efforts to build a peaceful and prosperous Nepal.
We are fully committed to preventing all forms of
violence against women, including sexual violence.
Nepal is a State party to seven core international
human rights instruments, including the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The independent judicial system and the National
Human Rights Commission — a constitutional human
rights watchdog body — are playing a prominent role in
safeguarding the rights of the people.
Nepal strongly believes that there can be no peace
and security if violence against women and girls persists.
The Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act,

2009; the Human Trafficking and Transportation
(Control) Act, 2007; the Gender-Based Violence Act,
2010; the National Plan of Action against Trafficking in
Women and Children, 2012; the National Commission
on Women Act, 2006; and other national laws provide
the measures necessary to address violence against
women and girls. Moreover, there is a sustained effort
to review laws that discriminate against women.
Nepal is the first South Asian country to develop
a national plan of action on resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). Increasing the participation of women
in decision-making, protecting women and girls from
sexual and gender-based violence and ending impunity
are the topmost priorities set forth in our plan. We have
a zero-tolerance policy against gender-based violence.
The Government of Nepal has never reneged on
its commitment to prosecute cases involving grave
violations of human rights and to end impunity
through the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms. We are fully conscious of fulfilling our
international obligations and national commitments,
and we are enacting laws to establish transitional justice
mechanisms. Our 2013 ordinance on the investigation of
disappeared persons and on the truth and reconciliation
commission is currently being examined by the
Supreme Court, and is therefore sub judice.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the
international community has to play an important
role in ending all forms of violence against women,
including sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Nepal stands firmly committed to ensuring
the full protection of women’s rights and preventing
sexual violence and all other forms of violations of
human rights. We look forward to working more closely
with the international community in the days ahead.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of June, as well
as for convening this thematic debate. We also thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, and the other speakers for their
briefings this morning.
We begin by reaffirming the importance that
Botswana attaches to the protection and promotion
of the rights of women and children, as well as our

13-3715363

S/PV.6984

commitment to address all forms of violence against
women, including sexual violence.
Sexual violence in armed conflict represents one of
the most heinous violations or abuses of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict is
therefore a matter both of upholding universal human
rights and of maintaining international security, in
keeping with relevant Security Council resolutions. In
that regard, Botswana welcomes the continued focus
by the Council on this thematic debate and wishes to
reiterate the importance of increased and more systemic
attention to the women and peace and security agenda
in the Council’s own work.
We remain deeply concerned that, despite repeated
condemnations by the international community
of sexual violence in conflict situations, such acts
continue to occur, and in some situations have even
become systematic and widespread, with women and
children constituting the majority of those adversely
affected by armed conflict. We call on all perpetrators
of such heinous acts to find it in their hearts to stop such
crimes. Sexual violence in the name of armed conflict
contravenes human rights. It goes against human nature
and against humankind.
In that regard, I wish to state categorically that
impunity for sexual violence, including by armed
groups, is unacceptable and can never be tolerated.
To that end, my delegation wishes to underscore the
importance of ending impunity for such acts as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace,
justice and security. Regrettably, a lack of accountability
tends to reinforce the social normalization of, and
tolerance for, sexual violence. We therefore recognize
the need for enhanced political will and commitment to
prevent these crimes by promoting and protecting the
rights of women and children.
While we remain convinced that more needs be
done to address such ongoing atrocities, my delegation
also wishes to emphasise the responsibility of States to
comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity,
and to effectively use all available means to enforce
accountability by prosecuting all perpetrators of such
crimes. Botswana recognises the important role of
the United Nations system in addressing violence
against women and children at the global, regional and
national levels, and in assisting States in their efforts
to eliminate and prevent all forms of violence against
women and children.
64

To that end, I wish to express the support of my
delegation for the work of UN-Women, as well as
the mandates of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representatives on Sexual Violence in Conflict and on
Children and Armed Conflict. While also recognizing
the existing normative framework established under
various Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1261 (1999), 1325 (2000) and other subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security and on
children and armed conflict, Botswana shares the
belief that efforts to address sexual violence in conflict
should be consistent with, and complementary to, wider
United Nations efforts. In that regard, we also wish to
underline that greater coordination and collaboration
with all the relevant stakeholders is essential to
strengthening global efforts to address sexual violence.
Botswana believes that efforts to end sexual
violence must also promote women’s active and equal
participation in conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
transitional justice and security sector reform processes.
In that regard, we strongly support the involvement
of women in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and
conflict prevention.
With regard to women’s access to justice, we call
on States to take practical steps to address obstacles
in women’s access to justice, including by creating an
enabling environment where women can easily report
incidents of violence without fear or intimidation.
Furthermore, we urge all States to strengthen the
capacity of national criminal justice systems to serve
victims with dignity.
With regard to the engagement of all segments of
society to combat sexual violence, our belief is that men
and boys must be socialized and engaged as partners
to create a culture of peace, tolerance and respect for
women. That includes ending the stigmatization of
victims and instilling a change of attitude and behaviour
in men and boys.
Botswana therefore pledges to work with the
international community as it seeks to find ways to stop
violence against women and children in the context
of conflict. We welcome the Council’s unanimous
adoption this morning of a new resolution on women and
peace and security (resolution 2106 (2013)). We remain
optimistic that, given our collective will, especially in
the Security Council, we will end such shameful crimes
against humanity.

13-37153

S/PV.6984

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this open debate on women and
peace and security with a focus on sexual violence in
conflict. I would like to convey our appreciation to
United Kingdom Foreign Secretary William Hague,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab Bangura,
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar of Uganda, who spoke on
behalf of the Women’s Initiatives for Gender Justice,
for their insightful statements.
We welcome the continuous efforts by the
international community to highlight the urgent need
for effective measures and action to prevent, combat
and eradicate the scourge of sexual violence in conflict.
While significant progress has been made through
concerted efforts at all levels, including by the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence and by UNWomen, there is no doubt that a lot more remains to be
done, especially in preventing and responding to sexual
violence in conflict. My delegation therefore calls for
an intensification of efforts to ensure compliance with
the obligations to prosecute perpetrators, end impunity
and provide equal protection and access to justice for
all victims of sexual violence, particularly women and
girls.
The Government of Uganda has taken a
comprehensive approach aimed at enhancing women’s
empowerment, enhancing their participation and
involvement in the promotion of peace and security, in
conflict-prevention and resolution, in eradicating sexual
violence and in ending impunity. We are committed to
the implementation of the relevant instruments.
In 2008, Uganda developed a national action plan
based on resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and
the Goma Declaration on Eradicating Sexual Violence
and Ending Impunity in the Great Lakes Region
(2008), which complements other national, regional
and international policy and legal frameworks to which
Uganda is a party. The national action plan gave renewed
impetus and resolve in Uganda’s efforts toward’s the
recognition and advancement of women’s rights and
the campaign to eradicate sexual violence. The plan
was revised in 2011 to take into account the lessons
learned during its implementation, including the need
to make indicators more streamlined and succinct for
better monitoring and reporting. The revised plan will
serve as a guide to all implementing actors until 2015,

although it will be reviewed periodically to set new
priorities based on experiences on the ground during
implementation.
We would like to stress the need for all parties to
armed conflict to enforce the prohibition against sexual
violence through their chains of command and to ensure
that alleged abuses are investigated promptly and that
perpetrators held accountable.
Uganda strongly supports more active participation
and involvement by women in addressing the concerns
raised by sexual violence in conflict, post-conflict
situations and peacebuilding, in particular in processes
such as security sector and justice sector reform. We are
convinced that sexual violence can be more effectively
combated through the strengthening of national
judicial systems, including by revising discriminatory
laws, simplifying procedures for lodging complaints
and providing free legal services to victims. We
also recognize the importance of providing timely
assistance, including health services, and supporting
the livelihoods of victims and survivors of sexual
violence.
United Nations peacekeepers and those of regional
organizations authorized by the United Nations have a
key role to play in preventing sexual violence in conflict
situations by practicing zero tolerance within their
ranks and protecting vulnerable populations. There is
no doubt that increasing the number of women recruited
and deployed in peacekeeping operations would make
a significant contribution to addressing the problem of
sexual violence in conflict.
In conclusion, we must redouble our efforts and
sustain the momentum in the fight against sexual
violence at the national, regional and international
levels, using a multi-pronged approach and utilizing
all of the tools at our disposal. We therefore welcome
the adoption of resolution 2106 (2013) by the Security
Council today as one of the ways of advancing further
action towards eradicating sexual violence in conflict
situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We welcome your
initiative, Mr. President, in convening this debate on
an issue that has gained strong public and political
acknowledgement. I also thank the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Zainab

13-3715365

S/PV.6984

Bangura, as well as the Special Envoy of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the representative of the Women’s Initiatives for
Gender Justice.
We continue to witness a disturbing increase
in the trend to use sexual violence as a political and
military tool, the effects of which are grave and longlasting, often alienating entire groups, communities
and peoples. It is unfortunate that, despite the existence
of international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, there is an alarming escalation in the levels
of sexual violence during and after armed conflicts,
which has devastating consequences on women and
girls. Their protection deserves our utmost attention
as a primary responsibility of all of us, because it is a
serious humanitarian concern and significant security
issue. It also requires a multidimensional approach.
Over the past decade, particular attention has
been paid to addressing some of the specific crimes
experienced by women and girls during armed conflict,
namely, rape, trafficking, forced prostitution and
enslavement. Today it is critical to ensure accountability
for past and present crimes and not to grant immunity
to perpetrators or amnesty for future crimes.
It is commendable that the Council continues to
focus on how best to achieve effective justice for crimes
of sexual violence in conflict in order to end impunity,
formally investigate and prosecute persons responsible
for such crimes and grave violations, prevent their
recurrence and seek justice and peace.
In that context, Armenia also attaches the utmost
importance to the promotion of justice and the rule
of law, as those values are indispensable for the
maintenance of international and regional security
and the protection of human rights. A consensus has
emerged that the rule of law should be promoted at both
the national and the international levels and should
be based on the Charter of the United Nations, the
norms of international law and the principle of good
governance. We therefore share the views expressed by
Council members and other speakers calling for more
systematic attention to impunity and justice. We also
agree that increased efforts to fight impunity at the
national and international levels are essential.
I would also like to emphasize that special attention
must be paid to children who are victims of rape and
other forms of sexual violence, especially girls, who
usually make up the largest group of victims in armed

66

conflict. In addition to the physical damage it causes,
sexual violence often leaves other forms of lasting
harm and stigma.
However, we cannot address sexual violence simply
by naming and punishing offenders. More fundamental
changes are needed at the institutional and societal
levels. In that context, sexual violence against women
will never be adequately addressed without focusing on
the empowerment of women and their participation in
the political, social and economic spheres.
Armenia takes note of some positive trends in
that field. Over the past decade, the Security Council
has put in place a normative framework for women’s
participation in peace processes, the protection
and promotion of women’s human rights and the
mainstreaming of gender equality and perspectives
in the contexts of armed conflict, peacebuilding and
reconstruction.
Peacebuilding needs the involvement of women.
The role played by women in peacebuilding in many
countries over the past decade has highlighted the
importance of their full participation. Women need
to be present at the table to discuss issues such as
genocide, impunity and security, if a just and enduring
peace is to be built.
However, despite the progress made, a great deal
remains to be addressed and accomplished, as female
voices are not always heard. Women remain largely
excluded, especially from efforts to find workable
solutions to conflicts. We should further promote their
participation.
It will come as news to no one that the costs of
conflict are borne disproportionately by women and
girls. And since women pay the highest price when
peace is absent, they are important stakeholders in
peacebuilding. The inclusion of women in all stages of
peace processes would help guarantee more lasting and
representative settlements.
Armenia recognizes the key role and critical efforts
of the Security Council in preventing sexual violence
and combating impunity in conflict and post-conflict
situations. We have encouraged continued action by
the Council, including the development of effective
measures to put an end to sexual violence in conflict.
We welcome the adoption of today’s resolution by the
Council (resolution 2106 (2013)), which will serve
as a practical tool in the consideration of policies,
programmes and actions that can successfully further
13-37153

S/PV.6984

the implementation of commitments in combating
sexual violence.
Armenia expresses its readiness to work closely
with the Council, other United Nations bodies,
interested institutions and concerned non-governmental
organizations to expand and implement the women and
peace and security agenda and better the situation of
women around the world, including those affected by
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to join the many previous speakers
who have thanked you, Sir, for having convened
this debate. I also express our gratitude to all those,
especially the women, who work every day to promote
peace and security.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
women and peace and security agenda has made clear
progress, expanding in both breadth and depth to
occupy the important place it does today, supported by
the legal instruments, political initiatives and practical
activities of the Organization.
Despite that progress, however, we regret to note
that reports from a number of conflict and post-conflict
situations continue to point to increasing physical and
emotional violence against women and girls, who are
the primary victims of sexual violence and its negative
consequences for their quality of life and future
development. In that regard, we would stress the need
to defend the human rights of the victims of serious
violations. In our view, the United Nations system
should continue to fight against impunity, bring to
justice those guilty for such violations and strengthen
national capacities, using regional capacities to promote
international justice in the defence of women’s rights.
Uruguay considers the issue of women and peace
and security to be an essential part of a larger agenda
that includes the situation of children in armed conflict
as well as the protection of civilians in armed conflict;
they are integral parts of the whole. It is therefore
essential to make coordinated progress and to use all the
instruments available to the Organization, particularly
its capacities in the field.
One instrument in such efforts is peacekeeping
operations, which in recent years have included
mandates for the protection of civilians that pay

particular attention to women and children. There has
been significant progress. However, the periodic attacks
against civilian populations, including in areas where
the missions are deployed, shows the limitations that
still exist against dealing with the perpetrators of these
attacks — limitations for the local population as well
as for the international community. Through resolution
1325 (2000), the Council has stressed the important role
that women play in the prevention of conflicts and in
peacebuilding.
Uruguay has been in the vanguard of incorporating
women into the armed forces, and that can be seen in the
number of women who are deployed in the armed forces
as well as in the Uruguayan police and in the formed
police units of peacekeeping operations. Those women
volunteers have always played a key role, and they are
also interested in returning to jobs in the field, which
shows, I think, the commitment that they have to the
goals of the missions. That is why I think it is important
to reiterate the need to continue to promote the greatest
possible participation of women in peacekeeping
processes, because they provide undeniable qualitative
advantages.
With regard to the implementation of the agenda of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, we would
like particular stress to be given to women and children
through the work that we do at Headquarters as well as
through the work that is done by Blue Helmets on the
ground. We would also like to stress the importance of
having the broadest possible support for this agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Elbahi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation to
all the parties involved in holding these open debates on
women and peace and security, pursuant to resolution
1325 (2000), for the second time this year.
My delegation would like to state that the situation
of women in areas of conflict in the Sudan has witnessed
considerable progress compared to previous periods,
thanks to the efforts of my Government, embodied in
the signing of the Darfur Peace Agreement with some
armed rebel movements, including the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM). It should be recalled that
there are a number of rebel movements still outside
the peace process. They still violate human rights in
areas of conflict, including acts of violence and sexual
violence against women and girls. The Council should

13-3715367

S/PV.6984

therefore send a strong signal to those movements to
compel them to sit at the negotiation table and to desist
from perpetrating grave violations of human rights,
particularly against women and children.
In the implementation of the work plan contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), our Government established a
number of specialized centres at the central and national
levels to coordinate the efforts of women in the fields
of peace and development and to provide them with
consultative guidelines with regard to strengthening
the principles of equality and a gender perspective.
National
programmes
on
rehabilitation,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration have
devoted special priority to the situation of women, in
close cooperation with the relevant United Nations
agencies, including UN–Women. My country has had
a national strategy on combating gender-based violence
since 2005, and has established a unit under the
Ministry of Justice to combat violence against women
and children. In order to safeguard our borders, prevent
the smuggling of weapons and stem the subversive
activities undertaken by rebel movements, which violate
human rights, particularly the rights of women and
girls, we will continue to enforce the border agreement
with Chad, as well as the tripartite agreement with
Chad and the Central African Republic, in addition to
extending the security cooperation protocol with Libya.
At the justice level, the Office of the Prosecutor General
in Darfur continues to look into reports submitted by
victims.
In addition to the efforts deployed by the advisory
council for human rights in Darfur, social services
and security units as well as the unit against violence
against women, the Government this month launched
the 10-year national action plan on human rights as a
clear-cut national strategy to enhance the situation of
human rights in the Sudan. The plan was welcomed by
the United Nations independent expert on human rights
during his latest visit to the Sudan earlier this month.
The Government of the Sudan emphasizes its interest in
enhancing the rights of women and in protecting them,
and reiterates its wish to continue cooperation with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as with the relevant
institutions. We will also continue our cooperation with
the relevant United Nations agencies with regard to
capacity-building.
In conclusion, my delegation wish to underscore
that the Secretary-General’s reports must contain
68

verifiable and correct information. Government bodies
must be informed of the contents of those reports long
enough before they are published, so that Governments
can comment and take the necessary steps on them in
the event that they prove true. We also call upon the
Council to deploy efforts to address such root causes of
conflict as poverty, a lack of development and climate
change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the African Union.
Mr. António: Let me begin by joining preceding
speakers in congratulating the presidency for the United
Kingdom’s accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would like to express the
African Union’s (AU) deep appreciation for the holding
of this open debate on a topic of great importance, as
illustrated by the overwhelming number of participants.
This debate bears eloquent testimony to the United
Kingdom’s commitment and efforts towards the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and related
resolutions at the highest political level. The adoption,
under the United Kingdom’s leadership of the Group
of Eight Summit, held in London on 11 April, of the
declaration on preventing sexual violence in conflict
further reflects that commitment.
I also wish to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General for his personal commitment
and engagement in giving this issue the attention it
deserves. I would also like to thank Ms. Bangura for
her leadership in representing the African continent.
We want her to know how proud we are of the work she
is doing on this important issue.
The issue of sexual violence in conflict implies
a collective moral obligation and provokes a sense of
urgency, given the ongoing escalation of this crime and
its devastating effects on its innocent victims — women
and girls, men and boys. The African Union’s efforts
have focused on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in conjunction with the gender policy adopted by
the African Union in 2009. Furthermore, the AU’s road
map for the African Peace and Security Architecture
for the period 2011-2013 devotes an entire section to the
topic of women and peace and security. The AU Peace
and Security Department has taken concrete steps to
mainstream gender into its work at the institutional,
operational and programmatic levels. The inclusion
of gender experts as part of post-conflict needsassessment missions undertaken by the Peace and

13-37153

S/PV.6984

Security Reconstruction Department is a step forward
in formulating efficient post-conflict reconstruction
programmes.
Similarly, efforts have also been made within AU
peace support operations to address the different needs
of men and women as peacekeepers, while recognizing
that much more must be done at the cultural and policy
levels to address gender differences in such operations.
In 2011, as part of its efforts to raise awareness in the
Peace and Security Council on the situation of women
and children in Africa, the AU Panel of the Wise
commissioned a report on mitigating the vulnerabilities
of women and children in armed conflicts in 2011. The
report highlights how rape and sexual and gender-based
violence have reached pandemic proportions during
conflicts. Within its mandate, the Peace and Security
Department has a central role to play in developing and
implementing strategies on preventing and responding
to sexual violence and sexual exploitation and abuse.
It was in that context that the African Union
Peace and Security Council held a meeting on
28 March 2011 on the theme of women and children
and other vulnerable groups in armed conflict, with the
participation, among others, of the then United Nations
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Building on that meeting, given the priority accorded
this issue by the leadership of the African Union
Commission, efforts are under way to appoint an AU
special representative on sexual violence in conflict.
The African Union Commission has been
encouraged by its continued strong collaboration with
the United Nations through the office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Zainab
Hawa Bangura, with a view to signing a cooperation
framework in the near future. We are convinced that the
envisaged cooperation framework will go a long way to
enhancing cooperation and coordination between the
African Union Commission and the United Nations as
they address conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ibrahim (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Foreign Secretary of the United
Kingdom, Ms. Zainab Bangura, Ms. Angelina Jolie
and Ms. Jane Adong Anywar. I would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, for holding this open debate
on sexual violence against women, an issue of great

interest to Member States in general, and one that has
recently acquired a special dimension in view of the
levels of violence being perpetrated against women
in my country, particularly since the documented
number of cases of rape committed by armed terrorist
groups is about 37,000 in Damascus and its environs
alone, according to the estimates of Syria’s national
reconciliation committee, and the number of women
who have been kidnapped has reached about 1,000 to
date.
My country has sent several official letters to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura detailing documented information on the
responsibility of armed terrorist groups for acts of rape,
sexual violence and murder against women in Syria.
Armed groups continue to kidnap women and girls and
use them as spoils of war and sex slaves for the pleasure
of terrorists, while the sponsors of such groups, thugs
of war and sexual perverts, some of whom reside in
Gulf sheikhdoms, continue to issue edicts blessing
such crimes under the so-called sexual or fornication
jihad. All this deviant moral and social behaviour has
been met with an unjustified and objectionable silence
on the part of many of the specialized United Nations
agencies. That continued suspicious silence is no longer
acceptable.
I would also like to address some of the statements
that have been made in this meeting, particularly the
total and deliberate omission of any mention of the
crimes committed by those terrorist groups — some of
which are affiliated with Al-Qaida — to the extent that
some Member States look as if they are supporting and
protecting this kind of terrorism and justifying the acts
committed by the terrorists, such as cannibalism in the
wake of their slaughter of their victims. In a meeting
such as this, we believe that it would be proper to say
that such an attitude cannot put an end to such horrible
practices and appalling forms of violence against
women.
It is truly shameful for the apartheid Israeli regime
to speak of women’s rights and combating violence
against women while its soldiers and settlers continue
their daily aggression against Palestinian women, men
and children, in addition to the violence practiced in its
detention centres and prisons, tantamount to the worst
forms of human rights violations. Before 1948, Israeli
gangs were guilty of several massacres; they later
formed the so-called Israeli Defense Forces, which
has perpetuated the approach of those terrorist gangs,

13-3715369

S/PV.6984

committing murder, destruction, rape, displacement
and other crimes that are an affront to humankind.
None of those crimes have been curbed; they continue
to this day.
Palmach, Haganah, Irgun — these were all Jewish
terrorist organizations active before 1948, and they
formed the nucleus for the so-called Israeli Defense
Forces. Those were terrorist gangs that committed
collective massacres, displaced Arabs — Muslims and
Christians alike — desecrated Muslim and Christian
holy places and committed hundreds of massacres, such
as in Deir Yassin, Balad Al-Shaykh, Al-Dawayima,
Al-Tantura, Sa’Sa’, Arab Al-Mawasi, Saf Saf, Haifa,
Jaffa, Al-Husayniyya and scores more. All those
violations continue to this day at the hands of the Israeli
army and its settlers.
As for the statement made by the representative
of Turkey, I would say that before he calls on the
Syrian Arab Republic to grant access to the United
Nations — whose agencies are active in Syria to this
day — his regime should allow the United Nations
and other international organizations to enter and
visit the many training camps on Turkish territory
where hundreds of terrorists reside and train in order
to eventually go to Syria and commit their murderous
crimes.
I would also like to address the crimes that have
been perpetrated against Syrian women and girls
displaced to neighbouring countries. Their rights have

70

been violated, and those who support terrorist groups
like Al-Nusra — a group affiliated with Al-Qaida that
commits the most heinous crimes against civilians,
including women — answer to the Qatari regime, which
continues to arm and finance terrorists and provide
them with a propaganda smokescreen to cover up their
crimes against women and girls. They appear daily on
satellite television channels, issuing fundamentalist and
destructive fatwas blessing the commission of horrible
crimes that violate human rights and international
humanitarian law.
The Syrian Arab Republic continues to believe in
the peaceful settlement of the conflict on the basis of a
comprehensive national dialogue, an end to the terrorist
campaign against Syria and the restoration of peace and
security in my country, which is a land of tolerance and
brotherly love.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before I draw the meeting to a close, I note that
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bangura has been with us throughout almost the entire
debate and is here with us at the end. I thank her again
for her briefing and all her work in this crucual area.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of the consideration of the item on the
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

13-37153
