A /76/PV.74

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

74

th plenary meeting
Monday, 23 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kridelka
(Belgium), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of agenda item 26 at its 54th plenary meeting, on
17 December 2021. In order for the Assembly to take
action on the draft resolution, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of agenda item 26.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 26?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will also recall
that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 17 September 2021,
the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item
26 to the Second Committee to enable the Assembly to
take action expeditiously on the draft resolution it has
before it today.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 26 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 76/506 B).

Agenda item 26 (continued)
Agriculture development, food security and
nutrition
Draft resolution (A/76/L.55)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now resume its consideration of agenda item 26 to
take action on the draft resolution issued as document
A/76/L.55.
I would like to inform the Assembly that
introductory statements may be delivered from national
seats or the rostrum, as delegations prefer.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon
to introduce draft resolution A.76/L.55.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): This sheaf of wheat
represents a loaf of bread for a poor family somewhere
in the world. This holy plant, wheat, is a source of life,
abundance and resilience for 35 per cent of the world’s
population, or 2.7 billion people, especially in Asia and
Africa. Now, however, wheat is becoming scarce for
millions. That is why we are here today. If we can adopt
draft resolution A/76/L.55 and make sure that food and
bread are available for millions, we will be working
for peace.
As I said, our world is facing yet another crisis.
This one has the potential to threaten every home and to
have long-lasting effects. It is a crisis of food insecurity
and a threat of hunger for millions of people around
the world, especially in developing and vulnerable
countries. We are gathered here because we have

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-35758 (E)

*2235758*

A/76/PV.74

decided to face this challenge together, as we should.
We came here united in our purpose of saying that we,
the people of the United Nations, will work in solidarity
to prevent hunger. We have put that determination in
one document that expresses our hopes for unity and
solidarity, and we vow to win this new battle. This is a
draft resolution that represents our desire to ensure that
we never see a child, or any human being, go hungry
anywhere in the world. It is born of the fear that long
breadlines could lead to extended periods of pain,
inequality and instability.
I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.55, entitled “State of global food insecurity”.
Who could have imagined that in 2022 we would be
here to talk about a threat of mass hunger and even
famine for millions all over the world? That is simply
unacceptable. The cover of the latest edition of The
Economist deserves mention in our discussions today.
Its portrait of human skulls as wheat kernels is a
terrifying reminder and an alarming warning of the
global food crisis that is hitting our world. People
everywhere are facing multiple crises, a perfect storm.
The three Fs, as they are now being called — the crises
of food, fuel and fertilizer — are compounded by the
climate crisis, the coronavirus disease pandemic and
now, conflict. People are tired, exhausted, scared and
hopeless. The last thing they need is to have no food
on the table. Our multilateral system is being stretched
to the limit. Developing and vulnerable countries,
especially indebted countries, are being tested as never
before. This global multidimensional crisis needs global
solutions, with the multilateral system at the heart of
every solution and every aspect of the recovery.
Rising food prices and inflation have historically
been catalysts for social upheaval. We are beginning
to see social unrest and protests in various parts of the
world in response to the surge in food prices. Instability
is rearing its head in many places, and time is of the
essence. If we fail to act now, the situation will only
worse, and social unrest will lead to instability and
conflict. As the Secretary-General reminded us last
week (see S/PV.9036), if we do not feed people, we
feed conflicts.
These are the drivers that have brought us
together to work on this draft resolution. We wanted
a non-politicized, focused, neutral and action-oriented
document. The draft resolution before us is the outcome
of an initiative by Lebanon and the efforts and hard
negotiations of a core group of countries that saw the
2/13

23/05/2022

seriousness of the issue and decided to do something
about it. In addition to my country, Lebanon, the core
group members are Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Egypt,
Fiji, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Kenya, Malaysia,
Mexico, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Senegal, South
Africa, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, the United
States of America and Uruguay. I am happy to report
that they have been actively trying to find solutions to
this crisis and raise awareness of its seriousness. The
United States held a ministerial meeting here at the
United Nations last week presided over by Secretary
of State Anthony Blinken and ministers from around
the world, and the Security Council convened a
meeting this month under the United States presidency
to discuss food security (see S/PV.9036). Another
member of the group, Italy, will hold a Mediterranean
ministerial dialogue on the food security crisis in early
June. That is in addition to many efforts by others to
extend support to countries hit hard by the food crisis.
Under the leadership of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations has done a great job of confronting the
challenges born of this crisis. We support the many steps
it has taken, especially the Secretary-General’s launch
of the Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy
and Finance. The World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund have also been at the forefront of this
battle, finding solutions and lending a helping hand to
vulnerable countries in particular.
With the adoption of this draft resolution, the
General Assembly will send a strong message of unity
and solidarity, the two ingredients we need to face this
crisis. It will show the world that we are still united
in our purpose, and that what unites us is greater and
stronger than what divides us. We also wanted this
draft resolution to be a resolution for peace. It will be a
bridge for peace, and it will show that multilateralism is
alive and resilient. It will signal to the world that when
it comes to tackling hunger, we are one.
I would like to express my appreciation to the
members of the core group for their work and efforts on
the draft resolution. I also thank all the Member States
that have already sponsored the draft resolution and
invite others to join them. We look forward to seeing
this draft resolution adopted without a vote, and to
seeing the General Assembly send a strong message of
unity, compassion and solidarity.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A.76/L.55, entitled
“State of global food insecurity”.
22-35758

23/05/2022

A/76/PV.74

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.55, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra,
Angola, Austria, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Cap Verde, Canada, the Central
African Republic, China, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Rwanda, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Türkiye, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United
Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America,
Uruguay, Viet Nam and Yemen.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.55?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/264).

A/76/L.55

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Bratchyk (Ukraine): With regard to resolution
76/264, which we have just adopted, I would like to
reiterate the position of the delegation of Ukraine on
the issue of food security.
As a reliable contributor to global food security
and one of the world’s main food suppliers, Ukraine

fully shares the commitment to acting with urgency,
at scale and in concert to respond to the urgent food
security and nutrition needs of millions of people
worldwide. In recent years the food-security situation
has worsened for the most vulnerable, especially owing
to the effects of the coronavirus disease pandemic and
climate change. But this year the world has faced a
new and unprecedented threat — a full-fledged war of
aggression unleashed by Russia on Ukraine.
Along with international law and the rules-based
order, Russia has also affected global food security,
because about 400 million people all over the world,
but mostly in Africa, the Middle East and Asia, depend
on grain and oil supplies from Ukraine. Now, thanks
to Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian seaports, we have
almost stopped exporting grain. Large areas of eastern
and southern Ukraine continue to be combat zones or
under temporary occupation. That is why we expect
this year’s harvest to be just half of last year’s yields.
Russia’s efforts to seize Ukrainian grain for its own
consumption or to sell it illegally in international
markets represent another threat. The Russian
occupiers have already stolen between at least 400,000
and 500,000 tons of grain. Almost all the grain ships
leaving the temporarily occupied port of Sevastopol
are loaded with stolen Ukrainian commodities. We
demand that Russia stop its illicit stealing of grain,
lift its blockade of Ukrainian ports, restore freedom of
navigation and allow the passage of commercial ships.
We strongly reject any manipulative narratives
saying that sanctions on Russia make it impossible to
effectively address the issue of agricultural exports. As
soon as Russia is compelled to stop the war, the looming
threat of hunger will be over, particularly for the most
vulnerable. Otherwise, it will continue to be totally
responsible for the famine and suffering of millions.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We would like to thank the group of
countries that initiated resolution 76/264 for drafting
the text. We welcome the fact that it is dedicated to
the issue of ensuring global food security, which has
traditionally been one of Russia’s priorities, and we
are therefore pleased to join the consensus on this
important document. However, we also have a number
of comments.
We share the concern about the deteriorating
situation in this area and the fact that the spike in prices
and the instability in the energy, fertilizer and food
markets in the past six months have naturally affected

22-357583/13

A/76/PV.74

the general food security situation. In that regard,
we are pleased with the resolution’s comprehensive
approach to the reasons for the problem. Our delegation
has already presented a detailed analysis of the factors
in the current situation, specifically through our
distribution of General Assembly document A/76/798
and our statement in the Security Council’s meeting
on 19 May (see S/PV.9036). We only hope that this
material will be duly studied and used by the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance set
up by the Secretary-General. While we understand the
need to establish this mechanism for the United Nations
system’s comprehensive consideration and response
to multifaceted challenges, we have been obliged
to conclude that the analysis and recommendations
in the Group’s first report are unfortunately not
comprehensive. In particular, for all practical purposes
they ignore the serious role played by the illegal
sanctions, including those imposed on Russia.
The fact is that the sanctions and restrictions have
destabilized and continue to destabilize the energy
markets. It is the sanctions that are interrupting supply
chains and established transport routes. They make it
difficult to insure and charter merchant ships and their
bans threaten ships’ entry into ports. Some transactions
cannot be paid for. Excuses about exemptions and the
targeted nature of the sanctions do not stand up to
scrutiny. Even Western analysts and international
structures have recognized the sanctions’ impact on the
food market, and that is why it is particularly sad that
the Global Crisis Response Group, which was set up
precisely to resolve this crisis, did not dare to talk about
it. If the Group genuinely wants to work impartially in
order to achieve a real resolution of these issues, it is
important to understand that ignoring one of the main
factors will only worsen the situation. That is why
we are obliged to dissociate ourselves from the words
“takes note with appreciation” in paragraph 3 of the
resolution, regarding the Group’s first report. We trust
that its second report will be balanced and take into
account various points of view.
For our part, we affirm that Russia remains a
responsible supplier of both energy resources and of
food. We believe that from 1 August and until the end
of the year we will be able to offer about 20 million tons
of grain for export through the port of Novorossiisk.
We are also prepared to discuss other purchases,
including fertilizers, whose export potential from
June to December of this year is estimated at about
22 million tons.
4/13

23/05/2022

We are once again being obliged to refute accusations
against us and attempts to shift the responsibility to
Russia for the difficult global food security situation.
It is not we but Ukraine that is blocking vessels in the
ports and mining its maritime waters, while Russia is
opening humanitarian corridors on a daily basis for
vessels to move in a south-westerly direction from
Ukrainian territorial waters. However, Ukraine is
continuing to export food, although in smaller amounts,
by rail and on barges along the Danube. According
to the data from the relevant Ukrainian ministries,
1.4 million tons of corn and wheat were exported in
March and 1 million tons of grain were exported in
April. Their destinations would be better clarified with
our Ukrainian colleagues. We merely saw the data from
Bloomberg about supplies through the Romanian port
of Constanta to one European Union country. We know
that fields are being mined, but it is the Ukrainian
armed forces that are doing it. And it is they who are
shelling territory that they do not control in places
where farmers have begun working in the fields. In the
south of the Kherson district, Russian servicemen have
deactivated more than 12,000 explosive objects during
their humanitarian demining of farmland.
Finally, to those colleagues who today and on other
occasions have accused us of undermining efforts to
achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
I would like to recommend that they first look at their
own track record. First and foremost, they should ask
themselves whether pumping tens of billions of dollars’
worth of weapons into Ukraine, money that they could
not previously find for sustainable development, is
helping to achieve the 2030 Agenda.
Mrs. Sandller (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to thank the countries that promoted resolution
76/264 on the state of global food insecurity, which we
have just adopted. This is an issue of particular relevance
to Argentina. We understand that the current situation
is creating even more pressing challenges that make
it difficult for us to achieve Sustainable Development
Goal 2, on ending hunger, achieving food security
and improved nutrition and promoting sustainable
agriculture. That is why Argentina, in line with its
historical stance in defence of multilateralism, actively
supports all initiatives to address food insecurity that
are promoted in forums such as the one we are in today.
It is precisely because of the relevance that my country
attaches to the issue of food security and to the building
of consensus that we would have liked the process
that led to the drafting of this resolution to have been
22-35758

23/05/2022

more open and inclusive, ensuring the constructive
participation of all Member States.
We regret that a final text was presented on food
security, a subject and discussion to which Argentina
has much to contribute since it is one of the largest food
producers in the world and was an active participant
in the Food Systems Summit that took place last
year in the General Assembly. However, despite the
drafting process, and taking into account the enormous
importance that my country attaches to food security,
we decided to join the consensus on its adoption.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Argentina’s
willingness to work constructively, as we have always
done, on any initiative that promotes progress towards
a world without hunger.
Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The issue of food security is a top priority for
El Salvador. At the national level, we have undertaken
various efforts to ensure the right to food and nutrition
from early childhood and throughout people’s lives. El
Salvador is committed to improving health conditions
through such initiatives as the Grow Together
programme, which fosters early childhood development
by supporting breastfeeding, nutrition and early care,
as well as our national food and nutrition security
policy, our Master Plan to Rescue Agriculture and our
Healthy and Sustainable School Meals Strategy, along
with our Rural Adelante, RECLIMA and Sowing Life
programmes, among others.
Aware of the effects of climate change on food
security, we are taking measures to increase our
resilience. Such actions have become extremely
urgent, as we are in one of the areas most vulnerable
to climate change and are part of the dry corridor in
Central America. High-impact climatic events are
taking place with greater frequency and intensity, as
demonstrated by tropical storms Amanda and Cristóbal
and hurricanes Eta and Iota, which hit Central America
hard. The increase in temperature, floods and droughts,
among other things, affects food security and nutrition,
particularly for families that depend on agriculture and
livestock for their livelihoods.
This is also a highly relevant issue on the
international agenda, especially because, according to
The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World
2021, hunger around the world increased during the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, affecting
between 720 and 811 million people. Similarly, the

A/76/PV.74

most significant increase in moderate or severe food
insecurity was recorded in Latin America and the
Caribbean and in Africa.
Therefore, El Salvador considers that addressing
food security is urgent, especially in the context of the
multiple crises caused by the COVID-19 pandemic,
as evidenced through challenges such as supply chain
interruptions, the lack of basic products, price increases
and job losses, among other things.
All of that demonstrates the need for States and
actors to join collective efforts to deal with food
insecurity. Accordingly, my country supports all
efforts in this area, both in the General Assembly
and in other United Nations organs, bodies, agencies
and programmes.
That is why we regret that resolution 76/264, on the
state of global food insecurity, was not the product of
an open, transparent and inclusive consultation process.
My country calls on the States Members of the United
Nations to undertake processes in such a way that it
is possible to effectively and transparently discuss
such issues, resulting in action-oriented documents
that take into account the views of the Members of
the Organization. We trust that such exclusionary
methods will not become a recurring practice in the
Organization, which would undermine its inclusivity
and legitimacy.
Nevertheless, El Salvador joined the consensus on
resolution 76/264.
Mrs. Kavaleuskaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The Republic of Belarus shares the concerns of the
States that co-sponsored resolution 76/264, with
respect to the potential threat of global hunger. We also
understand the reasons for introducing the resolution
at this time, even though the issue of hunger was also
very pertinent during the coronavirus pandemic. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the following.
Unfortunately, the resolution does not take into
consideration one important issue that has a serious
impact on food security and that many delegations have
not mentioned. That is the issue of unilateral coercive
measures, which has had a significant impact on the
food situation in the world. One example is the ban on
the export of Belarusian potassium fertilizer, which
represents about 20 per cent of the world market and
has had a significant impact in terms of the spike in the
prices for inorganic fertilizer in 2021. That ban has also

22-357585/13

A/76/PV.74

had a significant impact on food security and efforts to
eradicate hunger in vulnerable countries.
We would like to point out that that thoughtless ban
was introduced by the West against Belarus before the
start of the conflict in Ukraine. We have no doubt that
unilateral coercive measures have a pernicious impact
on food security in the world. The Secretary-General
has repeatedly highlighted that recently. The imposition
of sanctions unquestionably leads to a breakdown in
global trade, which has a significant impact on financial
stability and the trading potential of the countries on
which restrictions are imposed. The use of sanctions is
pointless and counterproductive and should not be used
in intergovernmental relations.
We are also disappointed by the attempts of
countries that actively use sanctions to mislead the
global community and to reject the real reasons for
food shortages. They are pinning all responsibility
for the increase in food insecurity on others. Belarus
is prepared to continue its efforts to guarantee and
strengthen global food security.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position on resolution 76/265.
We will now hear those delegations wishing to
make statements after the adoption of the resolution.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
European Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States.
The mounting global food crisis requires our urgent,
coordinated and unified action. Today we demonstrated
that we can unite on the most crucial challenges of our
time. The EU welcomes the adoption by consensus of
resolution 76/264. To demonstrate their full support,
our 27 member States co-sponsored the resolution. I
would like to thank Lebanon for taking this important
initiative at this make-or-break moment.
Food security, with a specific focus on the most
vulnerable countries, remains a top priority for the
European Union and its member States. That is
why, in these times of acute global food crisis, we
are determined to advance responses at all levels,
including the multilateral level. That is also why, while
fully supporting this important resolution, we would
have welcomed a clear contextualization on the major
accelerating factor of this global food security crisis.
6/13

23/05/2022

An effective global response implies a precise
and factual identification of the causes. Let us be
clear: climate change, environmental degradation, the
coronavirus disease pandemic and conflict situations
all play a part in driving hunger, inflation and poverty.
However, it is Russia’s war of aggression against
Ukraine — one of the major breadbaskets of the world,
especially for the global South — that has disrupted
global food chains and blocked the export of food from
Ukraine to the rest of the world.
That is a fact. It is supported by evidence and is
widely documented, including in the brief of the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
established by the Secretary-General. It was also
further highlighted last week during the Food Security
Call to Action ministerial meeting and the Security
Council open debate on conflict and food security (see
S/PV.9036).
Let us not therefore become victims of Russia’s use
of information manipulation, including disinformation.
Russia’s unjustified, unprovoked, illegal war on
Ukraine has caused those devastating effects. Blaming
sanctions for increased global food prices is a weak
attempt to conceal the truth and divert action from
where it is needed. The sanctions target the Kremlin’s
ability to finance its aggression against Ukraine and
its people. They are carefully crafted in a way so as to
avoid any effect on the agricultural sector.
I have spoken about the causes; let us now look at
the response. The EU has been a leading humanitarian
and development donor in support of food and nutrition
assistance. We will accelerate our work at this critical
time. We have ramped up our humanitarian assistance,
leveraging the collective action of the European Union
and its member States.
Just last month, we raised a total of €10 billion for
the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and Syria. We focus on
doing everything in our power to keep markets and
trade flows functioning. We call on all concerned to
take action to facilitate the export of food from Black
Sea ports. As those efforts continue, we are doing all
we can to help Ukraine to export — and the world to get
access to — the grain that is stuck in Ukraine due to the
Russian war. We are launching the Solidarity Lanes to
that effect in Ukraine as we speak.
Emergency assistance to vulnerable population
groups will be complemented by support to partner
countries on the sustainability and resilience of
22-35758

23/05/2022

agri-food systems. We must continue to work on the
transformation towards sustainable agriculture and
food systems in order to secure global food security
in the long term, in line with the 2021 Food Systems
Summit, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and, with respect to EU initiatives, the EU Green Deal
and Farm to Fork strategies. We strongly support the
role and leadership of the United Nations in responding
to the global food security crisis in a comprehensive
way by bringing together key United Nations agencies.
We welcome the work of the Global Crisis Response
Group on Food, Energy and Finance. We also support
the Group of Seven Global Alliance for Food Security,
including in its objective to ensure partnerships and
outreach to the most vulnerable regions, such as Africa
and the Mediterranean.
Finally,
we
strongly
support
effective
multilateralism and remain committed to anchoring
the global food security response in the multilateral
system. The Assembly will find in the EU a reliable
ally and partner. Our solidarity will continue to be
there, in Ukraine and the rest of the world, including
in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
wherever needed.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): On behalf of
the United States Government, let me start by thanking
Lebanon for the successful shepherding of resolution
76/264 to adoption by consensus. The United States
remains actively engaged in the work of addressing
global food insecurity through significant humanitarian
and development assistance, and we strongly support
the objectives of the resolution.
As others have mentioned, on 18 May Mr. Antony
Blinken, the United States Secretary of State, convened
a Global Food Security Call to Action ministerial
meeting at the United Nations here in New York.
Several dozen ministers exchanged views on what
needs to be done to address the recent spike in hunger
and malnutrition around the world. The ministerial
meeting was followed by a Security Council open
debate on conflict and food security (see S/PV.9036),
and all of that was part of the Days of Action on Global
Food Security. At the conclusion of the ministerial
meeting, Secretary Blinken publicly released a Chair’s
summary, which is entitled “Road Map for Global Food
Security — Call to Action”, and which outlines the
principal steps that countries can take to respond to this
crisis. The Road Map includes such actions as bolstering
agricultural supply, meeting immediate humanitarian

A/76/PV.74

needs, keeping food and agricultural markets open,
boosting fertilizer production and strengthening longterm agricultural resiliency. Today I would like to
invite all the delegations in this Hall to also sign on
to the Road Map. Doing so would demonstrate global
solidarity in the fight against hunger and help to build
momentum to implement solutions.
While we are proud to be a sponsor of resolution
76/264, I must note with regret, as others have, that the
text does not address the most important factor increasing
food insecurity and commodity prices globally. That is
Russia’s brutal, unprovoked and unjustified invasion of
Ukraine. It is Russia’s destruction of Ukrainian farms,
its agricultural sector and food destined for export that
is directly contributing to hunger and malnutrition
around the world. The United States reiterates that it is
not a party to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and underscores that today’s
resolution is non-binding and does not change the
current state of conventional or customary international
law regarding human rights, including food. We
understand abbreviated or other modified references to
certain human rights in the resolution to be references
to the more accurate and widely accepted terms used
in applicable treaties or in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. We also take note that States parties
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights undertook to progressively realize the
rights contained in the Declaration and, consistent with
that, we maintain the position that there is no separate
right to access safe and nutritious food. The United
States firmly acknowledges the right to adequate food
as a component of the right to an adequate standard of
living, and we maintain that as part of the progressive
realization of that right, States have an array of policies
and actions that may be appropriate. We therefore do not
interpret this text as prescribing particular obligations
or defining the scope of how States progressively
realize that right.
Regarding language in the text promoting a
universal and equitable system of global trade under the
World Trade Organization (WTO), it is our view that
United Nations bodies must respect the independent
mandates of other processes and institutions, including
trade agreements, and must not involve themselves
in decisions and actions in other forums, including
at the WTO. It is our strong position that the phrase
“fully respecting planetary boundaries” is vague
and ill-defined in the text. The United States has
opposed this idea since its inception in 2009, given our

22-357587/13

A/76/PV.74

continued emphasis on science-based decision-making.
Furthermore, planetary boundaries references are not
contained in the instruments referenced in the resolution
such as the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity.
With that general statement, the United States is
pleased to join as a sponsor of resolution 76/264.
Mr. Woodroffe (United Kingdom): As others have
done, I would like to start by congratulating Lebanon,
and in particular the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, for her leadership on resolution 76/264 and
on the critical issue of food security.
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption of
the resolution by consensus as a strong sign of the
international community’s determination to address the
urgency of the crisis now facing the world. At the start
of the year, the Global Humanitarian Overview warned
of unprecedented levels of global food insecurity,
driven by a perfect storm of the coronavirus disease,
the climate crisis and conflict. That of course has been
further exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
which, as the Secretary-General himself has said,
threatens to tip tens of millions of people over the edge
into food insecurity, followed by malnutrition, mass
hunger and famine. The impact of the crisis could last
for years.
During last week’s meetings, as just described by
my colleague from the United States of America, the
United Kingdom was clear that it stands in solidarity
with those who are now suffering. We will also play our
part in addressing this crisis. We will support the most
vulnerable countries with more than $3.5 billion worth
of humanitarian aid over the next three years. The United
Kingdom will press the World Bank to deliver swiftly on
its plans to strengthen fragile economies by distributing
$170 billion in aid over the next 15 months. We will
keep food and agricultural markets open, predictable
and transparent. British International Investment, the
United Kingdom’s development finance institution,
will scale up high-quality and sustainable investments,
including in the food and agricultural sector.
This global crisis requires a collective global
response, and today’s resolution is one important
element of that. But of course, and as we all know, the
most urgent response lies simply with one country.
It may dress this up in as many excuses and as
many falsehoods as it likes — as we have heard this
8/13

23/05/2022

morning — but in reality, all of us in this room know
one simple fact, which is that Russia can end the global
crisis by ending its conflict in Ukraine.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland sponsored and joined the consensus on
resolution 76/264 on the state of global food insecurity,
and we welcome its adoption. Since global food security
is a major concern for Switzerland, even beyond
today’s resolution, I would like to make the following
additional remarks.
Today’s numerous conflicts, in particular the war
in Ukraine, combined with other already existing
crises, such as climate change, loss of biodiversity and
droughts, increase the pressure on food systems and
have negative consequences for global food security
in the world. We must improve the basic conditions
for food and nutrition security for all and in particular
support the most vulnerable countries and people,
who are disproportionately affected by this situation.
Switzerland will remain a reliable partner in honouring
its commitments in Ukraine and in every other conflict
zone where it provides support. For example, my country
recently allocated more than CHF10 million to support
populations in the Horn of Africa, which has been hit
by one of the worst droughts in its history. Switzerland
also plans to increase its financial assistance to fragile
and vulnerable countries, particularly in Africa. We
will continue to support the development of resilient
local food systems by encouraging diversified
governance actors, production methods that preserve
natural resources and healthy and balanced diets.
Switzerland is concerned about the destruction
of production, processing and trade capacities, which
harms the availability of quality food that is affordable
and reliably accessible to all. In order to alleviate the
uncertainty of international markets, we call on States
to refrain from imposing export restrictions and bans.
Predictability and transparency in agricultural trade
are more crucial than ever. In this environment of
continual shocks and crises, we welcome the Road
Map for Global Food Security — Call to Action and
the recommendations of the Global Crisis Response
Group on Food, Energy and Finance of the United
Nations Secretariat.
Switzerland firmly believes in the importance of
furthering the transformation of food systems with a
view to achieving greater sustainability, equity and
resilience in every value chain, from production to
consumption. We are pleased that the international
22-35758

23/05/2022

community, in a spirit of effective multilateralism, has
adopted the resolution that brings us together today and
that every State has undertaken to do everything in its
power to contribute to reducing global food insecurity.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would first and foremost
like to express my deep appreciation to Lebanon for
taking the leading role in this effort, for bringing us
together and for keeping us honest throughout. It is
developing countries that are the worst affected by
the rise in global food insecurity, so it is only fitting
that they should be the ones to bring resolution 76/264
forward in order to address our current challenges on
this front, using a technical, politically neutral and
development-oriented approach.
During this morning’s debate we heard a number of
statements that underscore that the approach proposed
by the core group from the outset, of keeping this
project politically neutral, was the right one. We do
not deny the number of factors that are contributing to
the global food insecurity crisis, but this is not a time
for finger-pointing for political ends. I will give an
example. There have been very clear statements that
sanctions have no impact, and Brazil made that point
in the Security Council last week (see S/PV.9036).
We acknowledge very firmly that sanctions have not
been applied to food and fertilizer. That is a fact. But
it is also a fact that sanctions have secondary effects
with respect to the financial and logistical aspects of
agricultural trade, affecting the availability and price
of foodstuffs. We would therefore have preferred to
avoid political elements here today, as the resolution
itself has succeeded in doing.
Brazil is honoured to have contributed to a text
that has such broad-based sponsorship. We have been
a consistent advocate of agriculture, food security and
nutrition as top priorities on the multilateral agenda.
As one of the biggest global agricultural exporters,
our country provides food for more than 700 million
people, or around 10 per cent of the world’s population,
and is dedicated to contributing even more through
agricultural trade and the sustainable intensification of
our crops, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We are also making efforts to provide
humanitarian and emergency food assistance in
accordance with our national capacity, as we did with
our recent in-kind donation of more than 400,000 meals
for those affected by the conflict in Ukraine.
Nevertheless, even agricultural powerhouses are
not immune to the situation we are facing today. Food

A/76/PV.74

prices are reaching record highs and the access to
markets of two of the most important global breadbaskets
is severely constrained, either because of conflict or
because of the secondary impact of sanctions adopted
in response to it. Inflation is rising, and with it political
and social instability. If the international community
does not step up and make coordinated and collective
efforts to provide emergency assistance for those in need
and to stabilize the markets for agricultural inputs and
products, the situation is likely to further deteriorate
as price instability and a reduced supply of fertilizer
hamper planning and production in the next few years.
Today’s resolution aims to tackle the situation through
three main objectives — raising awareness among all
stakeholders about the dire and worsening situation of
food insecurity; recognizing and supporting the actions
taken by the Rome-based agencies and the United
Nations system to address immediate and long-term
obstacles to food security; and advancing sound and
reasonable policy recommendations for tackling the
rise in prices and stabilizing agricultural markets.
Lastly, we understand that this resolution is also
aimed at the more general but equally important goal of
unity. In recent years we have seen growing polarization
and shrinking consensus at the United Nations even
though our internationally agreed goals need exactly
the opposite. It would have sent an even more powerful
message if the resolution could have been adopted with
the same sense of urgency with which the SecretaryGeneral responded to the crisis in establishing the
Global Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and
Finance. Faced with a crisis that could lead millions
of people into acute food insecurity or worse, it is
imperative that we reverse the trend and act together
in favour of multilateralism, enhanced cooperation and
open, transparent and equitable agricultural markets.
The Assembly can count on Brazil for that.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): If climate change
is considered to be fast approaching red-alert status
and the Sustainable Development Goals are seen as
fast requiring intensive care, then the current crisis in
food security, if unaddressed, may ultimately require
cardio-pulmonary resuscitation. The latest data should
keep us awake at night. According to the World Food
Programme (WFP), 811 million people are already
hungry, and 276 million are already facing severe food
insecurity. Meanwhile, the average food price index of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO) in the first four months of this year is at
one of its highest levels ever recorded.

22-357589/13

A/76/PV.74

With rising agricultural and energy prices, weather
extremes, the pandemic, geopolitical tensions and
conflicts, we are facing a perfect-storm scenario in
which the situation is likely to get worse before it gets
better, unless we act decisively and in unity. Thailand
therefore welcomes the initiatives and concrete actions
undertaken by the United Nations system to address
this food crisis, from the Secretary-General to the
WFP and FAO, from the Security Council, with its
timely debate last week (see S/PV.9036), to the General
Assembly, with today’s resolution 76/264 on the state
of global food insecurity, just adopted by consensus.
In the months ahead, the Economic and Social Council
should likewise be focusing on how to turn the food
crisis around and thereby help rescue sustainable
development. That should be a priority at the high-level
political forum.
As one of the world’s largest food producers and
thirteenth largest food exporter in the world, Thailand
believes that concerted multilateral action, anchored
in the United Nations system and complemented by
regional cooperation, is essential to leading humankind
out of this crisis. For the Asia-Pacific region, for
example, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Council Trade Ministers just met in Bangkok this past
weekend and reiterated their commitment to helping
one another achieve food security, supporting the
WFP’s efforts to combat hunger and malnutrition and
calling for a trade and investment environment that
supports increased food security.
What are the priority steps ahead, in our view?
The first is for the immediate term. There must be
urgent action to get food to the starving and those on
the threshold of starvation. Meanwhile, concessional
financing and other support should be directed to
those who need it most — the low-income food-deficit
countries, the small-scale farmers and the groups most
vulnerable to price shocks, especially women and girls.
As the Secretary-General said, there is no answer to the
food crisis without an answer to the finance crisis.
The second step is for the short term. Global
supply chains for food and agricultural products need
to be secure and open. Countries should refrain from
banning food exports and keep supply chains open for
the unimpeded movement of essential goods, food,
fertilizer and agricultural products. One fifth of all
fertilizer exports are currently restricted, for example.
Any such emergency trade measures should be targeted,
proportionate, transparent and temporary, without
10/13

23/05/2022

creating unnecessary barriers to trade, and should be
consistent with World Trade Organization rules. The
relevant international organizations should facilitate
policy dialogue and coordination to ensure efficient
movement of food, grains, oil seeds, animal feed, fuel,
fertilizer and agricultural commodities.
The third step is for the medium-to-longer term.
The sustainable production of food and agricultural
products, for example through sustainable farming,
should be more vigorously promoted. Science and
technology should be mobilized to increase yield,
enhance efficiencies and improve food storage. Looking
down the road to 2050, it is envisaged that the world
will have to feed 2 billion more people and therefore
double crop production. Humankind is currently 90 per
cent dependent for its nutritional needs on a total of 15
crops, so to keep up with that pace we may ultimately
have to diversify.
In conclusion, we will never achieve the level of
food security in the biblical Garden of Eden, before
Adam ate the apple and departed from paradise.
However, we will need to come together if we are
to rescue millions of people from the purgatory of
starvation and hunger. People deserve one of their
most basic human rights — the right to adequate, safe,
affordable and nutritious food.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank all the States that
supported resolution 76/264, and we welcome its
adoption by consensus. Today we need that consensus,
united efforts and renewed hope in the effectiveness of
multilateral action, in addition to enhanced cooperation
and solidarity. Today’s consensus reflects our joint
recognition of the difficult situation the world is
facing in the light of a food crisis that needs no further
diagnosis or proof. It has become a tangible danger that
threatens the food security of millions, and not only
those in areas of conflict or difficult humanitarian
situations. However, those vulnerable groups will
also surely be the worst affected in many developing
countries and even in some middle-income States.
This international crisis is compounding the
already-existing difficulties that those countries are
facing, especially the repercussions of the coronavirus
disease, climate change and other factors that have
exhausted their capacities and financial abilities and
weakened their ability to recover and make progress
towards achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The crisis is even threatening to
22-35758

23/05/2022

destabilize social peace and political stability in many
countries, especially in the light of the record inflation
that the world is experiencing, with rising interest rates,
increases in debt and limited sources of finance.
We are running out of time. We need to announce
a state of alert for this global food security crisis. We
must take exceptional and urgent measures to limit
its repercussions, confront rising energy prices and
facilitate access to funding before matters get worse. In
that context, Tunisia renews its call to the international
community, especially the Group of Seven, the Group
of 20 and the international financial institutions, to
prioritize global food security and support multilateral
efforts to confront the food security crisis. That
includes providing urgent support to the countries
affected, especially those that are heavily indebted, by
accepting delays in debt repayment. We also urge all
Member States to avoid storing basic supplies and food
products and to keep markets and trade channels open
for the flow of food, fuel and fertilizer. We hope that
resolution 76/264 will pave the way for a new stage of
cooperation, solidarity and united efforts to prevent the
worsening of hunger and further disruption in global
food security.

A/76/PV.74

into consideration the needs of developing countries.
In that regard, we welcome and support the Global
Crisis Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance,
established by the Secretary-General, and its steering
committee, chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General.
We look forward to its work and outcome.
I understand that the Group’s second brief is about
to be issued. We therefore do not see resolution 76/264
as the end of the road but rather as the beginning of
wider international attention and efforts to address the
issue of global food insecurity. We expect that the issue
of food security and the challenges associated with it
will receive much-needed attention during the highlevel segment of the General Assembly at its seventyseventh session. That is what we want to see. I see no
global issue more deserving of broad attention than this
one, and no issue more pressing than that of ensuring
that every human being is guaranteed a dignified share
of food and access to it. It is vital to end hunger and
remain on track to achieve Sustainable Development
Goal 2, which we all agreed to a few years ago.

In conclusion, we welcome the efforts of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme. We also renew our
appreciation and support for the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and the work undertaken by the Global Crisis
Response Group on Food, Energy and Finance.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker on this item. May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 26?

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, I would
like to thank Ambassador Amal Mudallali, Permanent
Representative of Lebanon, for her very constructive
and leading role in coordinating the efforts of the core
group and drafting resolution 76/264, which we just
adopted by consensus. I would also like to express our
appreciation to all the Member States that joined the
list of sponsors of this important resolution. Egypt is
also pleased to be among the members of the core group
drafting the resolution.

Agenda item 7 (continued)

Today food insecurity is a real threat that is affecting
most nations in the developing world, including my
own country, Egypt, which is the largest importer of
wheat in the world and one of the largest net foodimporting developing countries. Reaching a consensus
on resolution 76/264 is proof of our joint commitment to
working together to achieve Sustainable Development
Goal 2, on ending hunger and achieving food security,
using a comprehensive and holistic approach that takes

It was so decided.

Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Reports of the General Committee
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (a) of agenda item 117 at its 35th plenary
meeting on 16 November 2021. In order for the
Assembly to consider the report of the Committee, it
will be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item
(a) of agenda item 117.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 117?
It was so decided (decision 76/506 B).

22-3575811/13

A/76/PV.74

Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/516/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Committee have
been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. If there is no proposal
under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it
that the General Assembly decides not to discuss the
report of the Committee before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position. In
paragraph 5 of the report, the Committee recommends
that the General Assembly appoint Evgeny Kalugin of
the Russian Federation as a member of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a term of office beginning on 21 August 2022 and
ending on 31 December 2023.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Evgeny Kalugin as a member of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a term of office beginning on 21 August 2022 and
ending on 31 December 2023?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I therefore take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 117?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/76/L.56)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Sri Lanka to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.56.
12/13

23/05/2022

Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka is pleased to
submit draft resolution A/76/L.56, entitled “World
Seagrass Day”, for the consideration of the Assembly
under agenda item 15. We thank delegations for
their constructive engagement throughout the
intergovernmental consultations, which have enabled
this draft resolution to be adopted by consensus
today. We further thank the Member States that have
sponsored the draft.
Seagrasses are one of the most valuable marine
ecosystems on earth, covering around 300,000 square
kilometres in 159 countries and on six continents. They
provide a range of critical environmental, economic and
social benefits, of which the most significant is their
enormous carbon-sequestration potential, capable of
storing up to 18 per cent of the world’s oceanic carbon.
That is greater than the carbon-sequestration potential
of rainforests, making the restoration and maintenance
of seagrass a vital tool in our efforts to adapt to and
mitigate the adverse effects of climate change. The
vital functions of seagrasses include their role in
stabilizing the sea bottom and providing ecosystem
support via food and shelter for a number of marine
creatures, including commercial and recreational fish
species, turtles, dugongs and manatees. Seagrasses also
provide protection from coastal erosion, which is one
of the main reasons why Sri Lanka, a littoral State, is
introducing this draft resolution.
It is also a fact that seagrasses are being destroyed
at a rapid pace as a result of human activity. Coastal
development, pollution and certain types of fishing
activities are among the key drivers contributing to the
destruction of this delicate marine environment. The
United Nations Environment Programme publication
Out of the Blue: The Value of Seagrasses to the
Environment and to People, states that we are losing
7 per cent of seagrass marine habitat worldwide per
year, which is equivalent to a football field of seagrass
lost every 30 minutes.
My delegation is therefore pleased to take this
small step forward towards their preservation, along
with other States Members of the United Nations, by
adopting this draft resolution to declare 1 March as World
Seagrass Day. We expect that this small but significant
step will help raise the level of awareness needed to
conserve and restore seagrass ecosystems, which are an
integral part of our march forward to realizing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. We reiterate our
appreciation to all the sponsors and delegations that
22-35758

23/05/2022

A/76/PV.74

engaged with us during the informal consultations in
arriving at a consensus on the draft resolution. We also
wish to thank the World Seagrass Association for the
support and encouragement given during this whole
process. We call on all Member States to support and
adopt this draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: We will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/76/L.56, entitled “World
Seagrass Day”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.56, and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Bangladesh, Belarus,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Guyana, Indonesia, Madagascar, Maldives,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, the Russian Federation, Senegal,
Seychelles, Singapore, Timor-Leste and Uganda.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.56?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/265).

A/76/L.56

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 78 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/76/838)
Draft decision (A/76/L.46)
The Acting President: The report of the Fifth
Committee on the programme budget implications
of draft decision A/76/L.46 is contained in
document A/76/838.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Singapore to introduce draft decision A/76/L.46.

Mr. Khng (Singapore): On behalf of Ambassador
Rena Lee, the President of the Intergovernmental
conference on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction, I have the honour of introducing draft
decision A/76/L.46, on the convening of a fifth session
of the conference.
In its resolution 72/249 of 24 December 2017, the
General Assembly decided that the conference should
initially meet for four sessions. The fourth session
of the conference took place from 7 to 18 March
2022, after having been postponed twice due to the
global coronavirus disease pandemic. At the end of
the fourth session, the conference considered that an
additional session was required as soon as possible to
make progress, and requested that the President of the
conference take the necessary steps to that end.
Draft decision A/76/L.46 is based on the
recommendation of the conference, which was adopted
by consensus. It proposes that the General Assembly
decides to convene a fifth session of the conference
for a period of 10 working days in August 2022, with
full conference services, including documentation,
provision for parallel meetings and overtime, webcast,
and press and meeting coverage, as required for the
duration of the conference. We hope that the General
Assembly will adopt the draft decision without a vote.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft decision A.76/L.46, entitled
“Intergovernmental conference on an internationally
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/76/L.46?
Draft decision A/76/L.46 was adopted (decision 76/564).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 78 and its sub-item (a).
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

22-3575813/13
