General Auembly-Eishteenth Seaion

14

lution 1767 (XVII), has under consideration various
proposals for other collateral measures,

I
1. Calls upon the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to resume, with energy and
determination, its negotiations on general and complete
disarmament under effective international control, in
accordance with the joint statement of agreed principles for disarmament negotiations 2 and in a spirit
of goodwill and mutual accommodation ;
2. Recommends the Eighteen-Nation Committee to
continue to encourage the widening of the areas of basic
agreement or similarity in the principal parties' approaches to the fundamental issues of general and
complete disarmament ;

II
Urges the Eighteen-Nation Committee to make efforts to seek agreement on measures which could serve
to reduce international tension, lessen the possibility
of war and facilitate agreement on general and complete
disarmament ;

III
1. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to submit to the General Assembly an interim report on the
progress of its work at an early appropriate date, and
a comprehensive report not later than 1 September
1964;
2. Commends the Secretariat of the United Nations
for its services to the Eighteen-Nation Committee and
requests the Secretary-General to continue to make
available to the Committee the necessary assistance and
services.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.

1909 (XVffl). Question of convening a conference
for the purpose of signing a convention on
the pl'ohibition of. the use of nuclear and
thermo-nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Recalling the declaration on the prohibition of the
use of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, contained
in its resolution 1653 (XVI) of 24 Novembe.r 1961,
Cognizant that the subject can be speedily and effectively studied by the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament in Geneva,
1. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-N"ation
Committee on Disarmament to study urgently the question of convening a conference for the purpose of
signing a convention on the prohibition of the use of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, and to report to
the General Assembly at its nineteenth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the present resolution and all other relevant
documents to the Eighteen-Nation Committee.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.
2 Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 19, document A/4879.

1910 (XVffl). Urgent need for 1u1pen1ion of
nuclear and thermo-nuclear teell

Th,· General Assembly,
Fully aware of its reponsibility with regard to the
question of nuclear weapon testing and of the views
of world public opinion on this matter,
Noting 'With approval the Treaty banning nuclear
weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and
under water, signed on 5 August 1963 by the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America, and subsequently by a great number
of other countries,
Noting further 'With satisfaction that in the preamble
of that Treaty the parties state that they are seeking
to achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions of
nuclear weapons for all time and are determined to
continue negotiations to this end,
1. Calls upon all States to become parties to the
!reaty banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere,
m outer space and under water, and to abide by its
spirit and provisions ;
2. Requests the Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament to continue with a sense
of urgency its negotiations to achieve the objectives
set forth in the preamble of the Treaty ;
3. Requests the Eighteen-Nation Committee to report to t~e General Assembly at the earliest possible
date and, m any event, not later than at the nineteenth
session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make available
to the Eighteen-Nation Committee the documents and
records of the plenary meetings of the General Assembly and the meetings of the First Committee at
which the item relating to nuclear testing was discussed.
1265th plenary meeting,
27 November 1963.

1911 (XVIII). Denuelearization of Latin America
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the vital necessity of sparing present
and future generations the scourge of a nuclear war,
Recalling its resolutions 1380 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, 1576 (XV) of 20 December 1960 and 1665
(XVI) of 4 December 1961, in which it recognized
the danger that an increase in the number of States
possessing nuclear weapons would involve, &ince such
an increase would necessarily result in an intensification
of the arms race and an aggravation of the difficulty
of maintaining world peace, thus rendering more difficult
the attainment of a general disarmament agreement,
Observing that in its resolution 1664 (XVI) of
4 December 1961 it stated explicitly that the countries
not possessing nuclear weapons had a grave interest
and an important part to fulfil in the preparation and
implementation of measures that could halt further
nuclear weapon tests and prevent the further spread
of nuclear weapons,
Considering that the recent conclusion of the Treaty
banning nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in
outer space and under water, signed on 5 August 1963,
has created a favourable atmosphere for parallel progress towards the prevention of the further spread of
nuclear weapons, a problem which, as indicated in
General Assembly resolutions 1649 (XVI) of 8 Novem-
