S/2021/824

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 September 2021
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General
Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2574
(2021), by which the Council extended and expanded the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and Council resolution 2366 (2017), in
which it requested the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the
mandate of the Mission every 90 days. The present report covers the period from
26 June 2021 to 24 September 2021.
Major developments
2.
As the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace between the Government of
Colombia and the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia – Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP) approaches, coinciding with President Iván Duque’s last year
in office and with the last year of congressional sessions of the 2018 –2022 term, a
major milestone in its implementation was reached in August 2021. Following
submission by Congress pursuant to a Constitutional Court ruling, President Duque
enacted the law creating the 16 special transitional electoral districts for peace. These
new seats in the House of Representatives are intended to allow for the participation
of historically excluded populations in conflict-affected regions. The transitional
electoral districts will be in force for the 2022 –2026 and 2026–2030 congressional
periods.
3.
The reporting period was marked by an increase in the preparations for the 2022
congressional and presidential elections, which will be the second national elections
held since the signing of the Final Agreement. State entities have begun working on
their areas of responsibility to ensure a smooth electoral process.
4.
The Government’s priorities for its last legislative period include a new tax
reform, which was enacted in September, and changes to the National Police. Other
key legislation for the implementation of the Final Agreement and related issues are
still to be presented to, and enacted by, Congress, including the Regional Agreement
on Access to Information, Public Participation and Justice in Environmental Matters
in Latin America and the Caribbean, known as the Escazú Agreement, which has been
signed but not ratified. Opposition parties have presented draft bills related to the
recent national strike, on issues such as economic reactivation, an emergency basic
income, guarantees for peaceful protest and police reforms. Different political partie s

21-12901 (E)

290921

*2112901*

S/2021/824

also filed several draft bills that would implement pending provisions of the Final
Agreement, including one that previously failed to pass in Congress, on a dedicated
judicial mechanism for the resolution of land-related disputes. Parties within the
Government coalition have presented draft bills seeking to reform the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the land restitution process and citizen participation.
5.
The Government’s draft national budget for 2022 presented to Congress in
August, to be approved in October, includes an annex on peacebuilding expenditures.
According to the proposal, peace-related funding would increase by 3.8 per cent
compared with 2021. However, funding would decrease for parts of the Final
Agreement, including the solution to the problem of illicit drugs, and for elements
related to the Office of the Attorney General and the National Protection Unit. Cuts
would also affect public entities with key peace implementation responsibilities, such
as the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization, the National Land Agency, and
the Territorial Renewal Agency. The draft budget provides increases for the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing in the
context of and due to the armed conflict, while funds for the Truth Commission were
not included, pending a decision on the extension of its mandate (see para . 68).
6.
In August, the Office of the Comptroller General presented to Congress its fifth
report on the use of funding in the implementation of the Final Agreement, from
signing and until March 2021. In the report, it was highlighted that peace -related
expenditures have grown, on average, by 5 per cent annually since the signing of the
Final Agreement, and that from 2017 to 2020, an average of 65 per cent of allocated
resources were spent. Nevertheless, in the report it was also noted that the allocated
resources have never been fully spent and, at the current pace, it is estimated that
implementation of the Final Agreement would take 26 years, as opposed to 15 years
as originally planned.
7.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace continues to make progress in cases under its
jurisdiction. During the reporting period, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued its
first two indictments on Case 03, on killings and forced disappearances presented as
casualties in combat by State agents, against 25 former and active members of the
public security forces (including one former general and four former colonels) and
one civilian third party. Charges include war crimes and crimes against humanity. The
Special Jurisdiction for Peace found that crimes were carried out systematically in the
Catatumbo region, and in Cesar and La Guajira Departments. The Special Jurisdiction
for Peace has identified 271 victims in those regions and the impact of the crimes has
disproportionately affected indigenous communities. The Special Jurisdiction for
Peace gave the indicted parties 30 working days to acknowledge their responsibility
or present their observations and ordered them to present a plan to help locate missing
persons.
Protection and security for former combatants, conflict-affected communities,
social leaders and human rights defenders
Regional dynamics of violence
8.
Disputes between illegal armed groups, including different FARC -EP dissident
groups, the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN) and the Clan del Golfo (also
known as Autodefensas Gaitanistas de Colombia), over territorial control and
strategic illicit trafficking routes have intensified, further aggravating violence,
particularly in areas affected by the conflict and prioritized for the implementation of
the Final Agreement. This includes several attacks against public security forces.
Affected areas include most of the regions covered by the development programmes
with a territorial focus and by the newly created special electoral districts. The killings
of former combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders continue to be
2/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

concentrated in the 25 municipalities highlighted in previous reports, 20 of which are
municipalities with development programmes with a territorial focus.
9.
The persistent violence continued to generate mass displacements and
confinements, especially in the Departments of Antioquia, Bolívar, Cauca, Chocó,
Córdoba and Nariño. During the reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs registered the forced mass displacement of close to 15,200
persons (44 per cent of which are from ethnic communities), bringing the total for
2021 to 57,420 displaced persons. In addition, 46,321 persons have been forcibly
confined in 2021, 96 per cent of which are indigenous and Afro -Colombian.
10. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) documented 11 large-scale killings resulting in 38 victims during the
reporting period. Another 16 killings are under verification.
Security and protection for former combatants
11. The Mission verified the killings of 14 former FARC-EP combatants during the
reporting period (all men), bringing the total since the signing of the Final Agreement
to 292 (283 men and 9 women). Although killings of former combatants decreased
during 2021 (44) compared with the same period in 2020 (53), risks, including threats,
continue to affect their reintegration, as some former combatants have been forced to
relocate. The Mission has registered 67 attempted homicides (3 during the reporting
period) and 22 disappearances (all men), since the signing of the Final Agreement.
Relatives of former combatants killed also continue to be vulnerable and lack specific
support mechanisms.
12. The Mission observed a significant deterioration in security for former
combatants in southwest Colombia. Over a third of the killings since the signing of
the Final Agreement have taken place in Cauca, Nariño and Valle del Cauca
Departments. Former FARC-EP members have reported an increase in attacks by
illegal armed groups against leaders and members of their cooperatives and
productive projects in this region. In Buenos Aires, Cauca Department, two former
combatants belonging to a cooperative have been killed in recent months. Threats,
killings, and the subsequent displacement of cooperative members, are having
disruptive effects on reintegration initiatives and have led to a temporary suspension
in several municipalities of Cauca and Valle del Cauca. In August, hundreds of former
combatants from these departments gathered for a three-day event in Popayán to bring
further attention to the dire security situation they face and demand more effective
security guarantees.
Precautionary measures issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
13. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace held two public hearings, in Cauca and Meta
Departments, in follow-up to the precautionary measures it issued in 2020 for the
protection of former combatants. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace ordered
additional region-specific measures to be taken by national and regional-level
authorities. The measures include the creation of an interinstitutional working group
to develop a security strategy for new reintegration areas and cooperatives, along with
a specific road map for former combatants who have left former territorial areas for
training and reintegration owing to insecurity, as well as the development of a pilot
plan for the comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement in Argelia, Cauca
Department. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace also ordered the Ministry of Defence
to create indicators to measure progress on establishing State territorial control and
the dismantling of illegal armed groups, as well as to put in place measures to prevent
stigmatization and to follow-up on recommendations from the early warnings of the
Office of the Ombudsman. In September, working groups co-chaired by the offices
21-12901

3/18

S/2021/824

of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation and the Inspector General met in Cauca, Nariño and Valle del Cauca to advance in the design of the
measures ordered by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
14. Regarding the National Protection Unit, progress continued with the adoption
of new protection measures, and the resolution of pending protection requests. Since
1 January 2021, 78 per cent of pending requests have be en assessed and 597 have
been approved, including 86 for women and 29 collective protection measures.
Although 470 of the 686 additional bodyguards ordered by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace in July 2020 have been hired, budget shortcuts are affecting p rotection
schemes’ funds for travel and per diems, hindering the ability of former combatants
to fully develop their economic, social and political reintegration activities across the
country.
15. The technical committee on security and protection, created for the parties to
jointly design arrangements for former combatants’ security, met once. However,
differences between the parties on the content and legal status of the Strategic Plan
for Security and Protection for former combatants announced by the Gov ernment in
March 2021 remain unaddressed.
Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the Attorney General
16. The Special Investigations Unit reported three new convictions, and 30 persons
were arrested related to attacks against former combatants. In total, of the 334 attacks
investigated by the Unit, 44 cases have led to convictions (including four against
those who ordered the attacks). Additionally, 46 cases are in trial phase, 25 are under
investigation, and 51 arrest warrants have been issued. A nother 132 arrest warrants
are pending execution, including 39 against those who ordered the attacks.
17. The tripartite working group on investigations, a key space for the Special
Investigations Unit, the Comunes party and the Mission to jointly follow u p on
potential threats and investigations, has been reactivated and has begun work at the
national level and in seven departments. The working group in Cauca was prioritized
for reactivation considering that this Department has the highest number of killin gs
of former combatants (47), but only two perpetrators have been convicted.
Deployment of public security forces in former territorial areas for training
and reintegration
18. Preventive security deployments of police and army units continue to guaran tee
former combatants’ security in the 24 former territorial areas for training and
reintegration. Owing to reports of reductions of these security schemes in some
former territorial areas for training and reintegration, especially in Arauca and Cauca
Departments, the Mission is following up with the leadership of the security forces to
guarantee that those mechanisms remain unchanged in order to ensure the protection
of former combatants, and maintain trust between them and security forces.
Security for Comunes and other political parties
19. As the date for the upcoming electoral process approaches, threats and attacks
against members of political parties from across the spectrum continue. According to
a report published by the non-governmental organization Electoral Observation
Mission, violence against political leaders through the first half of 2021 increased by
15.7 per cent compared with the same period in 2020 and 54 per cent of the killings
of social and political leaders have occurred in areas where the special transitional
electoral districts for peace have been established. The Government has reported that
the Comprehensive Security System for the Exercise of Politics, created in 2017, is

4/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

conducting technical discussions, including on gender mainstreaming and internal
regulations. However, the high-level unit of the System has not been convened.
Attacks against social leaders, human rights defenders and
conflict-affected communities
20. During the reporting period, OHCHR received information about the killings of
43 human rights defenders (3 cases were verified, 25 cases are under verification and
15 cases were inconclusive or not verifiable). Of the 43 allegations received, 7 victims
were women, including one indigenous leader, 2 male Afro-Colombian leaders and
12 male indigenous leaders. A total of 158 killings have been reported to OHCHR in
2021 (53 verified, 37 under verification and 68 cases were inconclusive or not
verifiable). The 53 verified cases (48 men and 5 women) inclu ded five indigenous
leaders and five Afro-Colombian leaders.
21. The situation in Tibú, Norte de Santander Department, is particularly
concerning. During the reporting period, the Mission received reports of more than
60 threats and 10 killings of women by illegal armed groups in this municipality.
Victims include women social leaders, former combatants, a prosecutor and civilians,
including Venezuelan migrants.
22. Work on the comprehensive programme for women social leaders and human
rights defenders at the regional level continues. During the reporting period, the
Office of the Governor of Putumayo appointed a person responsible for the
implementation of the programme.
National Commission on Security Guarantees
23. While the Final Agreement stipulates for the plenary of the Commission to meet
on a monthly basis, it has not met for the past six months. Two technical sessions
were held, but no progress was made regarding the development of the public policy
to dismantle illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their support networks.
Challenges persist for the Government and civil society members of the Commission
to engage in more constructive dialogue and reach consensus on the functioning of
the Commission. Civil society representatives have emphasized the need for a road
map for the period until August 2022, so as to ensure progress in the development of
the public policy.
Early warning system of the Office of the Ombudsman
24. During the reporting period, the Office of the Ombudsman issued nine early
warnings for 23 municipalities in six departments. It also updated the risks identified
in Bojayá, Chocó Department, and Maguí Payán, Nariño Department, owing to the
continued presence of illegal armed groups and the occurrence of forced
displacements, confinements, selective homicides, sexual violence, forced
recruitment and landmine incidents.
25. The Intersectoral Commission for Rapid Response to Early Warnings held two
sessions, one in Algeciras, Huila Department and another in Medellín, Antioquia
Department, to address former combatants’ risks, as ordered by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace in its precautionary measures.
Sustainability of the reintegration process
26. Four years after the laying down of arms by the former FARC-EP, much has
been achieved in the early stages of the reintegration process. Efforts by the
Government and thousands of former combatants have yielded positive results, and
with support from several partners, including those from the international community,
21-12901

5/18

S/2021/824

the process continues. However, there are also significant challenges, including the
deterioration of the security situation in various regions.
Access to land and housing
27. Differences persist between the parties regarding access to land and housing, in
part owing to limited dialogue and divergent views on how to address the needs of
former combatants. With support from the Mission, the parties are discussing options
to overcome those obstacles and move forward with clear timetables and mutually
agreed approaches.
28. The working group on land did not meet during the reporting period. The
Government purchased land for two additional former territorial areas for training
and reintegration in La Guajira and Caquetá Departments. To date, the Government
has purchased land for 9 of the 24 former territorial areas for training and
reintegration and aims at purchasing land for eight additional in 2021. Two of these
plots have yet to be formally handed over to former combatants, generating
uncertainty among them. Additionally, four former territorial areas for training and
reintegration in Buenos Aires and Miranda, Cauca Department; La Macarena, Meta
Department; and Puerto Asís, Putumayo Department, are pending urgent relocation
amid persistent insecurity facing former combatants.
29. In its latest report to Congress on the implementation of the Final Agreement
(April 2020–March 2021), the Office of the Inspector General called on State
institutions to accelerate efforts to grant access to land for former combatants for
housing and productive projects, regardless of their location. In its hearing on
precautionary measures in Cauca Department, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
requested that the Government present a plan to access land for the relocation of
former combatants and their productive projects in Cauca, Nariño and Valle del Cauca
Departments.
30. Although a comprehensive strategy to guide the provision of housing to former
combatants is pending, the Ministry of Housing and the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization have made efforts in this regard. Nevertheless, the number of projected
housing beneficiaries remains low compared with the demand. In addition, former
combatants are requesting to be active participants in the process. In September, the
parties agreed to establish a dedicated working group within the National
Reintegration Council.
31. The Government maintains its goal of building 150 houses in two former
territorial areas for training and reintegration by the end of the year. Necessary
technical studies have been concluded in five former territorial areas for training and
reintegration and are ongoing in another eight. Former combatants continue to express
concerns about the Government’s approach to housing projects and subsidies,
claiming they are not being consulted and differences regarding the number of
beneficiaries.
32. In 2021, the Government plans to provide housing solutions to approximately
320 former combatants living in urban areas; to date, only two have accessed housing
in those settings.
Productive projects
33. During the reporting period, the National Reintegration Council approved nine
new collective productive projects involving 113 former combatants (77 men and
36 women). The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization approved 481 additional
individual projects benefitting 574 former combatants (429 men and 145 women) To
date, 54 per cent of accredited former combatants are benefiting from productive
6/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

projects. This includes 99 collective projects benefitting 3,478 former combatants
(2,512 men and 966 women) and 3,190 individual projects benefiting 3,849 people
(2,968 men and 881 women). Funds for 15 collective projects previously approved
have yet to be disbursed.
34. Land tenure remains a key aspect for the sustainability of productive projects,
especially those related mainly to agriculture, 79 per cent of which were being
implemented on leased land.
35. Based on the mutual understanding of the importan ce of ensuring sustainability
of productive projects, the parties have agreed, within the National Reintegration
Council, to define a strategy in this regard. With support from the International
Organization for Migration, the United Nations Development Pr ogramme and the
Mission, the parties are working to define sustainability criteria to be mainstreamed
throughout the design, implementation and monitoring of the projects.
36. Currently, there are 155 former combatants’ cooperatives nationwide, 31 of
which are led by women, and 13 are exclusively comprised of women former
combatants. These productive associations have received technical assistance from a
wide range of actors, including national and international entities. Nevertheless,
80 per cent of them operate in remote rural areas, which makes them particularly
vulnerable to insecurity. Leaders of the former combatants’ national-level cooperative
have insisted on the need to strengthen security, noting that collective efforts are
essential for the success of the reintegration process.
37. Almost 59 per cent of women former combatants are part of productive projects,
and all collective productive projects approved by the National Reintegration Council
are designed with a gender perspective. However, women continue to face challenges
related to dealing with competing care tasks and access to decision -making.
Former combatants outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration,
including in new reintegration areas
38. Almost 10,500 of the more than 13,000 accredited former combatants reside
outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration, carrying out their
reintegration both individually and collectively. One-third live in urban settings and
two-thirds remain in rural areas. Seventy-five new reintegration areas host around
3,500. These former combatants remain vulnerable and require targeted support,
among others to ensure security and access to land, housing, and public services.
39. The National Reintegration Council has approved 46 collective productive
projects involving former combatants residing outside former territorial areas for
training and reintegration, including in approximately 25 new reintegration areas.
Despite difficulties, former combatants in those areas hav e demonstrated resilience
and have taken on the challenge of finding markets for their products, formalizing
their cooperatives and accessing land in Departments such as Antioquia, Bolívar,
Chocó, Meta, Risaralda and Sucre. For instance, while their projec t is pending
approval by the National Reintegration Council, some 30 former combatants in a new
reintegration area in Risaralda are in the process of purchasing a plot of land with
their own funds. They are also working on subsistence crops alongside their families
and the host community.
Regional sessions of the National Reintegration Council
40. In August, the National Reintegration Council met in Medellín with
spokespersons of the former combatants’ Pilgrimage for Life and Peace, to review the
commitments made last November. Ten months after the Pilgrimage, only one of
seven agreed decentralized sessions of the National Reintegration Council has been
21-12901

7/18

S/2021/824

held, missing opportunities to adopt context-specific measures to address reintegration
challenges, including with regards to access to land, housing and security.
Health
41. The Working Group on Health of the National Reintegration Council met six
times during the reporting period. According to the Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization, to date 275 former combatants (190 men and 85 women) have tested
positive for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), 9 of whom died (all men). Health
visits to former territorial areas for training and reintegration have been carried out
as planned and included vaccination campaigns against COVID -19 in some former
territorial areas for training and reintegration.
42. Out of approximately 1,222 former combatants living with disabilities, 1,081
have received certification for their disability, and about 100 have received
rehabilitation support.
43. Since April 2021, there have been persistent delays in the provisio n of food to
all 24 former territorial areas for training and reintegration owing to increased food
prices and a change in the service provider. The Government is working to find a
durable solution to the problem, which affects around 2,500 former combatan ts
residing in those areas.
Reintegration policies and institutions
44. On a positive note, in July the Government issued a resolution extending the
flexible conditions to access the monthly allowance for former combatants until
31 January 2022, as well as the transitional phase to implement the reintegration road
map. During the reporting period, the Government and Comunes worked jointly on
the design of the National Reintegration System, which is expected to be finalized
this year. Differences persist concerning the objectives and the legal status of the
System.
45. Continuing its programme of regional visits, the Working Group on Gender of
the National Reintegration Council visited Antioquia Department, to discuss gender
actions included in the national reintegration policy with local authorities. As a result,
the Office of the Governor committed to reactivating the Departmental Reintegration
Council and its working group on gender, and the parties agreed on a local
implementation plan for gender actions in line with the national reintegration policy,
including strengthening planning and capacity-building for public officials. In its
report, the Office of the Inspector General acknowledged the working group’s
progress in the implementation of the gender-specific actions of the policy, while
noting that the limited budget and staff allocation for those purposes remain a
challenge.
Role of municipal and departmental authorities and community-based reintegration
46. A regional Reintegration Working Group was established in Córdoba, bringing
the total to 18 mechanisms nationwide that reinforce ownership and foster actions by
local authorities to support reintegration. In Antioquia and Huila Departments,
departmental governments allocated over $480,000 and $370,000, respectively, for
former combatants’ productive and housing projects. In Bogotá, the Office of the
Mayor finished a census of former combatants living in the city, which will inform
responses tailored to their needs. In August, the District Council for Peace,
Reconciliation, Coexistence and Conflict Transformation, an advisory body
comprised of authorities and civil society representatives, was established in Bogotá
with the participation of former FARC-EP combatants, underscoring their role in
broader peacebuilding efforts.
8/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

47. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has allocated around
$3.8 million to fund the implementation of the joint community -based reintegration
strategy in 35 municipalities. Former combatants, United Nations a gencies and the
Mission have been actively promoting and implementing community -based
initiatives.
Political reintegration
48. On 20 July, the Comunes party representative for Valle del Cauca Department
was elected second vice-president of the steering committee of the House of
Representatives.
49. Since the opening of the congressional sessions on 20 July, Comunes has
proposed 12 draft bills, several of them related to the implementation of the different
sections of the Final Agreement.
50. In addition, in September, the Comunes party held an oversight hearing for the
Government to report on the implementation of the Final Agreement. Comunes
expressed concern about the status of implementation, while the Government
reiterated its commitment to it.
51. On 10 August, a group of members of Comunes, including two senators,
formally requested their separation from the party, as they intend to create a new
movement. A final decision on the matter is to be made by the party in accordance
with its statutes.
Consolidation of the integrated presence of the State in conflict-affected areas
52. Consolidating the integrated presence of State institutions and services is
instrumental to disabling the dynamics that underpin the violence caused by illegal
armed actors who thrive in areas characterized by the absence of an effective State
presence. To that end, a holistic approach to implementation is crucial to ensure that
all programmes devised in the Final Agreement achieve sustainable results, ultimately
leading to improving the living conditions in areas affected by conflict and poverty.
Comprehensive rural reform
53. In a part of the Final Agreement expected to extend through the full 15 -year
time frame for implementation, the Government has reported results within the
comprehensive rural reform, including that some 220,000 people now have access to
drinking water and sanitation, 50,000 people have electricity, 1,400 km of new roads
have been built and more than 5,000 rural houses have been handed over to vulnerable
families. A total of 18 new projects were approved under the “works for taxes”
programme, and 64 new projects were approved for approximately $230 million, with
resources from royalties from mineral and hydrocarbon exploitation, for areas su ch
as roads, housing and rural development. Nevertheless, the Office of the Comptroller
General recently warned about risks in the management of resources coming from
royalties from mineral and hydrocarbon exploitation, and recommended
strengthening oversight of their use. Importantly, the newly approved tax reform
includes a provision widening the areas where the “works for taxes” programme can
be implemented, going beyond conflict-affected regions. This change may have an
impact in the availability of resources in areas prioritized by the Final Agreement.
54. According to the Government, over 1.3 million hectares have been added to the
Land Fund, out of the goal of three million set in the Final Agreement, to provide land
for peasants and conflict-affected communities. So far, 232,539 hectares have been
handed over to 9,335 families. In its report, the Office of the Inspector General stated
that despite the progress made, the objective of equitable redistribution of land, as
21-12901

9/18

S/2021/824

included in the Final Agreement, is not being achieved, owing to titling disputes and
other legal issues.
Comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and
organizations in the territories
55. Modest progress was reported in two of the four components of the
comprehensive security and protection programme for communities and organizations
in the territories. The pilot project prioritized for Algeciras, Huila Department, which
includes a focus on former FARC-EP members, has concluded its diagnostic stage
and comprehensive protection measures were approved for a local former combatants’
cooperative. In September, 16 peace promoters (3 men and 13 women) were certified
to begin field work in prioritized regions and tasked with promoting alternative
conflict resolution mechanisms, human rights and coexistence; the Ministry of Justice
issued a resolution declaring the formal start of this key element of the programme.
Another 40 are expected to be certified by the end of September 2021.
Illicit crop substitution
56. The implementation of the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops, intended to create the conditions for sustainable legal
economic opportunities for vulnerable communities, continues in 56 municipalities
across the country. The Government reported that as at 31 July a total of
44,294 hectares of illicit crops have been voluntarily eradicated by almost 100,000
participating families and that cumulative investments in the programme amount to
$369 million.
57. The Office of the Inspector General recently acknowledged the progress of the
programme and highlighted the challenges it faces, including those resulting from
budgetary limitations. The Office also called for additional efforts to improve
resource management, expenditure efficiency and interinstitutional cooperation to
ensure successful implementation. It further called for prioritizing expenditures,
especially for productive projects, so as to honour the commitments made to
thousands of families who continue to bet on voluntary substitution as the solution to
their dependence on illicit crops.
Reinforce constructive dialogue between the parties
58. With the fifth anniversary of the Final Agreement approaching, its implementation
has shown that, regardless of their differences, when the parties resort to dialogue at
the technical and political levels, they can jointly devise solutions to overcome
challenges and preserve achievements.
59. During the reporting period, representatives of the Government and of former
combatants met several times to discuss the scope and functioning of the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. Although proposals from both sides were presented and actively
discussed, no agreement was reached. Following a request by the parties, the Mission
is working to help them overcome differences and reach an understanding that would
allow to strengthen the Commission’s work. Additionally, technical-level meetings
were held in the framework on the Commission, including discussions regarding
victims.
60. Work within the tripartite working group on mines continued with momentum.
With support from the Mine Action Service and the Mission, former FARC -EP
members continue to provide valuable information to locate anti-personnel mines, as
stipulated in the Final Agreement. During the reporting period, 22 former combatants
provided information on the location of explosive ordnance in Antioquia, Bolívar,
10/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

Santander and Tolima Departments. As part of these activities, the working group has
identified 71 locations where anti-personnel mines are believed to remain. The
Government and former combatants are defining the next steps to conduct demining
in these areas. This collective effort is crucial to ensure more communities live free
from the effects of anti-personnel mines.
61. The tripartite working group on transit to legality met three times during the
reporting period, while important issues regarding the accredita tion of former
FARC-EP members remain pending. The High Commissioner for Peace reported that
it accredited 19 (3 women) of the 28 individuals identified and located in April. The
total number of accredited former combatants now stands at 13,608 (3,139 wome n).
An additional 165 (133 men and 32 women) remain to be located and accredited, and
530 (331 men and 199 women) have yet to be notified of their accreditation. The
working group has launched an outreach plan for both groups.
Strengthening conditions for reconciliation
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
62. In addition to the major developments regarding Case 03, in August the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace presented its strategy for Case 07 on forced recruitment and
use of children in conflict. It has prioritized the investigation of cases from 1996 to
2016, noting that most of the 18,677 estimated cases of child recruitment by the
FARC-EP took place during that period. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace will also
investigate related conducts that may constitute international crimes, including sexual
and gender-based violence, forced disappearance, homicide and torture. In addition,
it summoned 26 former members of the FARC-EP eastern bloc to provide their
versions of events. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace also continues to investigate
cases related to the use of children by the public security forces.
63. Upon deciding on the admission and permanence of civilian third parties and
non-combatant State agents under its jurisdiction, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
emphasized that all actors involved in the conflict must demonstrate genuine
commitment with victims’ rights in order to remain within its jurisdiction.
64. To date, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has received 429 reports and has
accredited 325,339 victims. In view of the increasing number of accredited victims
and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on their ability to present reports, the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace extended the deadline for civil society and victims’
organizations to submit reports regarding crimes committed during the conflict until
March 2022.
65. In preparation for the implementation of the Mission’s mandate regarding
verification of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace’s restorative sentences, and as
envisaged in my recommendations to the Security Council (see S/2021/186), the
Mission has been working with the Special Jurisdiction for Peace to fine -tune a
system of monitoring and verification devised for this purpose. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace is advancing in the certification of 77 potential “tasks, works
and activities with reparatory and restorative content” in 16 departments, most of
them carried out by former FARC-EP combatants. If certified, the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace will determine whether and how these activities could be counted as early
progress in compliance with restorative sentences. The Mission has facilitated
workshops, with the participation of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the Unit
for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing, to raise awareness among former
FARC-EP members on the importance of the restorative nature of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace proceedings and its centrality for the peace process.

21-12901

11/18

S/2021/824

66. The Truth Commission has organized seven national and regional meetings on
truth and recognition of responsibilities for crimes committed by former members of
the FARC-EP and the paramilitary group formerly known as Autodefensas Unidas de
Colombia (United Self-Defence Forces of Colombia). The former top commanders of
these groups, Rodrigo Londoño and Salvatore Mancuso, as well as mid -level
commanders, acknowledged their responsibilities and asked for forg iveness. Several
events included face-to-face meetings between victims and perpetrators.
67. The Truth Commission also held dialogues with former presidents of Colombia
Álvaro Uribe (2002–2010) and Andrés Pastrana (1998–2002). The Commission has
now received the views on the armed conflict from all five living former presidents
and has stated that their testimonies will be taken into account for its Final Report.
68. The Constitutional Court is reviewing a request by victims’ organizations for
the extension of the mandate of the Truth Commission, set to expire on 28 November,
which posits that the pandemic affected the implementation of its mandate, thus
hindering victims’ rights. As part of the Court’s assessment, the Commission asked
that its mandate be extended for seven months. The proposed extension has received
favourable opinions from the Office of the Inspector General, the Council of State, as
well as the support of members of Congress from parties across the spectrum and a
large group of social leaders and victims’ representatives. The Government has stated
that the Commission’s mandate should be modified by Congress.
69. In coordination with the Office of the Attorney General and the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed as Missing handed
over 10 bodies of forcibly disappeared persons to their families in Bolívar, Chocó and
Sucre Departments. It also recovered 52 bodies of potential victims of forced
disappearance from cemeteries in Arauca, Caldas and Caq uetá Departments. In
August, the Unit reunited a woman who disappeared over 20 years ago, when she was
12, with her family. Since it began in 2017, the Unit has recovered 193 bodies,
returned 123 of them to their families, and reunited four victims, who ha d been
declared missing, with their families.
70. In August, members of an unidentified illegal armed group violently hijacked a
vehicle belonging to the Unit in Arauca Department.
National Council for Peace, Reconciliation and Coexistence
71. No plenary sessions of the Council were held during the reporting period despite
requests by most of its members to the Government to hold sessions. While the
Council and the Ministry of Interior have made progress in the final draft of the public
policy on reconciliation, coexistence and non-stigmatization, budgetary constraints
have prevented the holding of consultations with local communities and have delayed
essential communication and outreach strategies.
Cross-cutting considerations
Gender
72. The Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Stabilization and Consolidation
and the Office of the Presidential Counsellor for Women’s Equity continued to
implement the 51 gender indicators of the Framework Plan for Implementation of the
Peace Agreement, with 17.6 per cent of the indicators completed. Nevertheless,
challenges continue especially in terms of resource allocation for the implementation
of the 100 gender provisions of the Final Agreement, particularly those related to
security guarantees and reintegration.
73. The Special Forum on Gender completed 32 regional forums covering all of
Colombia’s departments for the election of its eight new members, with a wide
12/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

participation of youth and women. Appropriate funding is crucial to its continued
functioning. The recent launch of the Women’s Committee of Montes de Maria to
follow up on the gender provisions of the Final Agreement is a welcome development,
as women leaders in this region continue to face security issues that hinder their
participation in peacebuilding efforts.
74. Despite progress in the allocation of protection measures to women former
combatants, challenges remain. In several regions, women at risk have been asked to
avail themselves of their partners’ protection schemes, which highlights un equal
access to protection, compared with male former combatants.
Ethnic affairs
75. In August, the Office of the Inspector General warned the Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization of possible delays in the implementation of the
ethnic approach of the national reintegration policy and urged the Agency to update
its registry and implement specific measures for the economic and social reintegration
of indigenous and Afro-Colombian former combatants.
76. The insecurity facing ethnic communities remains of concern, especially on the
Pacific Coast, where several events of mass displacement and confinements of both
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities have been recently reported. In
addition, two former Afro-Colombian combatants were killed in Cauca and Chocó
Departments. Of all former combatants killed since the signing of the Final
Agreement, 22.8 per cent have been of ethnic origin, 22 indigenous and
44 Afro-Colombian. According to the Government, in the past three years, alleged
perpetrators were indicted in less than 1 per cent of the cases prioritized for
investigation by the Attorney General’s Office Special Investigations Unit related to
former combatants and social leaders of ethnic origin.
77. The National Protection Unit provided equipment to indigenous guards in
Tolima and an Afro-Colombian community in Chocó Department, ranging from basic
tools to means of transportation. In August, the Constitutional Court set a precedent
ordering the National Protection Unit and the Ministry of the Interior to coordinate
with ethnic authorities regarding the establishment of emergency collective protection
measures.
78. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace is preparing a strategy for the participation
of ethnic peoples in the design and implementation of restorative sentences.
Children
79. Since its reactivation in May, the Working Group on Children of the National
Reintegration Council has proven its value to collectively address child protection
issues. The Working Group met weekly and initiated an assessment of the programme
“A Different Path of Life”. The working group also met in Caquetá, Cesar and Valle
del Cauca Departments with 44 participants (16 men and 28 women) to identify
achievements and shortcomings of the programme. An additional meeting with some
20 participants was held in September.
80. In July, a former combatant who was recognized in 2020 as a child at the
moment of accreditation, was killed in Guaviare Department. The Mission is
following-up with four members of “A different path of life” who are waiting for the
disbursement of their reparations by the Victims’ Unit. This highlights the importance
of continued efforts to accelerate the tracing and notification of these young people
to mitigate security risks and provide clear orientations on their inclusion in the
programme and in the victims’ registry for reparations.

21-12901

13/18

S/2021/824

81. Significant progress was made regarding children of former combatants in
several former territorial areas for training and reintegration, including the
improvement of facilities in three former territorial areas for training and
reintegration in La Guajira, Meta and Tolima Departments. The provision of
psychosocial and educational support for children in four former ter ritorial areas for
training and reintegration in Antioquia, Cesar, Guaviare and Meta Departments is also
a welcome step. No major advances were registered regarding cases of former
combatants, mostly women, seeking to regularize legal guardianship of their children,
an issue that remains to be addressed within the Working Group.
Youth
82. As at 31 August, the Agency for Reintegration and Normalization reported that
there were 2,230 former combatants between 18 and 28 years old (1,457 men and
773 women). Forty-five per cent of them are involved in productive projects (more
than half of them in individual projects), and 80 per cent reside outside former
territorial areas for training and reintegration.
83. In August, President Duque presented the results of the Pact for youth initiative,
launched in May in the context of the national strike, to gather the views of youth
through workshops held across the country on education, culture and sports;
economic inclusion; health; democracy and participation; and rural development,
peacebuilding and sustainability. The Government also announced a public policy on
youth, contemplating investments of over $8 billion within the next decade on youth related issues. Some participants and other youth representatives have claimed that
the initiative has limited representation, as it did not include youth engaged in protests
during the national strike nor the issues they had put forward. Regarding peace
implementation, the policy required the Government to inform on pr ogress in the
allocation of monthly allowances to young former combatants, and to support policies
designed by youth councils in municipalities with development programmes with a
territorial focus.
84. Also in August, upon the request of political parties and youth organizations,
the National Civil Registry rescheduled the elections to the municipal youth councils,
initially planned for 28 November, to 5 December 2021. The National Registry has
reported over 39,000 registered candidates (including some 17, 000 women). The
Comunes party has registered 71 candidates (36 men and 35 women) in
17 municipalities of eight departments and in Bogotá. There is limited awareness
among youth about the election process and the councils’ functions and operation,
which could affect their participation.
Developments related to the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
85. Communities in areas with presence of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN), such as those in the Departments of Cauca, Chocó and Catatumbo, as well as
the south of Bolívar Department, are suffering the consequences of clashes between
this group and State security forces, as well as between the ELN and other illegal
armed actors. As a means to put an end to forced displacement, the placement of anti personnel mines, killings of social leaders and other serious effects on civilian
populations, leaders and civil society organizations continue to call upon the
Government and the ELN to resume peace talks.
Coordination with the United Nations country team
86. With extrabudgetary financing from the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Mission and the United Nations country team continue to
support small-scale projects on reintegration and reconciliation. Twenty initiatives in
14/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

new reintegration areas and three community-based projects in 11 departments have
recently been selected for support.
87. The country team and the Mission jointly contributed to enhance women’s
participation in productive projects, including through supporting chi ldcare centres
in the former territorial area for training and reintegration of Caldono, Cauca
Department, which combine indigenous parenthood practices and institutional
childhood assistance requirements. Additionally, the country team provided training
to some 7,000 members of 300 municipal peace councils to develop peacebuilding
initiatives, and supported community-based initiatives to mitigate the risk of child
recruitment in 86 municipalities.
88. Through the United Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace in
Colombia, the country team is providing assistance to 58 collective and 1,038
individual productive projects involving 2,524 former combatants who have received
training on marketing. Additionally, the country team is supporting techn ical studies
for housing solutions for former combatants and their families. The Fund also
provided support to 11 civil society organizations to enhance self -protection
mechanisms and emergency funds for human rights defenders.
89. During the reporting period, the fund allocated $5.9 million to projects in areas,
including support to the regional search plans of the Unit for the Search for Persons
Deemed as Missing; support to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement; and support to green
investments in municipalities historically affected by the armed conflict, involving
the private sector through blended finance mechanisms. The fund has been extended
to allow the full implementation of its projects until December 2023.
Mission support
90. As at 31 July, women represented 44 per cent of Professional and Field Service
staff, 59 per cent of United Nations Volunteers and 31 per cent of international
observers.
91. The Mission has been supporting the COVID-19 vaccination campaign by the
United Nations system in Colombia. To date, 94 per cent of Mission personnel have
received at least one dose of the vaccine.
Safety and security
92. During the reporting period, there were 27 incidents affecting United Nations
personnel, ranging from robbery and theft to harassment, intimidation and threats.
United Nations personnel were also affected by movement restrictions due to actions
of illegal armed actors in Chocó and Norte de Santander Department s, as well as in
Bogotá in the context of protests. There were also incidents of burglary, facility
intrusion and a landslide affecting operations in the Departments of Guaviare, Cauca,
and Antioquia, respectively. No United Nations personnel were reported in jured.
Conduct and discipline
93. During the reporting period, there was one alleged case of sexual assault, which
has been referred to the Office of Internal Oversight Services for assessment.
94. Regarding cases mentioned in the previous report, administrative action was
taken in the case of conflict of interest, while investigations remain ongoing in the
case of physical assault. A meeting in August with the Mission’s 17 conduct and
discipline focal points discussed the strategy to ensure prevention and assistance to
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse.

21-12901

15/18

S/2021/824

Observations
95. The approaching fifth anniversary of the signing of the Final Agreement should
be an opportune moment to take stock of its major achievements and to renew a
collective commitment to build upon these, while working to overcome the
outstanding challenges to its implementation. The gains that have steadily
accumulated over this period would not have been possible without the perseverance
of the people of Colombia and the parties themselves in the face of signif icant
obstacles, not least the ongoing difficulties posed by the COVID -19 pandemic.
96. There is no question that the Final Agreement has yielded many dividends. It
put an end to conflict itself, but also laid the foundations for lasting peace through a
robust and interconnected set of programmes, norms and institutions aimed at
overcoming its root causes and healing the wounds it caused. The Final Agreement
led to a successful ceasefire; allowed for thousands of former combatants to lay down
their arms and take part in democracy; enabled spaces for communities to work with
the Government in the design of development plans and alternatives to illicit
economies; incorporated an unprecedented approach to gender-related matters in
peace processes; provided for historically excluded communities and victims to have
their voices heard in Congress; and created a novel transitional justice system that
upholds the rights of victims and demonstrates that peace and justice need not be in
conflict.
97. Indeed, while the Colombian peace process continues to be a source of
inspiration to the world, the parties, Colombian society and the international
community should not neglect the daunting challenges and risk factors still facing its
long-term consolidation. Chief among them is the violence that continues to take the
lives of Colombian men and women in conflict-affected areas in which the full and
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement is most urgently needed.
Indigenous and Afro-Colombian territories characterized by poverty and a limited
State presence are disproportionately impacted. It is in such areas where
implementation of the comprehensive rural reform, and actions to strengthen the
integrated presence of state institutions would make the biggest differ ence in
disrupting the violence.
98. The Final Agreement’s various provisions on security guarantees are unevenly
implemented, leading to actions that fall short in curbing violence. If implemented in
a coordinated manner, mechanisms such as the National Commission on Security
Guarantees and the programmes on security and protection for women leaders,
communities and organizations in the territories, have the potential to prevent and
respond to what remains the biggest threat to the rule of law. To this end , I reiterate
my call to all institutions to act upon the recommendations of the early warnings from
the Office of the Ombudsman. This is all the more urgent as we quickly approach a
new campaign in which the regions most affected by conflict will be the e picentre of
an electoral process with unprecedented new aspects intended to widen and deepen
Colombia’s democracy, after the approval of the bill creating the special transitional
electoral districts for peace.
99. In addition to the necessary efforts by State entities to ensure safe and inclusive
elections, which I trust will include utilizing the programmes established in the Final
Agreement for that purpose, all citizens and political actors, especially those with
leadership roles on all sides of the political spectrum, have a responsibility to promote
their ideas and interests in an environment of mutual respect. I encourage all
Colombians to engage actively in this new electoral process and make use of the
broader spaces for political participation opened by the Final Agreement. I invite all
parties to join efforts, as they have done in the past, in support of initiatives such as
the pact for non-violence promoted by the Catholic Church.
16/18

21-12901

S/2021/824

100. The reintegration process continues to move forward despite challenges. Owing
to the parties’ resolve and mutual understanding of the importance of properly setting
the foundations of the process, today we are witnessing outcomes worth preserving
and building upon. Efforts to consolidate former territorial areas for training and
reintegration, including through the purchase of land, are a step forward, and I call
for the parties to jointly devise solutions so that all former combatants, be they in
former territorial areas for training and reintegration, new reintegra tion areas or urban
settings, have timely access to the necessary opportunities to ensure that their
transition into civilian life takes root. I urge the Government to spare no efforts to
accelerate former combatants’ access to land and housing, and to ena ble a safe
environment in the areas in which their individual and collective reintegration is
taking place. In doing so, I encourage both parties to ensure that women former
combatants and former combatants of indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin have a
say in decision-making processes so that equal access to income-generating
opportunities and protection measures is guaranteed.
101. The transitional justice system continues demonstrating its fundamental role in
Colombia's transition. I particularly commend the work of the Truth Commission
during the reporting period. Its efforts to take into account the voices of victims and
of all those involved in the conflict are a reminder that genuinely contributing to the
truth by replacing justifications with empathy and mutual recognition is a moral
imperative in a society that strives to overcome decades of conflict.
102. The Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing is also implementing
its mandate decisively. I strongly condemn the violent incident agains t its personnel
and call on all armed actors to respect the Unit and allow it to conduct its critical
work. The wait of thousands of families of victims of enforced disappearance should
not be prolonged.
103. Similarly, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has made significant progress in
determining crimes committed during the conflict and the responsibilities of the
different actors, while reiterating through its decisions that a serious commitment
with victims’ rights is non-negotiable. For the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and the
Comprehensive System more broadly, to continue its work, I reiterate my call to all
Colombians to extend their support, to respect and to contribute to its efforts, and I
urge the Government to provide the necessary resources.
104. While discussions regarding the 2022 budget are ongoing, I trust that the
Government and political forces in Congress will do their part to ensure that
investments in peace are not in jeopardy. The importance of guaranteeing adequate
resources for all sections of the Final Agreement cannot be overstated. In this crucial
year, ownership and reinforced commitment by the parties and all relevant
stakeholders will be instrumental to continue moving forward, preserving hard -fought
gains, and ensuring continuity.
105. The foundations on which the coming stages of the Final Agreement’s
implementation are to be built will only be as strong as the commitment of the parties,
political and civil society actors to constructive dialogue and to protecting peace fr om
the political fray. I encourage the parties to make full use of the Commission for the
Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement,
the National Reintegration Council, the National Commission on Security Guarantees ,
and all other institutions derived from the Agreement and tripartite mechanisms to
jointly tackle implementation issues, to continue to meet their obligations, and
ultimately to fulfil the expectations of victims and Colombian society. Their example
would send an important signal to all Colombians that it is time, finally, to unify
behind peace.

21-12901

17/18

S/2021/824

18/18

21-12901
