117 (II). Convocation of a general conference under Article 109 of the Charter
to amend the privil,ge of the veto and
resolution of the second part of the
first session of the General Assembly
in relation to the exercise of the veto

117 (Ill. Convocation d'une conference
generale en vertu de I' Article 109 de
la Charte pour l'amendement du privilege du veto et resolution de la
seconde partie de la premiere session
de l'Assemblee generale relative a
l'exercice du droit de veto

The General Assembly, in the exercise of its
power to make recommendations relating to the
powers and functions of any organs of the United
Nations ( Article 10 of the Charter) ,

L'Assemblee generate, en vertu du droit qu'elle
a de formuler des recommandations sur les pouvoirs et fonctions de l'un quelconque des organes
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies (Article 10
de la Charte) :
Invite la Commission interimaire de l'Assemhlee gencrale, rnnformement au paragraphe 2 a)
de la resolution 111 (II) de I' Assemblee generale
en date du 13 novembre 1947, par laquelle fut
creee cette Commission, a:
1. Examiner la question du vote au Conseil de
securite, en tenant compte de toutes les propositions qui ont ete OU pourront etre presentees
par des Membres des Nations Unies a la
deuxieme session de I' Assemblee generale OU a
la Commission interimaire;
2. Etudicr cette question en commun avec tout
comite q ue pourra nommer le Conseil de securite pour collaborer avec la Commission interimaire;
3. Faire rapport, et presenter ses conclusions a
l'Assemblee generale, lors de sa troisieme session; ce rapport devra etre communique, le 15
juillet 1948 au plus tard, au Secretaire general
pour transmission aux Etats Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et a I'Assemblee
gcnfrale;

Requests the Interim Committee of the General
Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 2 (lll)
of resolution 111 (II) of the General Assembly
of 13 November 194 7, establishing that Committee, to:
1. Consider the problem of voting in the Security
Council, taking into account all proposals
which have been or may be submitted by Members of the United Nations to the second session
of the General Assembly or to the Interim
Committee;
2. Consult with any committe which the Security
Council may designate to co-operate with the
Interim Committee in the study of the problem;
3. Report, with its conclusions, to the third session of the General Assembly, the report to be
transmitted to the Secretary-General not later
than 15 July 1948, and by the SecretaryGeneral to the Member States and to the General Assembly;
Requests the permanent members of the Security Council to consult with one another on the
problem of voting in the Security Council in order
to secure agreement among them on measures to
ensure the prompt and effective exercise by the
Security Council of its functions.
Hundred and twenty-third plenary meeting,
21 November 1947.

Invite Jes membres permanents du Conseil de
securitc a examiner en commun la question du
vote au Conseil de securite en vue de parvcnir a
un accord sur Jes mesures propres a assurer au
Conseil de securite l'exercice prompt et efficace de
ses fonctions.
Cent-vingt-troisieme seance pleniere,
le 21 novembre 1947.

23
