S/PV.6910

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6910th meeting

Thursday,24 January 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Masood Khan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2013/22)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-21589 (E)

*1321589*

S/PV.6910

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

to a ceasefire agreement, security arrangements and
gender matters.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2013/22)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Sudan to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/22, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I would like to
thank the Security Council for providing me with this
opportunity to present the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2013/22), which
was issued on 10 January, as well as to share with the
Council the most recent developments in the political,
security and humanitarian situation in Darfur.
At the political level, negotiations began on
20 January between the Government of the Sudan and
the faction headed by Mohammad Bashar of the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM), under the auspices of the
Joint Chief Mediator ad interim, Aïchatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane, and the State of Qatar. The parties are
expected to sign in the near future a framework calendar
to guide the negotiations leading to the adoption of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
From 10 to 14 January, the mediation team
organized a capacity-building workshop for the JEMBashar delegation. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur provided experts to support
the mediation efforts, in particular on matters related

2

On the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace, following the appointment of 46 of the
67 members of the Council of the Darfur Regional
Authority in October 2012, the Council was formally
inaugurated on 16 January in Nyala, in the province
of South Darfur. The Council of the Darfur Regional
Authority is chiefly responsible for evaluating the
performance of the Authority, guaranteeing that it is
well managed and reviewing laws having to do with the
Authority’s responsibilities. During the inauguration of
the Council, the First Vice President of the Republic
of the Sudan, Mr. Ali Osman Taha, renewed the
commitment of the Government to the peace process
and announced a parliamentary budgetary decision to
allocate 800 million Sudanese pounds, the equivalent
of approximately $181 million, to support the peace
process in Darfur.
As outlined in the report of the Secretary-General,
the Darfur Joint Assessment Mission finalized its
evaluation of economic recovery, development and
poverty eradication needs before the Darfur donor
conference. From 13 to 21 December, the Chairman
of the Darfur Regional Authority, Mr. Tigani Seisi,
led a delegation that included representatives of the
Government of the Sudan to Belgium, Italy and Spain,
to seek support for the donor conference.
In addition, on 25 December, President Omer
Al-Bashir issued a decree establishing a committee
to examine the current conditions in which aid
organizations are working in the Sudan. Members of
the committee include representatives of the National
Humanitarian Aid Commission, the Darfur Regional
Authority, the national security and intelligence forces
and the Ministries for Foreign Affairs, Defence and
the Interior. Nevertheless, UNAMID and humanitarian
partners have still not seen improvements in
humanitarian access on the ground.
(spoke in English)
I am seriously concerned about the increase
in hostilities between the Government and armed
movements and by the rising intercommunal violence
taking place in some parts of Darfur, and the associated
impact on the civilian population. Further to the
military clashes described in the report before the
Council, on 31 December local community sources
reported that Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid

13-21589

S/PV.6910

forces had ambushed a Government military convoy
near Guldo, approximately 23 kilometres northeast of Nertiti, in western Jebel Marra, resulting in
the capture of Government military vehicles and in
military casualties. Fighting reportedly continued in
the area on 2, 7 and 9 January, including — according
to local sources — bombing by Sudanese Armed Forces
aircraft.
Throughout that period, UNAMID and humanitarian
access to Golo and Guldo remained obstructed by
forces of the Government and armed movements.
Humanitarian agencies thereafter verified the arrival
of 5,000 displaced persons to Nertiti as a result of the
hostilities. UNAMID facilitated humanitarian needs
assessments and transported emergency aid to Nertiti.
Intercommunal violence flared up in early January
when the Beni Hussein tribe and Aballa camel-herding
tribes clashed in Jebel Amer, in El Sereif locality,
40 kilometres north-west of Kabkabiya, North Darfur,
over access to a gold mine administered by the Beni
Hussein group. On 4 January, a group of Aballa
tribesmen reportedly initiated mining activities without
the approval of the local mining committee charged with
overseeing mining operations in the area. An altercation
ensued, resulting in the killing of one Aballa tribesman
and injuries to three members of the committee. Shortly
thereafter, the Aballa mobilized militia and entered the
mining area by force. Up to 100 hundred people are
reported to have been killed, 47 people injured and an
estimated 25 villages destroyed. Some 60,000 civilians
were displaced including 10,000 to Kabkabiya,
8,000 to Saraf Umra and 25,000 to El Sereif. Several
thousand displaced mine workers were transported by
Government authorities back to their places of origin in
other states.
UNAMID transported state authorities, including
the Wali of North Darfur and a delegation from the
Darfur Regional Authority, to the area to intervene and
initiate reconciliation talks between the tribes. It also
provided special flights to airlift civilian casualties.
Beni Hussein militias blocked attempts by UNAMID
to gain access to the area where the fighting began.
On 13 and 14 January UNAMID and humanitarian
agencies conducted a humanitarian needs assessment
in areas of displacement. Thereafter, UNAMID
transported aid and provided security escorts to
humanitarian agencies for the delivery of more than
44 tons of urgently needed non-food items.

Following the intervention by Government
authorities and UNAMID, tribal leaders declared
a ceasefire on 17 January and committed to a
reconciliation conference planned for April. However,
sporadic clashes between the tribes have continued in
the Jebel Amer area and, more recently, on 19 January, in
and around Foro Baranga, in central Darfur. UNAMID
will continue to conduct confidence-building patrols
to affected areas and to engage with traditional leaders
and Government authorities to stabilize the security
situation.
With regard to the safety and security of UNAMID
and humanitarian personnel working in Darfur, I am
pleased to report that, on 2 January, with the support
of the Government of the Sudan, the two UNAMID
formed police unit personnel who were abducted in
Kabkabiya, North Darfur, on 20 August 2012, were
released unharmed, after 136 days in captivity. We
continue to urge the Government of the Sudan to hold
the kidnappers and the perpetrators of other attacks
against UNAMID and humanitarian personnel working
in Darfur accountable. I am equally relieved to report
that the three UNAMID national staff members
who were arrested on 24 and 25 December 2012 by
national security officers in Nyala, South Darfur, were
released on 22 January. All charges against them were
dropped. Despite that positive development, we urge
the Government of the Sudan to respect the immunities
afforded United Nations personnel working in Darfur
in order to enable them to implement the Mission’s
mandate in an impartial manner.
(spoke in French)
The security situation in some parts of Darfur,
particularly in the west of Jebel Marra and in North
Darfur, has worsened gradually since my last briefing
to the Council, in October 2012 (see S/PV.6853).
UNAMID has undertaken measures to bolster civilian
protection in those areas, including by strengthening its
early-warning and rapid-response capacities.
The goal of achieving a comprehensive and
sustainable peace in Darfur nevertheless requires of
the Government of the Sudan a holistic settlement of
the issues of political and economic marginalization
affecting not only Darfur but also the Sudan as a
whole. Along the same lines, parties, including all
armed movements and the Government of the Sudan,
must put an end to hostilities and commit to addressing
grievances through peaceful dialogue.

13-215893

S/PV.6910

The full implementation of the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur includes the holding
of consultations and an internal political dialogue in
Darfur, which must provide an opportunity to deal
with the causes of the conflict while contributing to an
improvement of the security situation on the ground.
In that respect, the full support of the international
community remains necessary to keep the attention
of the Sudanese Government, the Darfur Regional
Authority and the signatory and non-signatory armed
movements focused on the need to achieve a peaceful
resolution of the conflict.
The President: I thank Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, especially since you are from a friendly
country that makes a much-appreciated contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The best proof of that is that during your presidency
the Council has held important events, the most recent
of which was the open debate on a multidimensional
approach to peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.6903).
Pakistan is a country with extensive experience in
peacekeeping, as it has been one of the biggest troopcontributing countries to United Nations peacekeeping
operations for many decades. I would also like to
express our appreciation to Mr. Mulet, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations. We
thank him for his briefing to the Council.
The report before the Council on the situation
in Darfur (S/2013/22) clearly indicates that a state
of security and stability prevails in Darfur’s five
provinces. We would like to highlight paragraph 2 of
the report, where it states that the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur is moving ahead on various
axes, following the Darfur Regional Authority’s full
assumption of its responsibilities. The Authority is
being managed by the people of Darfur themselves,
and has started to implement projects pertaining to
resettlement of returnees, development, reconstruction
and economic recovery, not to mention the fact that
preparations for holding a stakeholder conference for
internally displaced persons and refugees have almost
been completed.

4

In the meantime, the Chairman of the Authority,
Mr. Seise, is currently on a tour to some donor States,
including the Republic of Korea and Japan. He will
also visit other States that are permanent members of
the Security Council in order to prepare for the donor
conference on Darfur.
The report also states that measures have been
completed to appoint members to the Darfur Regional
Authority’s Executive Council, which is made up of
67 members. In the formation of that Council, several
seats were left vacant, in anticipation of the possibility
that certain representatives of movements who are
expected to sign the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur might do so.
We would like to note that Doha, the capital of Qatar,
is currently hosting a meeting with representatives of
some of those movements, which have left the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) and, responding to the
voice of reason, decided to join the political process
to pave the way towards signing the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. We hope that those efforts will be
successful soon.
It is worth noting that the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, especially in
terms of justice and reconciliation, has gone ahead. In
that connection, we would like to highlight paragraph
6 of the report of the Secretary-General before the
Council, which notes that the office of the national
special prosecutor for crimes committed in Darfur has
commenced its work and opened investigations into
10 cases. Those cases pertain to crimes committed in
Darfur over the past few years. That is a good start.
I would also like to note that, among the cases
before the national special prosecutor are cases in
which peacekeepers and humanitarian workers were
attacked. One of the most prominent cases under
consideration now is the October 2012 attack on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) caravan. Many suspects allegedly
involved in that attack have been detained.
I would also like to note the joint efforts by the
Government of the Sudan and the Voluntary Return
and Resettlement Commission of the Darfur Regional
Authority in resettling people, in the light of the
increased number of voluntary returns from camps,
now that security and stability have been established.

13-21589

S/PV.6910

Allow me to correct some inaccurate information
contained in the report before the Council, in particular
with respect to the protection of civilians.
The report notes in many instances what it calls
renewed clashes between Government forces and rebel
movements that have not signed the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, when most of those incidents are
actually strictly tribal clashes in which the Government
only intervened to maintain order, enforce the State’s
authority and help with tribal reconciliation by
coordinating with elders and tribal chiefs.
In that context, I would like to highlight the bloody
confrontation mentioned by Mr. Mulet that took place
in the area of Jebel Amer in North Darfur. That was
no more than an armed confrontation between the two
tribes of the sons of Amer and Beni Hussein over areas
of traditional gold-mining activity. As the Council
knows, Jebel Amer is an area where people extract gold
using local, traditional methods. Yet the report before
the Council states that the Sudanese Armed Forces
bombed a gold mine, which is not true.
That incident confirms that the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur continue to be the competition over
resources. It started with competition over land, water
and grazing areas, and now, after precious minerals
such as gold were discovered, the tribes are competing
over precious metals.
The report submitted by the Secretary-General
also makes clear the extent of the cooperation that
UNAMID is receiving from the central and provincial
Sudanese authorities. The report notes, in paragraph
34, that, with a few exceptions, the Government of the
Sudan approved all 3,938 flight requests submitted by
UNAMID. That confirms that the Government is keen
on facilitating the movement of the Mission, except in
a very few instances in which the Mission might be in
danger or where there might be military activity on the
part of the rebels.
The same is true of the requests made for travel
permits for UNAMID convoys, as the authorities
involved do not object in principle to any movement
by the mission. However, as I have mentioned, certain
areas are very dangerous, because rebel movements
target UNAMID convoys.
In that context, the Government of the Sudan and
its Mission in New York reiterate that we will continue
our cooperation with UNAMID in all areas relating to
the performance of its duties. Just yesterday I had the

opportunity to meet with Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas,
the new Joint Special Representative for UNAMID and
head of UNAMID in Darfur. I discussed with him all
aspects of the situation in Darfur, starting with the root
causes of the conflict and the efforts and policies of
the State aimed at arriving at a negotiated, permanent
solution to the conflict. I assured him that we would
cooperate with him to the extent possible and in a
manner that would guarantee the safety, security and
unity of the Sudan.
At the end of the meeting, I noted that in that context
we hoped that all members of UNAMID would abide
by the principle of neutrality, which is enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. I also noted that the
Government of the Sudan, like other countries, would
not allow anyone who is involved or has been proved
to be involved in activities that threaten security in the
country to enter into the Sudan, and that the relevant
authorities had the right to deny them entry into the
country.
In conclusion we reiterate our long-standing view
that the Security Council must urgently and resolutely
take all of the necessary measures against those who
reject peace among the leaders of the armed rebel
movements in Darfur and who continually seek to
obstruct the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace. We hope to see additional measures taken and
that stronger messages will be sent to those armed rebel
groups that reject peace. We expect the Security Council
to take action against them by imposing sanctions.
Also in that context, we deem it important for
the Council to compel the State of South Sudan to
disengage and dissociate itself immediately from the
rebel movements in the Sudan, including the ones
in Darfur, that reject the Doha Document. The rebel
movements in Darfur continue to conduct military
operations in the border areas and in South Darfur.
They have been launching attacks from South Sudan,
which continues to sponsor those rebel movements and
to provide them with logistical and political support, in
blatant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and resolution 2046 (2012), whose main demand is an
immediate halt to the provision of support to the rebel
movements by any country.
I wish, in concluding, to note that even as the
Government of the Sudan is working hard to arrive at
a peaceful solution to the conflict in Darfur and other
areas, some are attempting to obstruct those efforts. In
that connection, I would like to note the destructive role

13-215895

S/PV.6910

recently played by Uganda when it openly hosted in
Kampala, on 5 January, a meeting of a coalition of armed
rebel groups opposing the Government of the Sudan.
That meeting included the rebel movements in Darfur
as well as the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth, as well as some other political factions. Uganda
gave that coalition support and assistance. As I said
earlier, we have provided the Council with the details of
that meeting. We ask it to hold Uganda fully responsible
for having placed obstacles in the path of the peace
process in Darfur, and the same applies to South Sudan.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Mulet to
make a further statement.
Mr. Mulet: At the beginning of my briefing today,
I reported that, since 20 January, some negotiations
had been under way in Doha between the Government
and one faction of the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) under the auspices of Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou
Souleymane, Deputy Joint Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and mediator. I am pleased to
report that, just a few minutes ago, the negotiating

6

parties in Doha — the Government of the Sudan and
the JEM of Mohammed Bashir — signed a framework
agreement that sets out the basis on which the parties
will negotiate on the adoption of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. I thought that that information was
pertinent for the members of the Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan to make a further statement.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I take the
floor to thank Mr. Mulet for the statement he just made,
which confirms to all members of the Council the
progress that the peace process is making in the Sudan
as many rebel movements join the march towards peace
on a daily basis.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

13-21589
