VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committe,·
-------

4. Encourages the Secretary-General in his efforts to
enable the United Nations to anticipate and react more
adequately and speedily to cases requiring humanitarian
assistance, as mentioned in his report on the work of the
Organization; 119
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to keep
the question of human rights and mass exoduses under
review with the objective of making appropriate recommendations concerning further measures to be taken in
this field;
6. Decides to review the question of human rights and
mass exoduses at its fortieth session.
JO 1st plenary meeting

14 December 1984

39/118.

Human rights in the administration of
justice

The General Assembly,
Mindful of articles 3, 5, 9, 10 and 11 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 120 as well as the relevant
provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 121 in particular article 6, which explicitly
states that no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life,
Recalling its resolutions 2858 (XXVI) of 20 December
1971 and 3144 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 on human
rights in the administration of justice,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/47 and 1984/50 of25 May 1984, in which, inter alia,
the Council approved the procedures for the effective
implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners 122 and the safeguards guaranteeing
protecti~n of the rights of those facing the death penalty,
Acknowledging the important work accomplished by the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control at its eighth
session, 123
Aware that the Seventh United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, to be
held from 26 August to 6 September 1985, will consider
the issues related to the formulation and application of
United Nations standards and norms in the administration of justice under item 7 of its provisional agenda, in
accordance with Economic and Social Council resolution
1982/29 of 4 May 1982,
Convinced of the need for further co-ordinated and concerted action in promoting respect for the principles
embodied in the aforementioned articles of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,
1. Reaffirms the existing prohibition under international law of every form of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and strongly condemns the
practice of arbitrary and summary executions;
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolutions 1984/47 and 1984/50
on procedures for the effective implementation of the
Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners
and on safeguards guaranteeing protection of the rights of
those facing the death penalty, respectively, as well as the
provisions of their annexes;
I 19 See Official Records of the General .4ssemb!J,. Th,rtv-nimh Sesmm.
Supplement No. I (N39! I).
120 Resolution 21 7 A (III).
12I See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
122 First United Nations Congress on the Prf'ventwn of Crune and the
Treatment of Offenders: report prepared bv 1he Secretariat (United Nations
publication, Sales No. 1956.IV.4), annex fA.
123 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cmmc1/, /<JM, Supplement No. 6 (E/1984/16).

211

-------~----------

3. Calls upon Member States to spare no effort in providing for adequate mechanisms, procedures and
resources so as to ensure the implementation of these recommendations, both in law and in practice;
4. Requests the Seventh United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
under item 7 of its provisional agenda, to give urgent
attention to the matter of devising ways and means to
ensure more effective application of existing standards and
to report thereon to the ( ,meral Assembly at its fortieth
session:
5. Requests the Secretary-General to discharge fully his
tasks in connection with the implementation of the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, particularly with regard to procedures 7, 8, 9 and 10 contained in the annex to Ernnomic and Social Council resolution 1984/47, and to employ his best endeavours in
cases where the safeguards guaranteeing the protection of
the rights of those facing the death penalty are violated;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council, through
the Committee on Crime Prevention and Control, to keep
these matters under constant review:
7. Invites the specia\i,ed agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations concerned, to
continue to co-operate with the Secretary-General in these
endeavours by providing assistance, as may be appropriate, and by submitting proposals for relevant action to the
Seventh Congress;
8. Decides to consider at its fortieth session the question of human rights in the administration of justice.
JO I st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/119.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in El Salvador

The General Assembly
Guided by the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 120
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 121
and by the humanitarian rules set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August I 949 124 and Additional Protocols I
and II thereto, 125
Aware that the Governments of all Member States have
an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken under various international human
rights instruments,
Recalling that, in its resolutions 35/ 192 of 15 December
I 980, 36; 155 of 16 December 1981, 37/185 of 17 December 1982 and 38/101 of 16 December 1983, it expressed
deep concern at the situation of human rights in El
Salvador.
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolutions 32 (XXXVII) of I I March I 981, 126 in which the
Commission decided to appoint a Special Representative
on the situation of human rights in El Salvador, 1982/28
of 11 March 1982, 127 l'-183/29 of 8 March 1983 128 and
124 Umtcd Nattons. /'real)' Sc•11·s. vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
1'' A: 32 144. annexes I a·nd I!
126 Sec Official Records of the Fconom,c and Sona/ Counnl, I 98 I, Supp/,•mcnt No. _, (E/1981/25 and Con I). chap. XXVIII. sect. A.
127 IhuI 1982. Supp/cmclll \, .' (E·l982:12 and Corr.I). chap. XXVI.
sect. ,\.
128 lhui I 9113 Su11plemcnt .\ , .i (E 1983/ 1.l and Corr. I). chap. XXYII.
~c~·t \

212

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

1984/52 of 14 March 1984, 129 whereby the Commission
extended the mandate of the Special Representative for
another year and requested him to report, inter alia, to the
General Assembly,
Noting that the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights points out in his report 130 that,
owing to the adoption of a new government policy, the
number of human rights violations has markedly
decreased, which is a welcome development, but that nevertheless a situation of war and generalized violence continues to exist in El Salvador, that there are still serious
violations of human rights, that the number of attacks on
life and the economic structure remains a cause for concern and that the capacity of the judicial system to investigate and punish human rights violations committed in the
country continues to be patently unsatisfactory,
Considering that there is an armed conflict not of an
international character in El Salvador in which the Government of that country and the opposition forces are obligated to apply the minimum standards of protection of
human rights and of humane treatment set out in article 3
common to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949,
as well as Additional Protocol II thereto,
Aware that a delicate process aiming at a political solution has been initiated in El Salvador, which could be hindered if arms or military contributions of any other kind,
making it possible to prolong or intensify the war, are provided from outside,
Taking into account that on 8 October 1984 the President of El Salvador stated before the General Assembly
that the main task of the mandate he was given by the elections of 6 May 1984 is to achieve social harmony and
internal peace in El Salvador, 131 and that the Special Representative notes with satisfaction the obvious desire of
the new Government to establish a democracy governed
by the rule of law and guaranteeing full respect for human
rights,
Recognizing that dialogue is the only way, in a spirit of
generosity and openness, to achieve a negotiated comprehensive political solution that will promote genuine
national reconciliation, put an end to the suffering of the
Salvadorian people and stem the growing tide of refugees
and internally displaced persons,
1. Commends the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights for his report on the situation of
human rights in El Salvador;
2. Expresses its deep concern at the fact that, as indicated in the report of the Special Representative, although
the number of human rights violations has decreased, they
are still serious and numerous, resulting in suffering for the
Salvadorian people;
3. Recalls that the right to life and liberty is paramount
and therefore notes with satisfaction the measures which,
according to the report of the Special Representative, the
Government of El Salvador has adopted to put an end to
these serious violations of human rights;
4. Deeply regrets that the persistence of hostilities by
the armed forces of the Government has resulted in many
civilian victims and material damage, and also regrets that
the hostilities of the guerrilla forces have on occasion
caused civilian victims and material damage to the economic infrastructure of El Salvador;
5. Reaffirms once again the right of the Salvadorian
people freely to determine their political, economic and

social future without interference from outside, through a
genuine democratic process, in an atmosphere free from
intimidation and terror;
6. Requests all States to refrain from intervening in the
internal situation in El Salvador and, instead of supplying
arms or helping in any way to prolong and intensify the
war, to encourage the continuation of the dialogue until a
just and lasting peace is achieved;
7. Welcomes with satisfaction the fact that, in accordance with the appeal made by the President of El Salvador
before the General Assembly and the Assembly's own
repeated appeals, talks were resumed between the Government of El Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Marti para
la Liberaci6n Nacional-Frente Democratico Revolucionario, which confirmed its willingness in that respect;
8. Recognizes that this dialogue is an important step in
the process of pacification and democratization of the
country and therefore calls upon the Government of El
Salvador and the Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberaci6n Nacional-Frente Democratico Revolucionario to
intensify their talks until they achieve a negotiated comprehensive political solution which will put an end to the
armed conflict and estaolish a lasting peace based on the
full exercise both of civil and political rights and of economic, social and cultural rights by all Salvadorians;
9. Welcomes the fact that the Government of El Salvador and the insurgent forces have agreed through indirect
talks to exchange prisoners of war and allow the International Committee of the Red Cross to evacuate wounded
combatants of the opposition in exchange for the release of
government officials captured in combat, appeals to all
States to do what they can to support operations of that
kind, and urges the Government of El Salvador and the
insurgent forces to continue those practices, which humanize the conflict, and to agree as early as possible to respect
the medical personnel and all military hospitals, as
required by the Geneva Conventions;
I 0. Again reiterates its appeal to the Government of El
Salvador and to the opposition forces to co-operate fully
and not to interfere with the activities of humanitarian
organizations dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the
civilian population, wherever these organizations operate
in the country;
11. Recommends the continuation and broadening of
the reforms necessary in El Salvador, including effective
application of agrarian reform, for the solution of the economic and social problems which are the basic cause of the
internal conflict in that country;
12. Deeply deplores the fact that the capacity of the
judicial system in El Salvador to investigate, prosecute and
punish violations of human rights continues to be patently
unsatisfactory and therefore urges the competent authorities to continue and strengthen the process of reform of the
Salvadorian penal judicial system, in order to punish
speedily and effectively those responsible for the serious
human rights violations which have been committed and
are still being committed in that country;
13. Calls upon the competent authorities in El Salvador to introduce changes in the laws and other measures
that are incompatible with the provisions contained in the
international instruments binding on the Government of
El Salvador in respect of human rights;
14. Renews its appeal to the Government of El Salvador, as well as to other parties concerned, to continue to

129 fbid., 1984. Supplement No. 4 (E/1984/14 and Corr.I), chap. IL
sect. A.
130 N39/636, annex.

Ill See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 24th meeting, para. 55.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

co-operate with the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights;
15. Decides to keep under consideration, during its fortieth session, the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by
the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and
Social Council.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/120. Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Guatemala
The General Assembly,
Reiterating that the Governments of all Member States
have an obligation to promote and protect human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling its resolutions 37/184 of 17 December 1982
and 38/100 of 16 December 1983,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1984/53 of 14 March 1984, 129 in which the Commission expressed its profound concern at the continuing massive violations of human rights in Guatemala,
Mindful of resolution 1984/23 of 29 August 1984 of the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities, 132 in which the Sub-Commission
recognized, inter a/ia, that in Guatemala there existed an
armed conflict of a non-international character, which
stemmed from economic, social and political factors of a
structural nature,
Noting the elections to the Constituent Assembly held in
July 1984, which fulfilled the first stage of the electoral
process for the institution of a new constitutional Government according to the timetable proposed by the Government of Guatemala, and affirming the importance of creating conditions in which the electoral process can be pursued in a climate free from intimidation and terror,
Alarmed at the continuation of politically motivated
violence in the form of killings and kidnappings,
Alarmed also at the large number of persons who have
continued to disappear and the unclear fate of those
reported to have been tried by the special tribunals, now
abolished,
Welcoming the co-operation of the Government of Guatemala with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights in the fulfilment of his mandate and noting
with satisfaction that a list of cases dealt with by the special tribunals has now been handed over to the Special
Rapporteur,
l. Takes note of the interim report by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Guatemala, 133
prepared in accordance with Commission on Human
Rights resolution 1984/53;
2. Reiterates its deep concern at the continuing grave
and widespread violations of human rights in Guatemala,
particularly the violence against non-combatants, the disappearances and killings and the widespread repression,
including the practice of torture, the displacement of rural
and indigenous people, their confinement in development
centres and their forced participation in civilian patrols,
organized and controlled by the armed forces;
132 See E/CN.4/ 1985/3-E/CN.4/Sub.211984/43, chap. XVIII. sect. A.

213

3. Once again urges the Government of Guatemala to
take effective measures to ensure that all its authorities and
agencies, including its security forces, fully respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
4. Renews its call upon the Government of Guatemala
to refrain from the forceful displacement of people belonging to rural and indigenous populations and from the practice of coercing them into participation in civilian patrols,
leading to human rights violations;
5. Welcomes the fact that many of the persons who
were tried by the special tribunals have now been released
and invites the Government of Guatemala to publish the
list of cases dealt with by the special tribunals;

6. Requests the Government of Guatemala to investigate and clarify the fate of all persons who have been subjected to involuntary or forced disappearances and are still
unaccounted for and to put an end to arbitrary detention
and imprisonment in secret places;
7. Urges the Government of Guatemala to establish
the necessary conditions to ensure the independence of the
judicial system and to enable the judiciary to uphold the
rule of law, including the right of habeas corpus, and to
prosecute and punish speedily and effectively those found
responsible for violations of human rights, including
members of the military and security forces;
8. Calls upon the Government of Guatemala to allow
an independent and impartial body to function in the
country to monitor and investigate alleged human rights
violations;
9. Reiterates its appeal to all parties concerned in Guatemala to ensure the application of the relevant norms of
international humanitarian law applicable in armed conflicts of a non-international character to protect the civilian population and to seek an end to all acts of violence;
10. Appeals to the Government of Guatemala to allow
international humanitarian organizations to render their
assistance in investigating the fate of persons who have
disappeared, with a view to informing their relatives of
their whereabouts, to visit detainees or prisoners and to
bring assistance to the civilian population in areas of
conflict;
11. Calls upon Governments to refrain from supplying
arms and other military assistance to Guatemala as long as
serious human rights violations in that country continue;
12. Urges the Government of Guatemala to ensure a
climate free from intimidation and terror which would
allow the free participation of all in the political process;
13. Invites the Government of Guatemala and other
parties concerned to continue co-operating with the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights;
14. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study carefully the report of its Special Rapporteur, as well
as other information pertaining to the human rights situation in Guatemala, and to consider further steps for securing effective respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all in that country;
15. Decides to continue its examination of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Guatemala at its fortieth session.

JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984
DJ A/391635. annex.
