V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

9. Requests the Executive Director of the United
N ations Children's Fund to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-third session, on
progress in preparing for the International Y ear of the
Child, includíng its financing and the level of contributions pledged.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/170.

United Nations Fund for Population
Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2211 (XXI) of 17 December 1966 in response to which a trust fund, subsequently named the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, was established in 1967 by the SecretaryGeneral,
Recalling further its resolution 3019 (XXVII) of 18
December 1972 in which it, inter alia, decided to place
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
under the authority of the General Assembly and
established the respective roles relating to the Fund of
the Economic and Social Council and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities has become a most effective and viable entity in the United Nations system
in the population field, owing in particular to its increased resources and its assistance to the developing
countries,
l. Welcomes the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Fund for Population Activities
entitled "Priorities in the future allocation of the resources of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities" ;86
2. Takes note of the views expressed on this matter at the twenty-second session of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme87 and at the sixty-first session of the Economic
and Social Council;
3. Endorses the following general principles to be
applied in making future allocations of resources:
(a) To promete population activities proposed in
international strategies, particularly the World Population Plan of Action; 88
( b) To meet the needs of developing countries
which have the most urgent need for assistance in the
area of population activities in view of their population problems;
(e) To respect the sovereign right of each nation
to formulate, promote and implement its own population policies;
(d) To promete the self-reliance of recipient countries;

75

(e) To give special attention to meeting the needs
of disadvantaged population groups;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities to apply the
criteria for establishing priorities and the other recommendations set forth in bis report, taking into account
the decisions made by the Goveming Council in this
regard, in clase co-operation with the specialized
agencies and the regional commissions concemed, as
appropriate;
5. Invites Governments to continue and to increase
their contributions to the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities in view of the rapidly increasing
needs of developing countries for population assistance;
6. Recommends that the Executive Director of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, for
purposes of continuity of the programme, should normally be appointed for a four-year term;
7. Urges continuing full collaboration and cooperation on operational matters between the Executive
Director of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, as well as between the Executive Director and the executive heads of other organs
within the United N ations system in the field of
population.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/ 171.

Operational activities for development

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Goveming
Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its twenty-first89 and twenty-second9 º sessions, as well as the statement of the Administrator of
the Programme91 and the views expressed during the
debate on operational activities at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly,
Reiterating the principie reflected in the consensos
on the functions and operations of the United Nations
development system as embodied in the annex to
General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution 2024 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
Stressing the continued need for a co-ordinated and
integrated approach to technical co-operation activities
carricd out by the United Nations system according to
the priorities of the recipient Governments, as well as
General Assembly resolution 3405 (XXX) of 28 November 1975 on new dimensions in technical cooperation,
Stressing f urther that the implementation of multilateral technical co-operation is a common endeavour
of the organizations and programmes of the United
N ations system,
1. Notes with appreciation that, pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 2024 (LXI), the

86 DP/186 and Corr.l.
8 7 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ), chap.
XVI.
88 Report of the World Population Conference, 1974 (Unitcd
Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.XJIL3), chap. l.

89 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5779).
90 Ihid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5846/Rev.1 ).
n Oflicial Records of the General Asscmbly, Thirty-first
Session, Second Committee, 30th meeting, paras. 2-13.

76

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme and the executive heads of the agencies
and programmes members of the Inter-Agency Consultative Board are taking steps, in a spirit of partnership, to strengthen their mutual co-ordination, both
between headquarters and in recipient countries, with
a view to improving tbe integration of technical assistance in line witb the above-mentioned consensus;
2. Requests all organizations of the United Nations system to pursue actively their consultations in
order to develop the measures required to strengtben
their co-operation and to ensure, tbrougb an efficient
United N ations development field network, an integrated and interdisciplinary approacb to operational
activities, and looks forward to the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, to be submitted througb tbe Economic and
Social Council, on the steps takcn and results achieved;
3. Invites all countries to help promote a properly
co-ordinated approach to operational activities and to
assist in the achievement of the dynamic growtb of
the activities of the United Nations Development Programme for 1977-1981 based on the need for an
equitable sbaring of the total effort required witb regard
to the level, timeliness and usability of voluntary contributions to the Programme.
106th plenary meeting
2 I December 1976
31/172.

Assistance to the drought-stricken areas
of Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep concern the recent failure of rain
during critica! stages of tbe cropping season in parts
of Ethiopia,
Mindful of tbe demands made on the resources of
the Government of Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation the assistance given to
Ethiopia by Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations,
Recognizing the relief and rehabilitation efforts made
by the Government of Ethiopia,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1986 (LX) of 6 May 1976, by wbich the Council
requested the Administrator of the United N ations Development Programme to intensify the response to the
needs for recovery, rehabilitation and development of
the drougbt-stricken areas,
Further recalling its resolution 3441 (XXX) of 9
December 1975, in wbich it urged the United Nations
and the specialized agencies to continue to implement
vigorously the provisions of Economic and Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI) of 8 May 1974, 1876
(LVII) of 16 July 1974 and 1971 (LIX) of 30
July 1975,
l. Urges the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, the Administrator of tbe United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and the other United Nations organizations
and specialized agencies to continue and intensify their
assistance to Ethiopia in its relicf and rebabilitation
efforts in their respective areas of competence and to
implement promptly tbc relevant provisions of Gen-

eral Assembly resolutions 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
and 3441 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI), 1876
(LVII), 1971 (LIX) and 1986 (LX);
2. Appeals to all Member States and voluntary
agencies and intergovernmental organizations to continue and increase their assistance to Etbiopia;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
scssion and to the Economic and Social Council at
its sixty-second session on the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2 above and of other relevant resolutions
of the Assembly and tbe Council.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31 /173.

Office of the United 1"ations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolutions 28 l 6 (XXVI) of 14 Decembcr 1971, establishing the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, 3243 (XXIX) of 29
November 1974 on the strengthening of that Office,
3440 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, which provides,
ínter alía, for measures to be taken in support of the
activities of the Office, and 3532 (XXX) of 17 Deccmber 1975 on the financing of emergency relief assistance and technical co-operation activities of the
Office,
Recalling section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution
3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2016 (LXI) of 3 August 1976, in which the
Council recommended that the General Assembly at
its thirty-first session should consider the most appropriate means for the financing, after 31 December 1977,
of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator,
Aware that it would be desirable, for planning purposes, for the General Assembly to give guidance to
thc Secretary-Gcneral on tbe modalities for the future
financing of the activities of tbe Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the Office
of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 92
and of the further information given by the Coordinator in bis statement to the Second Committee
on 19November 1976;93
2. Commends the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator and bis staff for the progress made in
strcngtbening the capacity of bis Office with a view to
providing an efficient world-wide service of mobilizing
and co-ordinating disaster rclief, including in particular
thc collection and dissemination of information on
disaster asscssment, priority nceds and donar assistance;
3. Recognizes that there will be a need for the
maintenance of the activities of the core programme
02 A/3 l /88 and Add.1

and 2.
Records of tlze General Assembly, Tlzirty-first
Snsion. Second Committee, 47th meeting, paras. 1-16.
!l:i Ofjicial
