TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

th.
MEETING:

NEW

10 NOVEMBER

1970

YORK

CONTENTS

Page

. . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .. . . . , . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . .

1

Tribute to the memory of General Charles de Gaulle, former President of the
French Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.....I..I......

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President! . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , , . , , . . , . . . .

5

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , , , . , . , , , . . . . . . . , . . . . ,. . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . .

5

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(cr) Letter dated 6 November 1970 addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the Permanent Representatives of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra
Leone, Syria and Zambia to the United Nations (S/9975/Rev.l);
(b) Third report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/9844 and Cot-i-.1 and 2 and Add. 1 and Add. l/Corr. 1
and Add.2 and Add.2/Corr. 1, 2 and 3 and Add.3). . . I . . . . . a. . . . . . . . .

5

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l556)

S/PV. 1556

I

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital lettess combined with$gures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a.yeference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of fhe Security Council (symbol Sl . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance wiih a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

.

FIFTEEN

i

HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-SIXTH

Held in New York on Tuesday, 10 November

President:

Mr. George J. TOMEH

(Syria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Cdlombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l556)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 6 November 1970 addressed to
the President of the Security Council by the
representatives of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra
Leone, Syria and Zambia to the United
Nations (S/997S/Rev. 1);
(b) Third Report of the Committee established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
(1968) (S/9844 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1
and
Add. l/C!orr. 1 and
Add.2
and
Add.2jCorr.1,
2 and 3 and Add.,3),

Tribute to the memory of General Charles de
Gaulle, former President of the French Republic
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
One of the most sole&m moments of life for a man
is when he confronts death and sees it ,strike. And
when it takes away a great man-one of those who
has made history, one of those whom the long centuries
bring forth so rarely within a nation, but who by virtue
of their human stature arc in the end claimed by all
mankind-the
fatal yet inevitable event plunges the
living witness into the profoundest meditation.
2. Today this painful moment has arrived. On this
grey and rainy day our hearts are filled with sadness
and affliction; we have an indefinable feeling of a sudden and immense emptiness: Charles de Gaulle of
France is dead. And this passing is the cause of the
mourning not only of the French people, of which he
was President and an inspired guide; throughout. the
entire world the sudden news of his death has overcome
us all.
3. The sign of agreat man-of one who allows himself
to act only at the highest level,-is
to be ahead of
and beyond his time, General de Gaulle belonged to
that category of great men.

MEETING
1970, at 3 p.m.

4. He was the head of the French Resistance, combating the nazi invasion; he acquired the support of the
great French people who refused to bow to tyranny;
he was an inspired and determined hero; he roused
and directed the heroism of the French people until
victory was won over the forces of evil and darkness.
5. His words will always be recalled, words of an
almost prophetic vision, when France was defeated.
He soleninly declared that the final word had not yet
been spoken; that the very same means which had
been used to conquer them might well be the means
which would one day bring them victory. That war
was not limited to the confines of their unfortunate
country. It was a world war. Overwhelmed though
they had been by mechanized force, they could in the
future gain their victory by using greater mechanized
forces, That was the destiny of the world. That vision
was accurate indeed, and for that reason will remain
a symbol of heroism in history.
6. As a statesman he brought not only stability, prosperity and greatness to France; he was also an arbiter
in the world conflicts that have beset mankind. Who
can forget that he was a great emancipator of peoples
and that he forecast accurately that they would inevitably liberate themselves.
7. He understood the great truth that there is an extraordinary power in the will of a people, and when this
power declares itself even those who would challenge
it are overwhelmed and awestruck.
8. No one is free unless everyone is free. By making
this truth a reality, in recognizing the legitimate rights
of the Algerian Arab people, General de Gaulle will
remain immortal in history.
9. France, which is great because of its history, great
by virtue of its revolution, and great because of its
culture and contribution to civilization, to values and
to man’s culture, today is adding another page to the
books of its glorious history: the life of General de
GablIe, the hero, the statesman, the visionary.
10. I am sure that I am expressing the feelings of
the Council when I ask the Ambassador of France,
my good friend and esteemed colleague,
Mr.
Kosciusko-Moriset,
to accept our most sincere condolences and to convey them to the Government and the
people of France and to the family of General do, Gaulle.
11. I should like to ask members of the Council to
stand and observe a minute’s silence.

The representatives,
of silence.

standing,

observed

CI minute

12. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfionz
I give the floor to the Secretary-General.

French):

16. The emotion felt in my country by the passing
of this great leader of our oldest ally is shown by the
immediate decision of President Nixon to attend personally the memorial service for General de Gaulle.
17. May I join the President of the Council and the
Secretary-General in asking the representative of
France to convey to the French people and the family
of General de Gaulle our most profound sympathy.

13. ; The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As soon as I
heard the news of the passing of General Charles de
Gaulle I sent the following message to the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations:

18. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom):’ I have
already paid the tribute of my delegation to General
de Gaulle in the General Assembly this morning. There
is little for me to add. My Prime Minister in the House
of Commons today has said: “Over the centuries
France has produced many great Fen and Charles de
Gaulle stands amongst the greatest of all of them. At
times he seemed to personify France.”

“I was grieved to hear the news of the death of
General de Gaulle, whom I regard as one of the
greatest soldier-statesmen of our time.
“General de Gaulle not only showed great wisdom
and imagination in tackling the problems of his own
country but also courage and vision in dealing with
the difficult problem of the decolonization of French
Africa, especially Algeria, By his courageous and
forthright stand in this regard he has earned the
respect of all friends of freedom.

19. I convey my delegation’s deepest sympathy once
again to our French colleague and his delegation, and
through them to all their countrymen and the family
of General de Gaulle.

“I had several opportunities of meeting him and
I was struck by his clear perception in regard to
many of the critical issues of war and peace which
arose during his tenure as President of France and
which continue to be with us today. I also
appreciated the increased awareness on his part of
the valuable role that the United Nations could play
not only in crisis situations but also in promoting
human progress.

20.

Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Early this morning tragic
tidings spread throughout t@ world: General Charles
de Gaulle, the great son of France and eminent statesman and military leader of our times, is dead.
(trnnslated

from

Russian):

21. The name of de Gaulle is linked with the most
important landmarks in the development of France and
in the history of international relations during the twentieth century, particularly during and after the Second
World War. His outstanding role as one of the leaders
of the struggle against fascism, against Hitler’s tyranny,
and for the freedom and independence of France and
the freedom and independence of Europe during the
Second World War has been universally acknowledged. General de Gaulle held a prominent place
in the galaxy of distinguished figures of the period
of the Second World War.

‘LGeneral de Gaulle’s passing will be mourned not
only by his native France but by the many who
admire him the world over.
“May I request you to convey td the President,
the Government and the people of France my profound sympathy and offer my respectful and sincere
personal condolences to Madame de Gaulle.”
14. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Our representative in the General Assembly this morning has
already expressed to the French Government and
people our most profound condolences at the death
of General de Gaulle. I cannot refrain, however, from
adding a very brief personal word. The twentieth century has, like most centuries, produced a reiatively
small number of truly great men, of giants whose
stature, whose personality, whose grasp of the underlying forces of history have enabled them to make a
lasting mark on their time, General de Gaulle was certainly one of those men. It is almost impossible to
imagine the twentieth century without him and it is
difficult to reconcile ourselves to the fact that we must
face the rest of the century without him. We have,
however, the satisfaction that through his actions and
his writing he has shown us the high road which humanity must follow if it is to achieve the heights of which
the General thought us capable,

22. General de Gaulle alsd played a prominent role
in the development of’Franco-Soviet co-operation: as
head of the Free French Committee during the Second
World War, General de Gaulle took the initiative in
establishing relations between the Committee and Ihe
Soviet Union early in the war. He highly appreciated
the outstanding contribution made by the Soviet Union
and its people to the defeat of fascist Germany. Thus
in a statement made during the Second World WAS
he said: “The French people welcome with enthusiasm
the successes and the increase in the strength of the
Russian people, because these successes bring France
nearer to its desired goal-freedom
and revenge.“’
23. As a great patriot of his country and a realis
in politics, General de Gaulle clearly understood the
tremendous importance of France-Soviet co-operation
for the destiny of France, the destiny of the European
continent, European security and universal Peace.

15. I had the privilege of knowing the General personally; it was a privilege I shall never forget.

1 Charles de Gaulle, MP~GWS & grrerre - L’Appel
rairie Plon, edit., 19541, p. 546.

2

(Park

Ll&-

“Unfortunately
for everyone”; said General de Gauile,
“efforts to forge an alliance between France and Russia
have all too often over the centuries met with obstacles
and opposition, born of intrigues or misunderstaflding.
Nevertheless, the need for such an alliance is obvious
at every new turning-point in history.“2

31. We extend our sympathy to his family and to
the Government and people of France. The Chief of
State of our country sent a message of condolence
this morning, and on this occasion we would only
express our wish to the Almighty that his soul will
rest in eternal peace.

24. Consistently following his political course, an
independent course, General de Gaulle responded to
the proposal of the Soviet Government and the FrancoSoviet Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance”
between France and the Soviet Union was signed during the Second World War.

32. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): The news of the
death of General Charles de Gaulle has cast a shadow
over the whole world. With France, every nation
mourns the death of the last of the great leaders during
the Second World War, who, in his indomitable fight
for the liberation and independence of his own country,
became the embodiment of the national spirit for men
everywhere.

25. The name of de Gaulle is also linked with the
marked improvement in France-Soviet relations which
came about at the end of the 195Os, when General
de Gaulle became Head of the French State. He visited
the Soviet Union and met the leaders of the Soviet
State on a number of occasions. His visits to our country led to further mutual understanding between the
Soviet Union and France. The recent visit to the Soviet
Union by President Pompidou is a continuation of the
policy of which General de Gaulle was a staunch
advocate.

33. In the more recent past, we in Finland were
greatly encouraged and supported by the policy of
France under President de Gaulle, a policy of European
reconciliation
and co-operation cutting across the
dividing lines of ideologies and military blocs and based
upon unswerving respect for the sovereign equality
and independence of nations,
34. The life and example of General de Gaulle
illustrate the profound truth of our time that fruitful
co-operation between States in no way requires a dilution of national identity, but, on the contrary, recognition of the unique character of each nation as the only
firm basis for genuine internationalism.

26. Mr. President, at this hour of universal mourning,
I should like to state that there are extensive possibilities for the development of France-Soviet relations because these relations are based on friendship
and on the fact that the fundamental interests of the
Soviet and French peoples coincide.

35. The message of General de Gaulle’s life will
remain a living force far beyond the borders of France.

27. The Soviet Union, in giving effect to the provisions of the- France-Soviet agreements concluded in
: October 1970, will continue to strive consistently for
the strengthening of the security of peoples and universal peace, for the strengthening of security and relaxation of tension in Europe, and for the expansion of
France-Soviet co-operation.

36. I should like to join the President of the Council
in requesting the representative of France to accept
our condolences and expressions of profound sympathy.
37.

Mr,

ESPINOSA

(interpretationfrom

VALDERRAMA

(Colombia)

Spanish): I should like to associate

my delegation with the grief of mankind over the passing of one of the great men of our time. On this solemn
occasion I cannot fail to mention General de Gaulle’s
trip to the countries of Latin America. He came to
Bogota, Colombia, on that occasion and as the President of the Congress of my country I was able to extend
the greetings of our people to the President of France
‘and to tell him of the admiration which we felt for
him, for the great genius of France, for the French
people’s love of freedom and constant struggle for the
betterment of mankind. On that occasion we also told
him that we welcomed him as a legendary hero to the
land of our country. _

j 28. The memory of General de Gaulle, who enjoyed
special popularity among the Soviet people, will remain
for ever in their hearts as that of a great son of the
friendly French people.
29. The Soviet delegation would like to express to
the French delegation its sincere condolences on the
death of General de Gaulle and shares in its sorrow
and in the sorrow of the Government and people of
France and the family of the deceased.
30. Mr, DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): For my country, the death of General de
Gaulle has very special significance. He was a great
friend of ours, and to demonstrate this, this year he
made a long trip through Spain, as if to say good-bye.
We have a lasting memory of his figure, great in history
!‘but humble at the time of his death. As the representative of France reminded us in the General Assembly
this morning, he said that he did not wish to have
a ceremonial funeral.

38. Today he has passed on, and we would like once
again to express our feelingsof admiration. I say thus
personally and on behalf of my delegation, and I know.
that I am expressing the feelings of the Colombian
people who are so close to the people of France and
who have had such love and admiration for the hero
who has just passed on.
39.

‘Ibid.,
pp. 546 and 547.
a Signed ,at Moscow on 10 December 1944.

Mr.

LANG

Spanish): Nicaragua

3

(Nicaragua) (interpretation from
shares the sadness of the free,

world over the passing of the wartime leader and glorious President of immortal France, who demonstrated
his military valour in the field of battle and his political
courage in the rebuilding of his country where he was
always prepared to make any sacrifices that were
necessary.
40. On behalf of the people and Government of
Nicaragua we express our feelings of grief to the distinguished representative of France over this irretrievable loss. France’s mourning is also that of Nicaragua.
41.

Mr.

KUZAGA
(Poland) (interpretation
from
l?wzch):
We all learned the news of General de Gaulle’s
death with the deepest sorrow. In him, France and
the world have lost a great statesman, a man of outstanding political calibre. I could scarcely add much to
what my colleagues around this table have already said.
May I, however, say that the memory of General de
Gaulle will always remain ‘particularly associated, in
Poland, with the image of the fighter who personified
France in her fierce resistance to nazi aggression. It
will remain associated with his attitude towards Poland,
with his friendship for us to which he gave expression
in the speech he delivered during his last visit to Poland,
at Zabrze, the town which he described as “the most
Polish of Polish towns’!, thus indicating his positive
attitude towards ,a fundamental problem for Poland,
that of its frontiers. General de Gaulle’s memory will
always remain associated with his vision of a Europe
living in conditions of co-operation, peace and security,
of a Europe which would be a factor for stability in
the world.
42. May I extend to the delegation of France the most
heartfelt condolences of the Polish delegation.
43.

Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interprelation from
A figure whose acts have marked the destiny
of mankind is no more. We hold this meeting of the
Security Council on the very day when General de
Gaulle has left the world on the eve of the end of
colonial empires, The French people, indeed the world,
have thus had brutally snatched from their midst a
hero, a genius whose role and influence were worldwide in their scope to the point of leaving their imprint
on the destiny of mankind itself,

French):

44. To France, with whose$cause that giant among
men identified himself, and to the prostrated family
to whom he brought his enormous prestige, on behalf
of my Government I extend our deepest sympathy.
45. May the magnificent work of decolonization be
completed, a task to which Charles de Gaulle devoted
himself and which he described in this own words when
castigating the bitter colonial wars:
“But, in French Africa as in all the other Territories where men live under our flag, there could
be no progress worthy of the name if men, on their
native soil, did not enjoy its moral and material
benefits, if they could not gradually raise themselves
to a level where they will be capable of participating
in, their own country in the management of their own

affairs. It is the duty of France to see to it that it
is so.”
46. And in 1964 he capped his own denunciation of
the colonial system in the following terms:
“Why then should France, which is itself in a
period of vigorous growth, stand aloof from a movement of which its traditional genius is in large part
the source and on which, in the final analysis, the
peace and fate of the world depend?”
47. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): My delegation, acting on behalf of the Government and people of Zambia,
had the opportunity of paying worthy tribute to the
late President of France, General de Gaulle, in the
General Assembly and in a number of Committees of
the General Assembly.
48. At this stage I should like to associate my delegation with the sentiments of condolence which you, Mr.
President, have expressed on behalf of the Council,
together with those of other delegations which have
preceded me.
49. General de Gaulle was a brave and outstanding
world citizen who has left an indelible mark on the
scene of the twentieth century. General Charles de
Gaulle is dead, but may his spirit live.
50. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): My delegation, on
behalf of the Government and people of Sierra Leone,
would like to express our condolences and deepest
sympathy to the people of France on the loss of Charles
de Gaulle, the great French leader and statesman.
51. One of the major achievements of his life, which
will always be remembered, is the effective part he
played in the decolonization
of many countries in
Africa and Asia. In fact, it was in Africa that, as a
young and unknown brigadier-general, his potential
greatness first made itself evident during the dark days
of the Second World War thirty years ago, In that
continent it was a leader of African descent, Governor
Felix Eboue, who was first inspired by the geniusOf
de Gaulle and who brought into the camp of the Fighting
French many who were uncertain and hesitant. EbouC,
who now lies in an honoured place in Paris, remains
one of the great illustrations in the twentieth century
of the heights to which a man of,non-European race
can rise when given free and unfettered opportunities
of education and world civilization. Eboue’s loyalty
to de Gaulle was the beginning of a long and last&
alliance between Charles de Gaulle and the Afro-Asian
world, an alliance which had no patronage or paternal.
ism in it, but which was that of a man who recognized
brilliance and leadership wherever he saw it, and in
whomsoever he met it, regardless of race, colour Or
creed.
52. The subject of our debate this afternoon also has
some relevance to the death of Charles de Gaulle. Be
was able in Algeria and in other African countries,
with a high percentage of European settlers, equal to,
if not higher than, that of Southern Rhodesia and Pop

/

/

/

1

tuguese Africa, to push through the process of
decolonization with great vigour, risking his own life
and personal safety.

61. Respecting that wish, I would only thank all members of the Security Council for their words, which
have moved us very much. All who shared in his
struggle from the very beginning will continue in the
same direction-the
direction of peace, reconciliation
and understanding among all nations and men.

53. My delegation mourns the passing of a great
leader of France and of all humanity, and we ask that
our deepest sympathy be transmitted to the delegation
of France, and through them to their country and to
his family.

62. The PRESIDENT
(intopwtationjbrn
French):
On behalf of the Security Council and on my own behalf’
I should like to thank the representative of France
for his kind words.

54. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): Mr. President, I should
fike to associate myself with the profound sentiments
of sympathy expressed by you, the Secretary-General
and other speakers, for the people tind Government
of France on the sad occasion of the passing of President de Gaulle,

Expression

President

63. The PRESIDENT
(irztelp~rtcrtionfr.on? Spanish):
I now wish to pay a tribute to Ambassador de Pin&
of Spain, who served as President of the Security Council in October, His term was marked by his distinguished personal qualities, courtesy, elegance, his
striving for peace, his sense of justice and his constant
concern for the cause of mankind. In addition, the
Foreign Minister of Spain, Mr. Lopez Bravo, presided
over the Council with great skill during the periodic
session held in that same month. To the people and
Government
of Spain, and .to their distinguished
Ambassador and Foreign Mihister, I would express
our sincere gratitude and friendship.

55. As the undisputed leader of the Free French
Movement during the darkest hours of the Second
World War, and later as the founder of the Fifth Republic, President de Gaulle won a unique place in the
hearts of the great French people and also in the galaxy
of history’s outstanding personalities. He was truly
a man of destiny.
56. The people and Government of Nepal share the
deepest sorrow on the irreparable loss suffered by
France and the entire world.
57.

of thanks to the retiring

64. I know I speak on behalf of all members of the
Security Council when I pay this well deserved tribute.
We wish Ambassador de Pin& every success in the
future.

Mr.

KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (itztrrj?orn French):. Mr. President, your very
noble words, Mr. Secretary-General,
your moving
message, and, dear colleagues, the words you have
uttered here will go straight to the hearts of the people
of France. Since this morning we have heard many
statements
in the General Assembly, and friends
known and unknown spontaneously have come to me
to express their sorrow and show that it is not France
alone that is in mourning but the entire world. For
all Frenchmen personally, the loss of the person who
gave us back our country, freedom and peace has
created a great void.
Pretation

65. Mr. de PINI&
(Spain) (interpretation
j7om
Spanislz): On behalf of my delegation, and also on
behalf of my Foreign Minister, I should like to express
to you, Mr. President, our gratitude and appreciation
for tNe very kind words you have addressed to me,
to my Foreign Minister, to my country and to my
people.
66. I am not really very surprised because your country and mine have been sister States for many centuries
and we share many traditions. I pay you, Sir, a tribute
on your accession to the presidency of this distinguished body of the United Nations, and in so doing
I should like to say that as you discharge your functions
I shall always be at your disposal, as, indeed, will
my delegation.

58. But, as your words have shown, beyond our borders de Gaulle stood for much more, personifying as
he did the independence of all peoples and nations.
He stood for friendship and co-operation among
nations.
59. All who approached him-and
our SecretaryGeneral has borne witness to this -were very much
struck by his sovereign vision of things, his mastery
of problems and his dazzling intuition as regards the
future-always
in the service of a noble cause, the
cause of peace among men, peace based on profound
respect for the independence and dignity of nations.
That is why I can testify to his great faith in the actions
of the Security Council.

Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Question
concerning
the situation
in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 November 1970 addressed to the
President of the Security Council by the Permanent Representatives
of Burundi, Nepal, Sierra
Leone, Syria and Zambia to the United Nations
(S/9975/Rey,l);
Third report of the Committee
established in
pursuance of Security Council resolution 253
(1968) (S/9844 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1
and Add.ljCorr.1
and Add.2 and Add.21
Corr.1, 2 and 3 and Add.3)

60. As the Council is aware, he passed away in that
simplicity
and dignity to which he had retreated after
spontaneously
leaving office. He was determined that
this simplicity
should be maintained and that no
speeches or eulogies be delivered upon his death.
5

67. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretation from French):
The Security Council will now proceed to consideration of the question brought before it in the letter of
6 November 1970, addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives -of Burundi,
i Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia. That letter
I is contained in document S/9975/Rev. 1.

session. The incontrovertible evidence of the Committee on Sanctions and of the Secretary-General is that
the situation in Southern Rhodesia continues to remain
extremely grave. The evidence is clear, moreover, that
the policies of sanctions have failed in their objective
of bringing down the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia. Southern Rhodesia continues to enjoyasubstantial volume of foreign trade. This has been possible
owing, in the first place, to increasing covert evasions
of sanctions; secondly, to insufficient vigilance on the
part of certain Powers, particularly industrial and
maritime Powers; and thirdly, to lack of co-operation
on the part of Portugal and South Africa.

68.

I would also point out to members of the Council
submitted by Burundi, Nepal,
Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia has been circulated
in document S/9976.

that a draft resolution

69. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, during my
association with you I have come to respeqt you greatly
for your wisdom, perception and sense of fairness.
It is, therefore, with great pleasure that I extend to
you the cordial congratulations of my delegation upon
your assumption of the office of President of the Security Council. Please accept, Mr. President, our good
wishes and assurances of our whole-hearted cooperation.

74. Recent reports appearing in the press show an
increasing number of major violations of sanctions,
They confirm that the illegal regime is tightening its
policies of racism and strengthening its State machinery
to enforce them. The leaders of the rebel regime remain
as determined as ever ruthlessly to pursue those
policies, which are designed, in the words of Mr, Ian
Smith, “to retain Western civilization in Southern
Rhodesia and to stem the tide of rampant black
nationalism along the Zambezi”. And that determination is reinforced by the support the regime receives
from other colonial and racist regimes, such as those
of Portugal and South Africa.

70. I should also like to pay the tribute of my delegaI tion to the Ambassador of Spain for the conspicuous
ability and authority with which he guided the Security
Council during the month of October. We are particularly grateful for his role in the informal consultations last month which led to the convening of the
first periodic meeting of the Security Council.

75. Though not surprising, those developments
nevertheless are disturbing. It is the clear duty of the
Security Council to take stock of the situation periodically and consider appropriate measures for the
achievement of our common objective. That is why
the five delegations have thought it necessary to call
a meeting of the Security Council at this time.

71. With regard to the question under consideration
today, it has been not only the subject of discussion
at a number of meetings of the Security Council over
the past years, but also one of unprecedented action
by the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter. My
delegation, therefore, has joined with those of Burundi,
Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia in requesting this meeting of the Security Council to discuss the question
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia ‘in the
light of developments which have taken place since
the adoption of resolution277 (1970) on 18 March 1970,
in the firm belief that it remains the particular and
continuing responsibility OF the Security Council to
keep the situation in that territory under close and
constant review. At stake here are not only the peace
and security of southern Africa, but also the authority
and prestige of the Security Council.

76. In view of the preoccupation of delegations with
the work of the current Assembly session, we hope
to have a very short meeting, at which it may be possible for the Security Council to adopt a brief and non
controversial resolution on which we can all agree.
To that end, the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Syria, Zambia and Nepal have further joined together
in preparing a draft resolution which has already been
made available to the members of the Security COUnCil
in document S/9976. I take this opportunity to present
this draft resolution formally on behalf of the five SpoP
sors.
77. The draft resolution is self-explanatory in nature,
However, I may point out that the draft avoids COntentious matters and is very simple and clear. Particular
care has been taken to have the language in the drafl
proposal
steer clear of both acrimony and
equivocation, While the objective of the Security Corm
cil has been clearly stated, the sponsors have not sought
‘to commit the Council to any course of action above
.and beyond that which it has already taken. No 4
for action beyond the clear capacity of the Sect&’
Council-or,
for that matter, beyond the capacity of
-any Member State-has made.

72. Two important United Nations documents which
have come out after the adoption of the last Security
Council resolution on Southern Rhodesia give a fair
and accurate picture of the state of affairs in that territory as well as an unbiased assessment of the effects
of sanctions on the Southern Rhodesian economy.
73. I refer to the third report of the Security Council
Committee on Sanctions,4 dated 15 June, and to the
Secretary-General’s introduction to his annual report,5
made available on the eve of the General Assembly
4 Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968).
5 OfJicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 1A.

78. The preamble of the draft resolution reaffirms
previous Security Council resolutions adopted since
the illegal declaration of independence five years ago.
6

as well as the primary responsibility of the administering Power to enable the people of Southern Rhodesia
to achieve self-determination
and independence and
in particular its responsibility of bringing about the
end of the rebel rtgime. It expresses grave concern
that certain States have not complied with the provisions of the resolutions concerning application of sanctions contrary to their obligations under Article 25 of
the Charter. In this connexion, I may recall paragraph
104 of the third report of the Committee on Sanctions,
in which the Committee considers that the Security
Council should again draw the attention of Member
States to their obligations under the Charter, in particular the obligations to abide by the decisions of the
Security Council. Lastly, the preamble would have the
council act under Chapter VII.

seek. I also wish to make it clear that the statement
I have made today does not prejudice the view of my
delegation that it is the primary responsibility of the
administering Power, under its own constitutional law
and the Charter of the United Nations, to put an end
to the armed rebellion by all means at its disposal and
to grant immediate independence to Southern Rhodesia
on the basis of majority rule.
83. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Nepal for the kind words that he was good enough
to address to me.
84. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): Mr. President, allow
me to perform a very pleasant duty, that of conveying
to you the warm congratulations of the delegation of
Zambia on your assumption of the high office of President of the Security Council for the month of
November. I was fortunate to visit your great country
not too long ago, and I recall the warmth and hospitality
which I received from your countrymen. Your personal
qualities, Mr. President, give my delegation entire confidence that the proceedings of this Council will be
conducted in an effective and satisfactory manner. You
can count on our maximum
co-operation
and
assistance.

79. The operative paragraphs are simply and clearly
formulated. The present policies of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia are supported, and all States have
been called upon to implement fully all Security Council resolutions pertaining to Southern Rhodesia. The
&aft resolution would also have the Security Council
further urge all States not to grant any form of recognition to the illegal rt?gime. The sponsors maintain the
view that the passage of time does not give legality
to an illegal rkggime, which was conceived in fear and
hatred, born in rebellion and is being nurtured in
racism.

85. I would be failing in my duty if I did not express
the gratitude of my delegation to your outstanding predecessor, Ambassador de Pin& of Spain, for the wise
counsel he brought to bear on our proceedings during
the month of October. Two historical events occurred
during the month of October which we would like to
recall and underline: first, the admission of the island
State of Fiji as the one hundred and twenty-seventh
Member of the United Nations, and secqnd, the holding
of the first periodic meeting of the Security Council
[1555th meeting]. A number of difficulties arose at
these meetings, b;ut thanks to the Spanish wisdom of
Ambassador de Pin& and his Foreign Minister, Mr.
Lopez Bravo, we were able to arrive at satisfactory
solutions.

80. The most important part of the draft resolution
is paragraph 1. This paragraph seeks to ckarify, and
state without equivocation, the central issue involved
in the situation in Southern Rhodesia. The central
issue, in the view of the sponsors, is the existence
of a racist minority rCgime which has denied the majority their inalienable right to self-determination.
The
responsibility
of the United Nations and”that of the
administering
Power do not end with the overthrow
of this racist illegal minority rCgime. Our goal is to
bring about the effective and full application of the
principle of self-determination.
The Security Council
has recogniied
this overriding concern in paragraph
7 of resolution 217 (1965), in which a clear call was
made to the administering Power to take immediate
measures in order to allow the people of Southern
Rhodesia to determine thei.r own future consistent with
the objectives of General ‘Assembly resolution 1514
(XV). Paragraph 1 ofthe present draft resolution places
the question in its proper perspective. It states that
independence before majority rule will be inadmissible.
Accordingly,
the administering Power is requested not
to grant independence to Southern Rhodesia without
, the fulfilment
of majority rule. We know that the
administering
Power has not given up its unique tactic
of confronting the armed rebellion with persuasion and
talk--d tactic which has failed before, and will fail again
in view of the postures and actions of the rebel regime.

86. We have called this meeting for the following
reasons: (i) to reaffirm our condemnation of the illegal
declaration of indepeildence in Southern Rhodesia; (ii)
to urge the Government of the United Kingdom not
to grant independence to Southern Rhodesia before
majority rule; (iii) to ensure that the Conservative
Government iti the United Kingdom continues the policy of sanctions against the illegal Smith rCgime in
Southern Rhodesia; (iv) to urge all States to observe
Security Council sanctions against Southern Rhodesia;
(v) to deplore the attitude of those States which have
persiSted in giving moral, political and economic
assistance to the rebel colony; and (vi) to urge all States
not to grant any form of recognition to the illegal rkgime
in Salisbury.

8 I I I hope that the members of the Security Council
will find it possible to support the draft resolution.

87. The Security Council last discussed the question
of Southern Rhodesia eight months ago 11534th and
1535th meetings], and during the intervening period
a number of disturbing developments have taken place.
The Smith regime has consolidated its political, military and economic positions. It has embarked on a sys-

82. In conclusion, I should like to express once again
our conviction
that a more energetic action by the
Council is needed to achieve the goal which we all
7

tematic campaign of genocide directed against leaders
of liberation movements who are being held in detention camps without substantiated charges or trial. The
list of breakers of the sanctions has grown considerably. One of the most disheartening developments
has been the attitude of the Heath Government towards
the question of mandatory sanctions against the rebel
colony. To illustrate this point, I shall quote from a
transdript which was issued by the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom to the United Nations reporting
on a press conference which was held by the British
Prime Minister, Mr. Heath, at the United Nations on
23 October 1970. Mr. Heath was asked to state the
attitude of his Government towards the legality of the
sanctions against Rhodesia and he replied in the following words:
“ . * . the position as far as the State is concerned
is that the British Government under British law is
responsible for Rhodesia and therefore ‘the views
of the State were heard. We as a Party in the House
of Commons opposed mandatory sanctions but that
does not alter the fact that when they were discussed
here in the United Nations by the last Government,
the last Government was the State responsible. And
therefore they were legal.”

financial controls and an embargo on trade in certain
commodities. The trade embargoes were gradually
extended, and selective mandatory sanctions were
imposed by the Security Council in December 1966
[resolution 232 (1966)] and extended in May 1968
[resolution 253 (1968)] and March 1970 [resohtion 277
(1970)]. The African countries through the Organization. of African Unity called for the total bIockade of
Rhodesia on 3 December 1965, but this fell on deaf
ears.
91. As is publicly known, the British Government’s
declared purpose in its sanctions policy has been to
bring down the illegal Government and to get the Tenitory to return to its status as a British colony, At one
time the policy of no independence before majority
rule was accepted at least in words by the then British
Government, but it would now appear that the Heath
Government would be willing to accept a “settlement”
which would leave the African majority of the Territory
under the control of the white minority. What matters
in our opinion is the principle of no independence
before majority rule, and we have co-operated in the
British sanctions policies-and
called for their extension-only
as a means to that end. In our opinion,
the policy of sanctions has failed dismally in its declared
purpose. The Smith rCgime is more strongly entrenched
now than it was in 1965. It receives active moral,
political, economic and military support from South
Africa and Portugal. Although, statistically, sanctions
have caused some difficulty-especially
in the tobacco
industry-and
have increased the cost of imports while
decreasing the value of exports, the Rhodesian
economy has survived without major difficulty being
caused to the white community.

88. I am sure that many will agree that that does
not represent any moral commitment
on the part of
the Heath Government to pursue a policy of comprehensive mandatory sanctions against the rebel
colony. We have noted the annual decision of the British Parliament taken last night to continue the present
limited sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. We, on
our part, stand ready to strengthen these sanctions
and make them more effective.

92. Nevertheless, it is important that sanctions should
remain in force and that Southern Rhodesia should
continue without any form of international recognition.
Sanctions do make some difference; they have ce~
tainly prevented the Rhodesian economy from serious
expansion, have weakened the Western bloc’s interest
in the continued existence of Rhodesia as awhite-ruled
State and have introduced a complicating and irritating
element into Rhodesia’s relationship with its southern
neighbour. Sanctions against Rhodesia thus increase
the element of international isolation which the whole
of southern Africa fears, and their withdrawal would
be universally recognized as inaugurating a new era
of international support and co-operation for the racist
rkgimes. The morale of the freedom fighters is boosted
by the awareness that the international community SUPports their legitimate struggle for independence,

89. In June 1970 the world was stunned to learn of
the painful death of Mr. Takawira, a very well-known
Zimbabwean freedom fighter who died in a Rhodesian
concentration camp. Mr. Tdkaivira was denied medical
treatment by the Smith rCgime, as part of its policy
of eliminating all people who are opposed to slavery
and oppression. Only yesterday we were informed in
a telegram by the Zimbabwe African National Union
(ZANU) and the Zimbabwe African Peoples’ Union
(ZAPU) that the Reverend Ndabaningi
Sithole, the
President of ZANU, and Mr. Joshua Nkomo, the President of ZAPU, and some of their colleagues are
reported very sick and that they are being denied medical treatment. I should add that we hold the British
Government
as the administering
Authority solely
responsible for the lives of the black majority who
are denied even the most elementary norms of democracy. Needless to say, we shall hold it responsible for
whatever will happen to the Reverend Ndabaningi
Sithole, Mr. Joshua Nkomo and their collaborators.
We urge the Government of the United Kingdom as
the administering Power to intervene directly and put
an end to these acts of genocide.

93. The support of all nations is indispensable if
Africa is to make reasonable progress in its struggle
to complete the task of winning freedom and dignity
for all its citizens. The situation in Southern Rhodesia
is such that we need to exert maximum pressure and
influence which can strengthen those who stand for
freedom, democracy and justice and which can Prevent
the opponents of freedom, democracy and justice from
becoming any stronger than they now are. Individual i
States may have a particular pressure factor which
they could exert-for
example, a big contract Or a

90. When the white minority rCgime in Southern
Rhodesia
unilaterally
declared independence
in
November 1965, Britain refused to enforce its authority
by military means. Instead it imposed half-hearted
8

crime by celebrations to the sound of trumpets in Salisbury. The deafness of the Rhodesian settlers, who have
defied world opinion, is indeed matched only by their
arrant determination to push through the celebrations
of the fifth anniversary of the crime.

natural resource for which there is worldwide demand.
It may be that joint action by particular groups of
States, directed at those States which violate United
Nations sanctions against Rhodesia, is possible. It aY
be that consultation between States Members oP the
United Nations could lead to concerted action, with
each nation taking the action most appropriate to its
circumstances and strength, but in a manner which
would contribute to the over-all goal.

99. Strengthened by the unfailing cqmplicity of the
Government of the United Kingdom, the masters of
Salisbury do not of course hesitate to carry their insolence to the maximum in their attempt to perpetuate
the fait accompli, despite the unvarnished condemnations of the General Assembly and the Security
Council.

94. As I have had occasion to point out, it is important
that we should not regard this matter of Southern
Rhodesia as an affair calling only for resolutions to
be passed .here at the United Nations and at other
international
conferences-although
such resolutions
have their place. We must accept that continual moral,
economic, political and military pressure on the Smith
regime must be maintained. We must never waver in
our opposition to the Smith regime and to the forces
of evil. Therefore the Zambian delegation trusts that
the Security Council will unanimously adopt the draft
resolution contained in document S/9976, which has
&en so ably presented by Ambassador Khatri of
Nepal. The draft resolution before the Security Council
is a very simple one which calls for a reaffirmation
On the part of the Council that there will be no independence for Rhodesia that is not based on majority rule.
The Security Council must be seen to show a serious
concern for the people of Zimbabwe and must not try
to escape from the harsh realities of the unpleasant
situation now confronting it. Refusing to confront
unpleasant facts will not make the task of coming to
terms with them in the future any easier.

100. However, the arrogant stubbornness of Smith
and his henchmen has only helped to run their heads
against the wall. There have been shortcomings on
the part of certain Governments, it must be said, but
the Governments of the international community which
for five years have refused to countenance an extorted
independence,
deserve the gratitude of Africa in
general and of the Republic of Burundi in particular.
101. This merciless repudiation on the part of the
world community, with the exception of Lisbon and
Pretoria, so far from being a source of rejoicing for:
Smith and his entourage, is tantamount to a stinging
rebuff to his temerity and his arrogant stubbornness.
102. Not knowing which way to turn, the impious
Rhodesians have tried to conceal their resounding
failure by drowning it in pompous celebrations.
103. Being themselves responsible for the political
and legal snub they have suffered at the hands of the
near totality of States, the champions of racial separatism in Rhodesia have devised an expedient to console
themselves in their splendid isolation and to throw dust
in the eyes of the world.

95. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative Of
Zambia for the very kind and generous words that he
expressed towards my country, Syria, and ‘towards
myself.
96. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, my delegation is happy to work
under your aegis at a time when the Security Council
is called upon to consider the problem of Rhodesia,
which is a human problem of extreme seriousness. We
know how determined you are to serve the cause of
decolonization
and the cause of human rights-in brief,
the cause of man, Consequently, we look to your skill
and your dedication to ensure that this session of the
Council may bring us to safe harbour and that the
results may be not only satisfaction but in accordance
with the rights of the Zimbabwe people. We are therefore glad to promise you in advance our full COoperation, no matter how modest it may be.

104. During the five years in which the settlers have
bathed in the euphoria of an independence which they
alone have recognized, they have deployed all their
manoeuvres on all fronts; they have knocked on every
door in order to secure acceptance for a Government
born of irregularity, illegality and flagrant injustice.
The results could be nothing other than the world-wide
and persistent repudiation of the Smith rBgime by the
family of nations.
105. The failure of the champions of racism to impose
their rCgime and the systematic repudiation of that
rCgime by all States are powerful trump cards for the
London Government. Indeed the United Nations has
a right to be set free from the perplexity into which
the United Kingdom has plunged it during the past
five years.

9’7. My delegation would also like to reiterate its congratulations
dnd thanks to Ambassador de PiniBs and
to the Foreign Minister of his country for the decisive
role played by the Government of Spain through
Ambassador de Pini& during the past month. He overcame difficulties thanks to his dexterity in the consultations which preceded the historic periodic meeting of
the Security Council, the first such to be held, and
we pay tribute to him.

106. How are we to reconcile the inertia of the British
leadership with the purity of its intentions? Do not
the dilatory tactics of the British leaders suggest a certain complicity with Ian Smith?
107. If the generous gesture of those Governments
that have refused all legal, diplomatic and political rec-

98. My delegation will now address itself to the basic
problem before us, namely, the consummation of a
9

116. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, it
is a pleasure today to sit here under your able guidance,
familiar as we all are with your profound scholarship
and breadth of knowledge. We wish you a successful
month of office and we promise you every possible
support.

ognition deserves the praise of Africa, the fact remains
that it is the same Africa that must deplore the failure
of a21 States to comply with the economic sanctions
ordered by the Security Council.
108: To attain the objective, political boycott must
go hand in hand with the strengthening of the economi’c
quarantine which the United Nations has decided to
impose on those who have usurped power in Zimbabwe.

117. During October the Council was able to achieve
several important goals. Amongst them were the
introduction to membership of a new nation, Fiji, the
first periodic meeting of foreign ministers under the
chairmanship of His Excellency the Spanish Foreign
Minister, Mr. Lopez Bra+o, and, finally,‘the reacfivation of the Committee on Sanctions, which is partly
related to our agenda this afternoon. For all these we
owe a debt of gratitude to the great experience and
tact of our colleague, Ambassador de Pin& of Spain.
We congratulate him for his very fine performance as
President of the Council in October.

109. My Government must warn that the continual
violation of the embargo by many of Rhodesia’s trading
partners may not only perpetuate the Smith r6gime’s
flouting of the most sacred human rights, but also its
stubborn defiance of the supreme authority of this
Council.
110. The Conservative Government has once again
confounded common sense by its statements in the
House of Commons yesterday, which reveal an attitude
both contradictory and defeatist.
111. Indeed, ‘what credence can the Security Council
place in the London Government when its assurances
that it will put an end to Rhodesian settler rule are
juxtaposed with a candid admission of presumed defeat
even before the battle is jdined? This defeatism before
the fact on the part of the United Kingdom is illustrated
by something the head of the Foreign Office said on
9 November: “the evidence is that the chances of success are remote”“.
I might add that the messages
exchanged between London and Salisbury*are always
veiled in secrecy and that it is not impossible that secret
meetings are again taking place not only without the
knowledge but also to the exclusion of the interested
parties in Africa, whereas it is those whose interests
are most directly involved who should be playing a
preponderant part in any negotiations which might be
undertaken.
112. According to the very terms used by the British
Foreign Secretary, the impossibility
of finding a solution is to be attributed to the dummy constitution
introduced by a rBgime which is in every respect liable
to have transplanted apartheid to Zimbabwe.

118. The aim of draft resolution S/9974 of 6
November 1970, before us today and so ably presented
by the representative of Nepal, is to confirm the determination of the Council not to recognize the illegal
regime of Southern Rhodesia. Together with others,
we have repeatedly stated our views from this forum
of world opinion on the different aspects of this matter.
We do not wish to spend the valuable time of the Council repeating those views, but we should like to add
a few observations.
119. It has been said in the past by the Government
of the United Kingdom that it regards the matter of
decolonization as one in which all its political parties
have agreed that human rights and justice should prevail. It would be a mistake if, under pressure from
the short-sighted viewpoint, for example, of some
agents of trade and commerce or from sentiments of
kith and kin, any British Government should depart
from these high moral principles. The weakening of
the effective sanctions has been a source of worry to
my delegation and we very much hope that there is
no truth in the rumour that some of the Afro-Asian
States are participating in illegal trade with Rhodesia.

113. But itis theveryrootsoftheevilthat
the administering Power is in duty bound to attack, that is to say,
the institutionalization
of a constitutional system which
is nothing but the negation of all human morality.

120. In this matter of sanctions we should like to
see these applied to South Africa and Portugal if they
continue to violate the sanctions ,imposed by the
Council. We do not consider this impracticable ifsanctions have been applied to countries fifty times larger
in population and size than South Africa and Portugal
combined.

114. ft is therefore the business of the Security
Council, using the powers and prerogatives entrusted
to it by the Charter, to reaffirm with redoubled force
the invalidity
of the independence flaunted by Ian
Smith. This reaffirmation of the powers of the Security
Council can only be effected by the unanimous adop;
tion of the draft resolution that the Afro-Asian members
have submitted to the Council.

121. We are impressed by the news we have received
in telegrams of the overwhelming approval in the British Parliament of the continuation of economic sanctions against Rhodesia. My delegation will be gratified
if the same approval can be given to the principle of
no independence before majority rule. This was applied
to Zambia, Malawi and Kenya, among others withlarge
settler population, countries, in which those settlers
who have chosen to remain feel safer than in the uneasy
state of white supremacy.

115. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I thank the representative of Burundi for the very kind
sentiments he has expressed about me.
-’ Quoted in English by the speaker.

10

122, The rebel leader, Mr. Ian Smith, stated a few
days ago that he hoped his country would never sink
to the level of one man, one vote. I suppose that by,
that he means that he feels that some citizens of his
country should be hydra-headed, that they should have
many heads to one man, whereas others should have
only one head to one man. If so, we are determined
to cut off the many heads of some of his citizens until
Only one head remains to one man-and,
we hope,
a sensible head.

that a number of disturbing political and economic
developments have taken place in Rhodesia which
require the close examination and attention of the :
Security COUnCil. In their speeches they have
attempted to show what these developments are; but
even before their speeches were made they circulated
the draft resolution in document S/9976, and although
that text reaffirms that primary responsibility lies with
the Government of the United Kingdom, no effort was
made beforehand by the sponsors to consult with or
even inform the United Kingdom delegation of their
intention to ask for a debate and to submit a draft
resolution. It seems a curious procedure if the sponsors
really wanted to achieve a constructive result.

123. He has also said that he hopes they will not
sink to the degeneracy of the dempcratic principle of
counting heads as if counting sheep.
124. BY these irresponsible statements-if
they are
true-Mr.
Smith exposes himself not only as a bad
Politician,
but as an indifferent leader and shepherd
of his people.

131. I shall in due course have comments to make
on this draft resolution. But first of all, it seems important that I should set this discussion in a more realistic
context by describing the positive steps that my
Government is taking to meet iis responsibilities with
regard to the Rhodesian problem.

t25. The question of refugees is one which concerns
my delegation, as we were a member of an ad hoc
group of the Special Committee
on Decolonization7
which visited Africa earlier this year. In interviewing
the courageous members of liberation mbvements-to
whom we give support and whom we would encourage
all members to support in their fight for freedom-we
discovered that there was a great deal of room for
more co-operation between Britain and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in order to
make certain that unfortunate black Rhodesians are
not left stranded outside-their country and are not made
to constitute
a burden on neighbouring
African
countries with limited resources which have gladly and
uncomplainingly
offered them hospitality.

132. As soon as the present British Government came
to office it made clear its intention, which had formed
part of its commitment to the’ British electorate during
the preceding elections, “to make a further effort to
see whether a settlement of the Rhodesian problem
on the basis of the five principles is possible”. That
was said by my Prime Minister in the House of Commons on 2 July 1970.
133. That intention was restated at the United
Nations by the United Kingdom representative who
spoke at the 759th meeting of the Committee of
Twenty-four on 25 August and by the United Kingdom
representative at the 1885th meeting of the Fourth
Committee on 20 October.

126. We recognize this anniversary as one in which
the collective viewpoint of nations entrusted with the
maintenance of peace and international security in this
Council has made it clear, and will continue to make
it clear, to the world that there can be no substitute
for majority rule and true democracy with adequate
safeguards for minorities.

134. On 9 ‘November
1970 my Government
announced that the first step in that approach had been
taken, Speaking in the House of Commons yesterday,
the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home,
announced that he had sent a communication of a preliminary nature to Mr. Smith through the channel of
our Ambassador in Pretoria and Mr. Smith’s representative there. He said:
“This is simply a first exploratory step in a process
of trying to establish whether there is a realistic basis
for a negotiated settlement at all within the ambit
of the five principles subscribed to through the Years
by a majority on both sides of this House.”

127. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of Sierra Leone for the kind words he said about me.
128. Sir COLIN CROWE (United Kingdom): Mr.
President, may I begin by associating myself with the
welcome that has been accorded to you as You take
up this heavy task of President of the Security Council.
I know that you will fulfil these duties with grace and
skill, and I assure you of the co-operation of mY
delegation.

135. The first of those principles, as I need hardly
remind the Council, is the principle and intention that
unimpeded progress to majority rule would have to
be maintained and guaranteed. My Foreign Secretary
did not overestimate the prOSpeCt for %m3%sful
negotiation,
but he said: “however long the odds
against a settlement, I do not believe that any new
Government can simply let the matter lie where it is
without a new attempt to see if a settlement is
possible”. Finally, he made it clear that “there ~111
not be a settlement except within the five PrlnclPles.
Therefore if there is a settlement it will be within the
five principles. ’ ’

129. At the same time I should like to congratulate
the representative of Spain for the manner in which
he exercised the presidency last month. His skill, conciliatoriness
and charm were all outstanding and it was
a real pleasure for us all to work with him.
130. The sponsors of the draft resolution now before
the Council have asked for a meeting on the ground
7 Special Committee on the Situation with regardto the ImPlementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
11

:

“(a) Immediately sever all diplomatic, consular,
trade, military and other relations that they may have
with the illegal rCgime in Southern Rhodesia, and
terminate any representation that they may maintain
in the Territory.”

136. I have read out those quotations at some length
so that there should be no misunderstanding. The British Government has a commitment
to see whether a
realistic basis for a settlement of the Rhodesian
problem, in accordance with the five principles,’ exists
or not, One of those principles is that any such settlement must be acceptable to the Rhodesian people as
a whole. The British Government could not accept
any fresh commitment in the Security Council which
would restrict it in any way in reaching a settlement
within this and other principles if this proved practicable. Nor do we consider ..it acceptable that the
Security Council should at this juncture seek to lay
down any conditions for a settlement.

141. What, on the other hand, is too much in every
sense of the word is the attempt in paragraph 1 [A/9976]
to bind the United Kingdom “not to grant independence to Southern Rhodesia without the fulfilment of
majority rule”. Members of the Council will, I amsure,
recall that a very similar suggestion was rejected by
the Council on 16 December 1966. An amendment to
what subsequently became Security Council resolution
232 (1966) called upon the United Kingdom “to make
a categorical declaration that it will only grant indepen.
dence to Southern Rhodesia under majority rule”
[134&h meeting, para. 611. At that time, my predecessor, Lord Caradon, said:
“I must make it quite plain that the paragraph
as now proposed is, in our opinion, entirely out of
place in this draft resolution. Moreover, it impinges
on matters within the sovereignty of the British
Parliament. It is for this reason that it cannot be
accepted by my delegation as part of the draft resolution.” pbid.1

137. I should also like to refer to the question of sanctions. I see that the third report of the Sanctions Committee is listed on our agenda. My delegation has participated as fully as any in the preparation of that report,
and to the work of the Committee we have contributed
all but a handful of the reports of possible violations
of sanctions that have been made to it. We proposed,
either ourselves or together with our Commonwealth
partners, many of the decisions for future action contained in section IX of the report and we hope that
they will. be rapidly put into effect. We regret that
sanctions have not yet achieved their immediate political objective. But no one can deny that they do in
fact continue to exert pressure on the Rhodesian
economy and to restrict the rate of development, Far
from my Government relaxing on sanctions, as has
been alleged, I can inform the Council that yesterday
the British Parliament decided by an overwhelming
vote to renew the annual legislation that imposes sanctions for another year.

The Council rejected that suggestion by 7 votes to
none, with 8 abstentions. There are, therefore, no
grounds for the suggestion that this draft resolution,
in particular paragraph 1, only reaffirms existing commitments. We have never accepted this commitment
in a United Nations resolution and we cannot do so
now.
142. To sum up, this draft resolution has been brought
in order to lay down in advance the precise and only
conditions on which the sponsors of the draft resolution
would endorse a settlement of the Rhodesian problem.
Yet the same sponsors, as I have already pointed out,
reaffirm in their draft resolution the “primary responsibility of the Government of the United Kingdom”.
We have always accepted and we still accept that
responsibility;
we are now engaged, as I have
explained, in trying to discharge it. We have already
made clear the framework within which we would conduct negotiations if we found that the circumstances
really warranted our entering into negotiations with
the rkgime. I refer, of course, to the five principles.

138. I now come to the draft resolution in document
S/9976. The draft resolution itself seems to be a classic
case of something which is both too little and too much.
In so far as this new draft resolution repeats Ijrevious
obligations, it is unnecessary; in so far as it imposes
fresh obligations, it is unacceptable. It is too little,
or even worse, in that two of its operative paragraphs
seem to repeat the steps the Security Council has
already decided to take in regard to the illega1 rCgime
in Southern Rhodesia, in either less emphatic or less
precise terms.
139. Paragraph 2 refers vaguely to “the present sanctions”, when these have already been clearly spelled
out in the mandatory paragraphs of Security Council
resolutions 277 (1970), 253 (196X) and their predecessors.

143. We are not prepared to enter into negotiations
with our negotiating position dictated to us publicly,
from outside. No sovereign Government would beprepared to accept that. No serious negotiation has ever
been or ever could be conducted in that way. It is
for that reason that the draft resolution before US is
unacceptable to my Government. If it is pressed to
the vote in this form we shall therefore have to vote
against it.

140. Paragraph 4 merely “urges all States . , . not
to grant any form of recognition to the illegal regime”;
whereas Security Council resolution 277 (1970), in
paragraph 2, ‘Decides that Member States shall refrain
from recognizing this illegal rCgime”; and in paragraph
9:
‘6Decides, in accordance with Article 42 of Ithe
Charter and in furthering the objective of ending the
rebellion, that Member States shall:
8 See Rhodesia:

Proposals

for

a Settlement-1966.

144. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (interpretation front
Spnnish): Mr. President, on an earlier occasion I Congratulated you on your assumption of the Chair and
thanked you for your kind words addressed to me then.
I should like now to express my gratitude to the rep-

(London, Her

Majesty’s Stationery Office, Cmnd. 3 159).

12

resentatives of Nepal, Zambia, Burundi, Sierra Leone
and the United Kingdom. I should like to express my
appreciation and gratitude to all of you, on my own
behalf and on behalf of my Foreign Minister.

draft. My delegation regrets that this decision has been
taken. We trust that the British Government will
change its decision or at least abstain in the vote and
abide by the draft resolution which, in my opinion,
should be supported unanimously.

145. My delegation has already had occasion to state
its position on the problem of Southern Rhodesia both
in the General Assembly and in the Security Council.
On the two occasions when the Council dealt with
this matter my delegation stated that the international
community could not continue to tolerate the situation
created in Rhodesia by a few British settlers who have
denied the inalienable rights of the Zimbabwe people
over their territory.
These British settlers have
declared their independence, set up their Parliament
and Government, held a referendum, drafted constitutional laws and proclaimed a Republic in violation of
the provisions of the Charter and resolutions of the
United Nations, In the opinion of my delegation all
these acts ,have been made possible by the passivity
of the administering Power for which the interests of
the British settlers take precedence.

151. For all these considerations my delegation can
now say that it will vote in favour of the draft resolution
which was so eloquently introduced by Ambassador
Khatri, the representative of Nepal.
152. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation from French): In extending our congratulations and thanks to Ambassador de Pin& we are not
following a ritual. Rather, we believe that we should
pay a deserved tribute to the tact, mastery and authority with which he presided over the Security Council
last month. We are certain, Mr. President, that you
will demonstrate the same qualities. We are familiar
with your scholarly conscience, your objectivity, and
we wish you every success in your task.
153. Appreciative of the concerns of our colleagues,
particularly the African members, we gladly responded
to your appeal even though my delegation had some
doubts as to the need to call a meeting of the Security
Counhil today to consider the situation in Rhodesia.

146. Five years have already passed since these settlers, disregarding the interests and the rights of the
genuine population of Rhodesia, illegally declared their
independence and took possession of a Territory which
did not belong to them without the administering Power
doing what was necessary to prevent it.

154. For might it not be feared that such a meeting
marking the fifth anniversary of the rebellion of the
Salisbury settlers would highlight the rebellion in a
way it obviously does not deserve? We met last March
[153&h nrzd 1535th meetings) to weigh the implications 1
of the latest steps by the rebels against the Administering Authority in Rhodesia, the United Kingdom. At
that time, not without some difficulty, we adopted a
near-unanimous
resolution [270 (1969)1 which was
undoubtedly far from perfect but .which at least had
the merit, by strengthening the sanctions of not allowing the establishment of a so-called republic in Salisbury to go unanswered.

147. In the opinion of my delegation the draft resolution which we have now before us contains three principal elements which give it a balanced and logical structure. First of all, it calls upon the administering Power
to abide by its inescapable obligations towards the Zimbabwe people and not to give Southern Rhodesia
independence which would constitute an illegal and
unjust act contrary to the principles of the Charter
and United Nations resolutions.
148. The draft then goes on to deal with the problem
of sanctions which have already been decreed to put
an end to the situation existing in Southern Rhodesia.
Last month, in October, under my presidency, it was
decided that the Committee on Sanctions should be
expanded. All its members are now active. The Committee will continue with its task of seeing to it that
all States strictly abide by their obligations arising from
Security Council resolutions 253 (1968) and 277 (1970).
My Government, which has scrupulously observed the
tenets of these resolutions, and will continue to do
so in the future, is in favour of the present system
of sanctions continuing to exist and is in favour of
its being observed by all States.

15.5. Since 18 March nothing has occurred in the territory’ to bring about any decisive change in the
Rhodesian situation. Mr. Smith’s attempts to inStitUte
official relations
with other States, outside his
neighbours to the south, have failed. Rhodesians have
been denied access to a number of international Sporting events in application of resolution 277 (1970). Christian churches have continued to oppose the law on
land tenure which strengthens racial segregation at the
expense of the indigenous inhabitants.
156. For its part, the new United Kingdom Government made known soon after taking office that it reaffirmed the five principles relating to the political future
of Rhodesia, and in particular the one on the progressive application of majority rule, It has since maintained that position.

149. Finally, the resolution contains an appeal to all
States to abide by resolutions on Southern Rhodesia,
and, if possible, to put an end to the situation existing
in the Territory. It would be of little avail for US’ to
adopt another resolution if the administering Power
which has primary responsibility did not help to put
it into practice.

157. The Security Council, for its part, has taken cognizance of the third report of the Committee established
under resolution 253 (1968). This document, which was
rarely quoted and even more rarely analysed in the

150. We have just heard that the United Kingdom
delegation has received instructions to oppose this
13

Assembly’s debates on southern Africa, deserves some
comment because it does help to assess the effectiveness of the sanctions.

165. For in our eyes the United Kingdom is the respon-’
sible authority which is in duty bound to take measures:
that fit the circumstances in order to put an end to
the Rhodesian rebellion. We do not think that we are’
entitled to tell the British Government what it should
do.
166. In any case, would there not be some contradiction in stating that the United Kingdom Government
is responsible and even sometimes reproaching it for
not sufficiently exercising its responsibility and, in the
same breath, dictating what it should do, that is to
say, wrongly to try to substitute another responsibility
for its own?

158. The report is disappointing on more than one
point. For instance, although tourism presumably does
not meet any vital need, 355,000 tourists visited the
rebel territory in 1969. This is more than in 1965. Net
immigration,
too, is on the rise, although the authorities
in the countries of origin are not without the means
to stem the flood.
159. Finally, despite the inadequacies of the report
on this subject, the information given in the paragraphs
on the general economy show that investments have
increased in recent years and made possible industrializ,ation to counterbalance the losses sustained in agriculture.

167. For our part, for the reasons that the acting permanent representative of France in the Security Council has already explained in his letter of 31 March 1970
[S/9732], we would have some difficulty in agreeing
that Article 41 of the Charter empowers the Security
Council to decide that Member States should refrain
from recognizing as a State any particular political
entity whose status is in dispute, Paragraph 1 of the
draft resolution before us, therefore, seems to us to
be legally questionable. We have no difficulty as to
the substance: we do not recognize the Salisbury
rCgime and obviously we hope that there will be an
unimpeded advancement towards majority government. But the language here seems to us to go beyond
our powers. It could perhaps be changed, and we would
have wished that consultations might be held on this
subject to reach an agreement which is not beyond
our grasp. If, however, this language is maintained
as it stands, and since we have no objection to the
substance, we shall be content to abstain.

160. For in this last field the sanctions have produced
results, thanks in particular to the role played by managements in the former importing countries; Rhodesian
tobacco e$ports have been sufficiently reduced to
cause a costly build-up of stocks, discontent among
the producers, and increased budgetary costs. The substitution of maize for tobacco has done little to reduce
the effectiveness of the sanctions.
161. As far as trade is concerned, sampling in various
quarters indicates that in 1969 it did not reach the volume of four years earlier (the main trading partners,
by far, being South Africa and Mozambique).
If we
deduct from the total the exports to neighbouring
countries of Southern Rhodesia that have not yet
escaped Rhodesia’s economic grip and still depend
upon it for the transit of their own products, and if
we also deduct exports under contracts concluded
before sanctions, we see that the colony’s trade with
the rest of the world is #quite clearly declining, which
is a.result.

168. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Frenc/t):
I thank the representative of France for his kind words.
169. Mr. KUFAGA
(Poland) (interpretation fiof?l
French): It is with special pleasure that I extend to
you, Mr. President, the sincerest congratulations of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November.
We are pleased to see a representative of Syria, a country which is a friend of ours, occupying this important
post. With your erudition, your experience and your
wisdom, we are confident that you will occupy this
post with the greatest dignity and with determination
to carry out your various tasks this month.

162. Without exaggerating the scope of sanctions, and
my delegation has always pointed out that sanctions
alone cannot be expected to solve the Southern
Rhodesian problem, it is at least gratifying that the
rebel authorities of the Territory, although particularly
favoured by nature, are, their reports of victory notwithstanding, being seriously affected by the measures
that have been in force for the past three years,
163. On the other hand, we must regret that in the
‘short term the populations on whose behalf the international community is acting in the long term also have
to pay, sometimes perhaps more dearly than the others,
for the obstinacy of a small group.

170. You are succeeding Ambassador de Pini&
whose presidency was marked not only by his customary brilliance and courtesy, but also by a date which
will go down in the history of the United Nations,
the first meeting of Foreign Ministers, which was presided over by the Foreign Minister of Spain.

164. For these reasons, the Organization,
like
Member States, should prefer, to recommendations
-some of which, excessive or inapplicable,
do not
bring us closer to the objectives sought-all
concrete
initiatives undertaken in concert with the administering
Power responsible which there is reason to think may
contribute
to the peaceful and complete
selfdetermination
of the inhabitants of Rhodesia.

171. My delegation understands and shares the feelings of those delegations that proposed this meeting
of the Security Council. Twenty-five years after the
signing of the Charter of the United Nations and ten
years after the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, the Declaration which we have just solemn[Y
reaffirmed ,the existence of the r&noyity- racist r&me
14

in Southern Rhodesia cannot be considered as anything
but an open challenge to the Zimbabwe people, to the
African people, to the United Nations whose fundamental principles are at stake and to the cause of peace
and security in Africa.

situation in southern Africa. The problem of Southern
Rhodesia cannot, in our opinion, be considered independently from the situation in South Africa and the
Portuguese colonies. That would be contrary to facts,
which show that the minority regime of southern
Rhodesia is the vassal of South Africa, that it is part’
of the whole ideological, military and economic system
of southern Africa. The adoption of measures against;
Southern Rhodesia without taking account of that
reality, would only reduce the effectiveness of those
measures. Sanctions under Article 41 have been
adopted by the Security Council. At fist selective,,
they were then expanded. We supported those sanctions; we continue to support them. However, they
are still not complete, still not water-tight and above,
all they still leave open the possibility of their being’
circumvented through the medium of South Africa and
the Portuguese colonies.

172. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have considered these problems, all factors have been
taken into account, a number of resolutions have been
adopted and action has been taken and yet a minority
regime representing a mere fraction of the people of
Southern Rhodesia remains in place. Moreover, they
are strengthening their position. They are hurling a
series of challenges at the African countries, the people
of Rhodesia, and to the international community as
a whole. The situation is so paradoxical that we are
bound to ask a few fundamental questions.
173. We question fist of all the political will of the
administering Power in discharging its responsibilities
to the people of Southern Rhodesia and its determination to put into effect the Declaration of 1960. The
United Kingdom has always stated that this was its
responsibility
and that it still has this responsibility.
This is the key eiement, because no one can convince
US that the determination of the administering Power
to take the necessary steps could fail to overcome a
minority of a few thousand whites.

179. The situation is now such that regardless of the
activity of the Council’s Committee
on Sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia, regardless of the measures
taken by a great number of States, the sanctions
decreed by the Council are not as effective as we would
have wished. Hence we have called for the full application and the strengthening of sanctions against the
minority regime. Hence our support for paragraph 3
of the draft resolution submitted by five Powers which
calls on all States to act in accordance with their obligations under Article 2.5 of the Charter.

174. If the administering Power had demonstrated its
determination,
then there would have been no political
or military means which would have made it possible
for the unilateral declaration of independence to be
made in 1965, nor would the political steps have been
taken which were taken afterwards, in particular, the
proclamation
of a republic.

180. We now revert to the question of the determination of all States to make those sanctions effective,
to take the necessary steps to ensure such effectiveness, The debates on the question of Southern
Rhodesia in March 1970, the two vetos cast against
the Afro-Asian draft resolutioni
at the time, the open
attempts to set aside sanctions, which have been mentioned in today’s press, indicate that that determination
is now more than ever absolutely vital to the success
of any action by the Security Council.

175. Secondly, there would have been an appropriate
response to these illegal acts; there would have been
‘determined
action and not a series of negotiations
which, with the passage of time, have only
strengthened the conviction of the Smith regime that
it had nothing to fear from abroad which would put
an end to the political and economic situation set UP
by it.

181. Let us not forget that the problem of Southern
Rhodesia is first and foremost a human problem. It
is not insoluble. It will be solved because it is impossible
to impose on the Zimbabwe people for long a regime
which is the very denial of the fundamental rights of
all men, of all people. What the United Nations can
and must do is to create all the necessary conditions
for a solution of that problem, in accordance with the
Declaration of 1960 and with the interests and wishes
of the people of Southern Rhodesia.

176. The determination of the administering Power
remains vital. The United Kingdom must back up its
words with deeds and actions.
177. We have always emphasized the need to put
an end to all co-operation and economic assistance
to the minority rCgime in Southern Rhodesia, but, as
the report of the Committee of Twenty-four9 states,
South African, as well as British and American interests, continue to prevail in Southern Rhodesia, Foreign
companies continue to work there, and as long as these
activities continue the Smith regime can only feel
economically
more secure and, what is even more
important,
morally and politically secure.

182. Poland, for its part, has recognized none of the
‘illegal steps taken by the minority regime, neither the
so-called declaration of independence of 1965, nor the
setting up of the so-called republic in 1970.
183. Poland has no relations with the illegal regime
of Ian Smith, It has always said that it is in favour
of any steps whose purpose it would be to put an end

178. We have likewise stressed the need to adopt
measures which would take into account the entire

lo See OfficialRecords of the Security Council, Twenty-fifth
Year,
SuPPlemeW for January, February and Xarch 1970, document
S/9696.

’ See Official Retards of the General Assembly, Twenty-jfth Session, Supplement No. 23, chapt. V.

1.5

to that regime, In accordance with the principles of
1 our foreign policy, we support and we shall continue
’ to support the liberation movement of the Zimbabwe
people. We shall also continue to give our full support
to whatever resolutions may be adopted by the Security
Council to bring about a just solution of the problem
of Southern Rhodesia.

190. It is the general view that this question has been
and is being considered with sufficient frequency and
thoroughness in organs of the United Nations.
Moreover, no one can say that decisions which on
the whole point in the right direction have not been
taken. It is a well-known fact that the Security Council,
having noted that the situation in Southern Rhodesia
constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
has adopted a number of decisions directed against
the racist regime which holds sway in that country,
including decisions concerning the imposition of
economic and other sanctions against that rdgime.
Those decisions of the Security Council are well known
to all and they are referred to in the draft resolution
now submitted for the consideration of the, Security
Council by the delegations
of five Afro-Asian
countries, in document S/9976. As we are all aware,
the Security Council has established a special Committee to supervise the application of sanctions against
the regime in Southern Rhodesia. All fifteen members
of the Security Council are now members of that Committee.
191. Why, then, have all these decisions proved ineffective, why have they not led to positive results? What
is the secret, so to speak, of the ineffectiveness of
the United Nations decisions? There is, in essence,
no secret whatsoever: the Southern Rhodesian racists
by themselves, if they were alone and had no outside
support, if they were without the prop of foreign help,
would not have been able to resist the turbulent onrush
of the national liberation movement of the peoples of
Africa, to challenge the United Nations or to ignore
its decisions. The crux of the matter is that the racists
in Salisbury have had, and so far still have, influential
friends and protectors. Who it is that defends them,
who protects them, is something which is also we11
known: in the first place, South Africa-and Portugal,
their direct partners and allies in the colonial bloc and
in racist terror in southern Africa; secondly, the United
Kingdom, which bears the primary responsibility for
the rise and continued existence of the Southern
Rhodesian regime; lastly, a number of the United Kingdom’s allies in the NATO military bloc.

184. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfr.om
French):
I thank the representative of Poland for the fraternal
sentiments he was so kind to express about me.
185. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republies) (translatedfi-om Russian): The Soviet delegation
would like to associate itself with the congratulations
which have been extended by previous speakers to
the outgoing President of the Security Council, Ambassador de Pin&, and to you, Mr, Ambassador, on your
assumption of this important post. We express particular satisfaction over the,fact that the current President of the Security Council is an eminent scholar,
a distinguished diplomat and a worthy representative
of a country which is friendly to us. We are confident
that your outstanding abilities, great experience and
political and scholarly erudition will enable you to discharge your duties in this responsible position brilliantly.
186. Turning to the question under consideration, the
Soviet delegation considers it essential to make the
following statement.
187. For the second time this year the Security Council is considering the question of the extremely serious
situation which has arisen in Southern Rhodesia. The
Soviet delegation has listened with great attention to
the carefully reasoned statements of the representatives of African and Asian States at today’s meeting
of the Council. The representatives of the Asian and
African countries have very convincingly analysed the
events which are taking place in Southern Rhodesia
at the present time and have asked the Security Council
to pay due attention to this problem. We share fully,
and with good reason, the justified alarm expressed
by the representatives of those States and by other
speakers over the fate of the Zimbabwe people and
the fate of peace in Africa as a whole.

192. What, then, is happening in practice to the decisions of the United Nations, to the decisions of the
Security Council concerning Southern Rhodesia? The
overwhelming majority of States in the world are
strictly observing those decisions and are not maintaining any relations or links with the Southern Rhodesian
racists, whether economic, political or of any other
kind. That is not, however, leading to the desired
results since there are some States which are sabotaging the implementation of those decisions and the sanctions against the Southern Rhodesian racists are consequently failing and proving ineffective.
193. Southern Rhodesia is openly supported by South
Africa and Portugal. The United Kingdom and a
number of other Western States carry on extensive
trade and, as before, maintain links of every kind with
the regimes at Pretoria and Lisbon. In that way,
through those racist colonialist regimes, they are in
fact maintaining indirect links with Southern Rhodesia,
too.

188. It is quite obvious that the situation in Southern
Rhodesia is deteriorating. Instead of the racist regime
being eliminated, as has been the aim of the Security
Council’s efforts and of all the decisions adopted by
it despite the stubborn opposition of the friends of the
racists in the Security Council and the General
Assembly, the position of that regime is definitely being
strengthened. That regime continues forcibly to maintain its control over the territory and people of Zimbabwe and to subject the population of the country
to increasingly cruel colonial and racist oppression and
bloody terror.
’ 189. Again and again the question arises: what is the
matter? What is the main reason for the situation which
’ has arisen? Can it be that the United Nations has not
paid sufficient attention to this question?
16

I
,
I

6

194. Furthermore, as can be seen from the relevant
documents, particularly the official report of the Committee on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia submitted to the Security Council in June of this year, a
number of States are continuing to trade directly with
Southern Rhodesia and are even investing capital in
the economy of that country in flagrant violation of
the decisions of the Security Council on sanctions.
That report shows that recently the number of cases
of .suspected sanctions-breaking has increased considerably.

Assembly [resolution 2621 (XXV)], contains a special
appeal to the Security Council to take the necessary
measures to widen the scope of the sanctions against
the illegal racist rCgime of Southern Rhodesia. Among
the measures proposed by the Assembly in this connexion there is one emphasizing the need to declare mandatory all the measures laid down in Article 41 of the
Charter. The Assembly’s resolution also contains a
proposal that the Security Council should consider the
question of imposing sanctions upon South Africa and
Portugal in view of their refusal to carry out the relevant
decisions of the Security Council,

195. A number of Western States are also giving the
Southern Rhodesian rCgime direct political and moral
support. We are all familiar with the continued manoeuvres to which the delegations of those States resort
in order to prevent the adoption of the necessary strong
measures by the Security Council and other United
Nations organs, to prevent the adoption of decisions
concerning full sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
A graphic example and confirmation of this can be
found in the actions of the representatives of the United
Kingdom and the United States in the Security Council
in March of this year [1534th meeting] when they both
used the veto at the same time in the vote on the draft
resolution submitted by a large group of countries of
Africa and Asia which, inter alia, provided for the
: extension of economic sanctions also to South Africa
and Portugal as the main violators of the Security Council decisions on the application of sanctions against
the racist rkgime of Southern Rhodesia.

199. The adoption of that programme by the Assembly was an expression of the will of the overwhelming
majority of States Members of the United Nations in
their noble aspirations and demands that measures
should be taken against the racist rkgime of Southern
Rhodesia. Only the representatives of the racist
rkgimes and the representatives of a small, narrow
group of countries which protect those r6gimes voted
against the adoption of that programme
by the
Assembly.
200. The Security Council has a duty to take account
of these demands, which have been supported by the
Assembly. It must seek and adopt effective measures
and decisions by which it can change the course of
events and deliver the peoples of the African continent
from the danger threatening them, ensure peace on
that continent and speedily free the Zimbabwe people
from the colonial and racist yoke,

196. It is perfectly clear that if the Salisbury r&me
did not enjoy the protection and support of those and
other Western Powers, if it did not receive economic
and military assistance directly from South Africa and
Portugal and through them from the Western countries
too, it could not continue to exist and to hold tyrannical
sway over the Zimbabwe people.

201. The Soviet Union, for its part, fully supports
the resolutions concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia adopted earlier by the Security Council, and
unsw&vingly complies with them. The Soviet people
manifest full solidarity with the Zimbabwe people in
their just struggle to win freedom and independence
and are assisting them in that struggle.

197. The continuation
of the current situation in
Southern Rhodesia, which constitutes a serious threat
to the security of the peoples of Africa and to international peace, cannot be tolerated. The United Nations
and its Security Council, as the organ primarily responsible for the maintenance of international peace and
security, must not, regardless of the difficulties which
exist, abandon their efforts to deliver the Zimbabwe
people from the tyranny of the racist rigime which
is in power in Southern Rhodesia. The overwhelming
majority of States in the world are in favour of theadoption of decisive and effective measures against
that rkgime. The Third Conference of the Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, which
was held at Lusaka, the capital of Zambia, from 8
to 10 September 1970, adopted a special resolution
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia. That
resolution contained a request that urgent and effective
measures should be taken to assist the just struggle
of the Zimbabwe people against racist tyranny.

202. The delegation of the USSR has carefully studied
the draft resolution submitted for the consideration of
the security Council by the group of Afro-Asian
countries. We cbnsider that this draft resolution is not
sufficiently strong, although, as it appears from the
statement by the United Kingdom representative, he
intends to reject and vote against even this weak draft
resolution. We must, however, draw attention to the
fact that, for example, the wording of paragraph 1 might
be interpreted as meaning that the Security Council
is against independence for Southern Rhodesia and in
favour of continuing colonial domination, which, of
course, as we understand it, is by no means the intention of the sponsors of the draft resolution. We are
fimrly convinced of this.
203. In the view of the Soviet delegation, therefore,
it would be advisable to have this paragraph worded
in such a way as to indicate that the Security Council
calls upon the United Kingdom to take the necessary
measures to grant immediate independence to Southern
Rhodesia with a democratic system of government in
accordance with the aspirations of the majority of the
population of that country. We are Brmly convinced

198. The programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, adopted not
long ago at the twenty-fifth session of the General
17

that such a wording would correspond more closely
to the expectations, hopes and aspirations of the 4
million people of that country, the 4 million people
of Zimbabwe.
204. Since the agenda for the meeting also includes
the question of the third report of the Committee on
Sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, it would obviously be appropriate to refer to that report in the preamble or in the operative part of the draft resolution,
even if only by taking note of it.
205. In the light of these remarks, the USSR delegation considers the five-Power draft resolution in principle acceptable and supports it.

211. Our draft resolution therefore contains, through
a simple reaffirmation of past decisions, a condemnation of such violations; it also implicitly emphasizes
the inadequacy of the sanctions and the pressing need
for more effective action by the Council. Such action
remains essential if there is at last to be an effective
remedy to the crisis in southern Africa, which poses
a real danger to international peace and security.

206. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I thank the representative of the Soviet Union, in particular for the kind words he spoke in my regard, and
I assure him that I was very touched.
207. Since there are no more speakers before the
vote, I should like, as representative of SYRIA, to
make the following statement.

212. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I wish to say
that I have no more speakers on my list. If no representative wishes to speak at this stage, I would propose
to the Council that we proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/9976.

208. My Government’s firm support for draft resolution S/9976, so eloquently introduced by the Ambassador of Nepal, which my delegation has the honour
to co-sponsor, is based on the principles of equality
among peoples and their right to self-determination,
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter
from its very first article.

j,/

210. We harbour no illusion that a resolution can put
an end to the oppression. Only the use of force can
dissuade the usurpers from their illegal enterprise.
However, the very authorities that are in a position
to apply such pressure successfully are opposed to
it. Nevertheless, it would be helpful for the international community to reaffirm its resolve. That is the
least that is expected of it. But such a reaffirmation
can bear fruit only if the previous decisions of the
Council imposing economic sanctions on the Smith
regime are no longer violated. Unfortunately,
they are
being violated, as is shown by the figures for the trade
and investment that the illegal regime continues to
enjoy, figures set forth in the report of the Sanctions
Committee.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Burundi, China, Colombia,
Finland,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.

209. However, a European minority whose settlement in Zimbabwe was facilitated, even encouraged,
by the administering Power, has succeeded in usurping
power and now seeks to deprive the majority of the
inhabitants of their political and human rights. Under
the very terms of the Charter the administering Power,
is supposed to watch over the rights of the population,
its progress and advancement towards independence;
to be sure, it has condemned the racist minority in
words, but in deeds has lamentably shrunk from using
effective means to ensure the supremacy of law and
morality. It is this failure of the administering Power
to live up to its obligations that is at the root of the
problem, That a fanatical and reactionary minority
should apply the law of the jungle can of course happen;
but that the duly vested authority should show itself
complaisant
and sometimes ready to engage in a
dialogue with the usurpers on bases not determined
‘by the rule of the majority-this
it is that encourages
the outlaws to persist in their defiance and to intensify
their oppression of the African masses. While the illegal
regime celebrates the anniversary of the unilateral
declaration
of so-called independence
‘an “independence” in which the majority counts for nothing,
in which the denial of law and justice is the rule-it
is incumbent upon the Security-Council
to reiterate
its decisions not to recognize that regime. It is likewise
incumbent upon the Council to reaffirm the responsibility of the administering Power and to emphasize its
shortcomings. Those are the principal elements of the
draft resolution.

Against:
United
Northern Ireland.
Abstaining:

Kingdom

of Great

Britain and

France, United States of America.

The result of the vote was 12 in favour,
with 2 abstentions.

I against,

The draft resolution was not adopted, the negative
vote being that of a permanent member.
213. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
I now call on the representative of Finland to explain
his vote.
214. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): Mr. President, I am
pleased to have this opportunity to extend to YOUthe
best wishes of my delegation. We know that you Will
conduct the affairs of the Council with the competence
and fairness which we are accustomed to expect from
you.
215. I am also happy to join in paying a tribute ta
last month’s President of the Council, the Ambassador
of Spain, who has made a consistently constructive
contribution to the work of this Council.
216. The Finnish delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by the five African and Asian
18

members of the Council in order to reaffirm our support
for the policy of sanctions against the illegal rbgime
in Southern Rhodesia. Although this policy has not
yet achieved its purpose it has had a number of important results. It has isolated the illegal rCgime diplomatically , economically,
legally and morally. The
Smith rBgime has been made an outcast without hope
of gaining international recognition or establishing normal relations with members of the international community.
International
pressure against the illegal
regime must be maintained and a further effort should
be made to find ways and means by which sanctions
can be applied more effectively.

graph. We have consistently made clear our support
for the right of the people of Southern Rhodesia ti,
self-determination
and majority rule. This is the aim
of this Council and, I am sure, of each of its members.
But it seems most inconsistent to reiterate in the fourth
preambular paragraph the prime responsibility of the
United
Kingdom
for the achievement
of selfdetermination in Southern Rhodesia, and immediately
thereafter in the first operative paragraph to prescribe
in advance under Chapter VII of the Charter how and
when this goal is to be achieved. Such a binding injunction could only serve further to complicate an already
most difficult situation.

217. At the same time, we must continue to keep
in view the ultimate purpose of Security Council action
in this matter, which is the upholding of the Charter
principle of equal rights for all without distinction as
to race, colour or creed, and the right of peoples to
self-determination
in accordance with that principle.

223. We share the concern of all other members of
this Council at the failure of the illegal rCgime to agree
to majority rule in Southern Rhodesia. But we believe
it unwise and unhelpful to impede the achievement
of this objective by tirescribing too rigid a framework
and time-table for its pursuit.

218. We very much regret that the unanimity which
the Council has hitherto maintained on this issue has
now broken down, This is all the more regrettable since
nothing has happened to destroy the basic unity of
purpose which has enabled the Security Council for
the first time in history to initiate and maintain a
worldwide system of economic sanctions for the purpose of putting an end to racial oppression in Southern
Rhodesia.

224. Finally, in all frankness, I must say that we are
concerned over the way in which this draft resolution
was prepared and presented to us. The representative
of Nepal, in presenting the draft, said that it was noncontroversial, but, as far as we are aware,. little or
no effbrt was made to consult in advance all the members of the Council ifi order to determine whether the
draft was in fact non-controversial. That seems to us
a pity. Given the fact that the Council has again and
again acted unanimously in regard to Rhodesia and
has taken unanimously some of the strongest measures
ever adopted by the United Nations, it should not have
been too difficult to draft a resolution which all could
have supported and which, it could be hoped, by reason
of its unanimous support would have had some impact
on the illegal rCgime in Rhodesia. Unfortunately,
that
effort was not made, and that .end has not been
achieved.

219. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Mr.
President, may I join my colleagues in congratulating
YOU on your assumption of our presidency. We look
on you both as a wise and experienced representative
of your Government and aS a widely admired member
Of our United Nations family. We are sure you will
add to your high reputation as President of thii Council.
220. I should also like to associate my delegation with
the thanks that have been expressed to the President
of the Security Council for October, the Ambassador
of Spain, for his service, particularly’ in contributing
in such a substantial way to the success of this Council’s
first periodic meeting of foreign ministers.

225, In the light of these considerations, both substantive and procedural, my delegation felt that it could
not support the draft resolution. On the other hand,
since’we agreed with almost all of it, we did not wish
to oppose it; therefore we abstained.

221, My Government’s position in opposition to the
illegal minority rkgime in Southern Rhodesia is clear
and of long-standing. Not only is this true in terms
of statements made before this Council and other
United Nations organs, but it is exemplified in my
Government’s
staunch support for the economic and
other sanctions which this Council has imposed on
Rhodesia. Moreover, our support for these measures
is not limited to United States citizens and firms. We
have-through
our active participation in the Council’s
Sanctions Committee sought to increase the effectiveness of sanctions enforcement by all States.

226. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of the United States for the very kind and courteous
words he said about me, and I assure liim they are
reciprocal.
227. At this stage I wish to say that I have been given
to understand that consultations are still proceeding
on the question under consideration and that some
Afro-Asian members may submit another draft resolution by tomorrow. So, if there is no objection, I shall
call a meeting of the Council for tomorrow at 3 p.m.
228. Sir Colin CROWE (United King_dom): I should
like to suggest that before we fix a meeting of the
Council, in order to avoid the sort of thing that happened today, we should have the text of the draft
resolution, so that we can consult upon it before we
move into a meeting. Otherwise-if,
as I see it at the
moment, there is no consultation and a draft resolution

222. It is for these reasons that my Government would
have been pleased to be able to vote for the draft resolution which was before us and would have been able
to vote for almost all of it, including four out of five
operative paragraphs, However, my delegation has
serious reservations regarding the first operative para19

is produced at about 2.30 p.m.- we shall find ourselves
in the meeting at 3 p.m. in the same position. Let
us please agree by consultation before we have the
meeting. When we are ready, then let us have a
meeting, and then we can go ahead, I hope, in unanimity, because, after all, the object of the exercise is
surely to show we are as close together as possible
and not to demonstrate our divisions.
229. Mr, MWAANGA
(Zambia): I wish to declare
in advance that my delegation has never obtained any
malicious enjoyment from the misfortunes of the
United Kingdom
over the situation in Southern
Rhodesia, Having said that, I wish to say that I have
listened with great attention to what the representative
of the United Kingdom has said. It is my delegation’s
feeling that agreement on this matter is not impossible
and we feel that it is in the interests of the people
of Southern Rhodesia that we should meet again-preferably tomorrow as you suggested, Mr. President
-with a view to arriving at some kind of solution.
Therefore I strongly support what you said in connexion with the,holding of a meeting tomorrow.
230. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation from
Sparzish): First I should like to thank all those delegations that said very kind things about my performance
as President of the Council for October. I should particularly like to thank the representatives of France,
Poland, the United States, Finland and the Soviet
Union for the very kind things they said about me
and my delegation.

23 1. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (interpretntio/z fro??1
Frc&z): In view of the late hour, my delegation will
try to be vel y brief. The delegation of Burundi wonders
how it was possible that the delegation of the United
Kingdom was not contacted when consultations were
proceeding for the meeting of the Security Council,
Last Friday the sponsors of the draft resolution took
the trouble to ask the Secretary-General of the United
Nations officially to publish the draft resolution inquestion. We are surprised at all this, because we believe
the representative of Zambia contacted the representa
tive of the United Kingdom on the matter. We wanted
to make the situation quite clear.
232. On behalf of my delegation and my Government
and on my own behalf, I should like also to express
our thanks to the twelve members that voted in favour
of the draft resolution. I think this shows that, in spite
of obstacles to the independence of the Zimbabwe
people, justice still means something to the majority
of Members of the United Nations. Our thanks go also
to the delegations of France and the United States,
which, while experiencing some difficulty, did not find
it necessary to veto the draft resolution, as the United
Kingdom did last March. That is some measure of
success, and we should like to thank them for that.
233. The PRESIDENT:
In view of the situation that
has arisen, it seems to me that I should have consultations with the members of the Council and that I should
convene a meeting after due consultations. As there
is no objection, it is so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.40 p.m.

20,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Litho

in United

Nations,

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLKATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publications
des
d4poritaires
du monde
Nations
Unier,
Section

.

NATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
lo: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Nations
Unies
sonl
en vente
dans
les librairies
et les ogencer
en&r.
Informez-vour
auprbs
de votre
libroirie
ou adrersez-vou.s
61
des venter,
New York ou Genbve.

KAK

flOJlY’IMTb

M3AAHMR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OPrAHM3Al.JMH

06bEAHHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

Price:

$U.S. 0.50

(or equivalent

HAL(IIIfi

UNIDAS

Los publicoeiones
de lar Nociones
Unidor
estCln en venta en librerias
en todos partes
del mundo.
Consulte
a IU librero
o dirljare
a: Nocioner
Ventar,
Nuevs
York o Ginebro.

New York

throughout
New York

in other

y cases distribuidaros
Unidor,
Sac&n

currencies)

de

82145-August

197%2,050
