S/2019/612

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2019
Original: English

Ninth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 1 (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) and associated
individuals and groups. In paragraph 97 of the resolution, the Council requested that
I provide an initial strategic-level report on the threat, followed by updates every four
months. In its resolution 2368 (2017), the Council requested that I continue to
provide, every six months, strategic-level reports that reflect the gravity of the threat,
as well as the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in
countering the threat.
2.
This is my ninth report on the threat posed by ISIL to international peace and
security. 2 The report was prepared by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, 3 in close
collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, other United Nations entities and
international organizations.
3.
It is noted in the report that, in the after math of the territorial defeat of ISIL,
ISIL continues to aspire to global relevance, in particular through its affiliates and
inspired attacks. The continuing concerns posed by returning fighters and their family
members are also noted. Moreover, the report highlights ongoing threats and
challenges, including the fact that the current lull in directed attacks by ISIL may be
temporary, and the urgent need to address the processing and repatriation of detainees
and internally displaced persons, including having to confront humanitarian,
logistical, jurisdictional and human rights challenges while addressing security
concerns.

__________________

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97, S/2017/467, S/2018/80, S/2018/770 and
S/2019/103.
3
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban associated individuals and
entities.
1
2

19-12412 (E)

010819

*1912412*

S/2019/612

II. Threat assessment
A.

Overview of threat/Middle East
4.
The period under review saw the completion of the military defeat of ISIL in
the Syrian Arab Republic, with the fall of Baghuz in March 2019. Many ISIL fighters
died trying to defend the last remnant of the so-called “caliphate”. A larger number,
both fighters and dependents, left the area before and after it fell , forming part of a
wave of internal displacement into camps and detention facilities in the north -east of
the Syrian Arab Republic. The population of Hawl camp alone increased more than
sevenfold in early 2019, to more than 70,000, generating acute humani tarian and
security concerns among Member States.
5.
The evolution of a covert ISIL network at the provincial level in Iraq since 2017
is now being mirrored in the Syrian Arab Republic, with attacks increasing in areas
controlled by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. ISIL personnel, including
some senior figures, are also reported to have taken refuge in governorates where
hostilities are ongoing. The high concentration of extremist elements, including
foreign terrorist fighters in these areas, is assessed to pose a serious potential threat. 4
6.
Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 5 is reported to be in Iraq, along with most of the mainly
Iraqi leadership of the ISIL leadership, while others also remain in or close to the
former “caliphate” area. The difficulty in meeting, communicating and moving
money and supplies has necessitated the delegation of authority, including to regional
affiliates. The ISIL core has continued the process of drawing down to protect its
essential personnel and functions. It is unable to support foreign terrorist fighters,
preferring to focus on the survival of its leaders and Syrian and Iraqi fighters after its
territorial defeat. 6
7.
ISIL insurgency activity in Iraq, including the burning of crops, is designed to
prevent normalization and reconstruction, in the hope that the local population will
ultimately blame the Iraqi authorities. A similar approach is anticipated in the Syrian
Arab Republic. ISIL still has many fighters and other supporters and is pursuing a
strategy of consolidating and creating the conditions for an eventual resurgence, an
outcome that cannot yet be ruled out in parts of the former “caliphate” area.
8.
By contrast, ISIL is not well established in the Arabian Peninsula. In 2018, three
attempted operations by ISIL were disrupted in Saudi Arabia, leading to the death of
six terrorists and eight members of the security forces in what were described as
rudimentary plots planned mostly by lone actors. In Yemen, fighting between
Al-Qaida and ISIL has continued to weaken both. Given its lack of local acceptance,
and the range of forces confronting it, ISIL in Yemen is assessed as unlikely to recover
in strength or attract foreign terrorist fighters.
9.
Meanwhile, ISIL continues to aspire to global relevance, as illustrated by
Baghdadi’s video late in April 2019, which highlighted its affiliates. The dispersed,
delegated leadership approach entails giving specific better-established ISIL affiliates
responsibility for supporting lesser or newer ones. This approach also extract s
maximum propaganda value from inspired attacks, as demonstrated by the
leadership’s reaction to the Easter Sunday bombings in Sri Lanka, which Baghdadi
celebrated but was not aware of before they happened. With the exception of the
Easter Sunday bombings, these inspired attacks on which ISIL is currently hoping to

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Listed as Ibrahim Awwad Ibrahim Ali al-Badri al-Samarrai (QDi.299).
6
Information provided by a Member State.
4
5

2/17

19-12412

S/2019/612

rely on often lack tradecraft and resources, so that many are disrupted and those that
succeed tend to be relatively low-impact.
10. Member States expect the current lull in directed international attacks to be
temporary. They expect ISIL to revive its external operational capability as soon as
circumstances allow, either in the core area or in the area of its affiliates. The latter
tend to be localized conflict zones that attract foreign terrori st fighters from within
the region or others who have a cultural affinity with it. Afghanistan remains the best
established of these and is one where external attack planning ambitions exist, and a
capability may follow. Notwithstanding significant ISIL ac tivity in West Africa and
South-East Asia, it is not clear that these presences are focusing beyond regional
issues.
11. The loss of territory by ISIL coincides with an end to the group ’s ability to
generate revenue from local populations and extractive i ndustries, in particular the
petroleum sector. At the same time, the group is left with significant residual wealth,
estimated to be as much as $300 million, with none of the financial demands of
controlling territory and population. The group is believed to be capable of directing
funds to support terrorist acts both within Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and
abroad, while encouraging increased financial self-sufficiency throughout its
network. Notwithstanding the spread of new payment technologies, cash couriers and
unregistered money service businesses or hawaladars remain the most common
methods of transferring funds to and from ISIL. These methods are also among the
most difficult for authorities to identify and interdict.
12. According to one Member State, the past looting of Iraqi antiquities at historical
sites in Nineveh, Diyala, Anbar and Kirkuk Provinces was financially motivated.
Returnees from the conflict zone who had held finance positions reported that ISIL
had created a unit within the Diwan for Natural Resources specifically responsible
for the selling of antiquities. When that Diwan was dissolved, the unit moved to the
Diwan of Finance. Details of antiquities traded and the current location of any stored
antiquities are assessed to be known only to ISIL leaders. 7
Foreign terrorist fighters
13. Member States remain concerned about the challenges posed by foreign terrorist
fighters, returnees and relocators, even though relocators have not yet appeared in
large numbers and returnees have not yet emerged as leading terrorist actors.
Estimates by several Member States of the attrition rate at the global level for foreign
terrorist fighters average 25 per cent killed and 15 per cent unaccounted for. Set
against an approximate initial figure of 40,000 who joined the “caliphate”, these
percentages would suggest that between 24,000 and 30,000 foreign terrorist fighters
are alive. 8
14. Member States have different approaches to processing and repatriating women,
including internally displaced persons. Factors taken into account under each
approach include whether mothers and children are held together, the difficulty of
establishing parentage and the nationality of minors and the specific legal protections
afforded to minors. Regardless of the complexities, the conditions in overcrowded
camps such as Hawl make it clear that these challenges, if ignored, will not resolve
themselves. Nevertheless, the logistical, jurisdictional and human rights complexities
of addressing detainees and displaced persons in the Syrian Arab Republic, and to
some extent in Iraq, require concerted efforts and have increasingly become the focus
of international attention.
__________________
7
8

19-12412

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
3/17

S/2019/612

15. The threats posed in the short term by adult detainees and in the medium to long
term by minors who are often traumatized and may become increasingly radicalized
have the potential to grow more serious, with consequences for social integration and
the potential risk of violence, including possible terrorist attacks in the future. Some
individuals may join Al-Qaida or other listed groups if the underlying factors that
gave rise to ISIL remain unaddressed. Challenges in the justice and corrections
systems in a number of countries, if not properly addressed, can also end up creating
the conditions for radicalization in prison and increase the risk of future attacks.

B.

Regional trends

1.

Africa
16. In Libya, fighting around the capital, which began with the Libyan National
Army offensive in April 2019, created a security vacuum in the southern
governorates, especially in Sabha and Awbari. This vacuum was exploited by ISIL,
and its members were able to launch several attacks on a number of cities, including
Zillah, Fuqaha’ and Fazzan. In addition, in April 2019, the Government of Nationa l
Accord was able to apprehend an ISIL member plotting to carry out attacks in the
capital. Notwithstanding their dwindling numbers, ISIL fighters continue to pose a
threat in the subcoastal region extending from the oil fields in the east to the borders
with Algeria in the west. The group reportedly maintains control over some cash
reserves that it had seized from Sirte while the city was under its control. ISIL is also
said to be trying to invest in small and medium-sized enterprises in major coastal
cities. Other sources of income include the extortion of citizens and the taxation of
human trafficking networks. In addition, it was reported that at least 1 million euros
was paid as ransom to free workers belonging to an oil company in southern Libya. 9
17. A number of terrorist cells affiliated with ISIL were disrupted in Morocco. Some
of those apprehended had reportedly returned from fighting in the core conflict zone
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, aided by trafficking networks and forged
European identification documents. In Sinai, the area of operations of Ansar Bayt
al-Maqdis, which pledged allegiance to Baghdadi and is reported to include up to
1,000 members, is confined to locations around three towns constituting
approximately 3 per cent of the area of the Peninsula. 10 Egypt asserts that the group
is a local phenomenon without any operational or financial ties to the ISIL core.
18. With regard to returned foreign terrorist fighters from the core conflict zone to
North Africa, the movement of fighters in small numbers to Algeria and Libya was
detected through the Sudan. Algeria reportedly intercepted approximately 100 Syrians
who had attempted to enter the country through its southern borders, with assistance
from criminal networks, after having transited Turkey and the Sudan using falsified
documents. 11
19. West Africa, meanwhile, has witnessed a striking increase in ISIL and Al -Qaidalinked recruitment and violence. National borders in the region are porous and
national authorities ill-prepared to address the threat. 12 For example, one border area,
the “W Regional Park” in Benin, Burkina Faso and the Niger, is being used
increasingly as a base by Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and other terrorist
groups. Some of these are Al-Qaida-aligned but are willing to cooperate with ISIL

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
11
Information provided by a Member State.
12
Information provided by a Member State.
9

10

4/17

19-12412

S/2019/612

affiliates and collectively encroach across the borders into coastal States. Two French
nationals were abducted in Pendjari park in Benin in May 2019.
20. The attacks of Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, mostly in Mali and the Niger,
are now being publicized by Islamic State’s West Africa Province, based in Nigeria,
demonstrating hub-and-spoke coordination between the two affiliates in the wider
region. They may have cooperated in the May 2019 attack on Nigerien forces in Tongo
Tongo and aspire to turn the Nigerian city of Sokoto into a joint logistical base. 13
21. Islamic State’s West Africa Province continues to operate mainly in Nigeria ’s
north-eastern Borno and Yobe Provinces in the Lake Chad Basin, while it has also
increased pressure on defence and security forces in Diffa, the neighbouring region
of eastern Niger. 14 Islamic State’s West Africa Province has also continued at an
intense operational tempo, with a high level of violence and attrition against loc al
security forces. It is believed to have some 4,000 fighters, in which respect it now
ranks alongside Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (QDe.161) as the
strongest ISIL regional affiliate. It is also seeking to attract foreign terrorist fighte rs,
with only very limited results to date.
22. In Somalia, Member States reported that the previous uneasy calm between
Al-Shabaab and ISIL had not lasted long. In Puntland, where ISIL had made minor
inroads, and in Mogadishu, clashes broke out early in 2019. ISIL in Somalia came
under pressure both from Al-Shabaab and from continuing enforcement operations of
the African Union Mission in Somalia. Al-Shabab was then able to occupy some ISIL
bases in Puntland and force ISIL underground, even in its Ceelash a Biyahastronghold
near Mogadishu. Notwithstanding those reverses, ISIL managed to retain some
operational bases and could still conduct limited assassination operations against
business figures and government officials in Boosaaso.
23. The territorial losses of ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and the
weakened state of its Somalia affiliate were reported by Member States to have given
momentum to Madina Tawheed Waljihad, 15 a group that emerged in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in November 2017. Madina Tawheed Waljihad hoisted the ISIL
flag and pledged allegiance to Baghdadi at its base in Medina, Beni Region, North
Kivu. Although the ISIL core has not yet formally accepted the Madina Tawheed
Waljihad pledge of allegiance, the group continues to try to communicate with them
and to attract relocating foreign terrorist fighters to augment its ranks. Some Member
States attribute increased activities by Madina Tawheed Waljihad operatives, most of
them self-radicalized lone actors, to Baghdadi’s 22 August 2018 speech instructing
fighters to deploy to various locations, including Central Africa. Madina Tawheed
Waljihad was further encouraged by Baghdadi’s April 2019 video, featuring a banner
of the Islamic State’s Central Africa Province alongside its other affiliates, and started
to operate under the Islamic State’s Central Africa Province banner.
24. Member States from the region expressed concern throughout early 2019 about
the increased momentum and frequency of operations by Islamic State’s Central
Africa Province. Although at a nascent stage, they assess that the group has the
potential to evolve, attract relocators from the region and beyond, and build
connections with other ISIL affiliates in Africa. One Member State reported that ISIL
in Somalia had been instructed by the ISIL core to move funds to other regional
affiliates, including one instance in which it was tasked with providing financial
support for operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

__________________

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
15
Also known as Madina Tawheed wal Muwahedeen.
13
14

19-12412

5/17

S/2019/612

25. Some other Member States offer the alternative perspective that ISIL claims
may be opportunistic, given that they see no evidence of ISIL directing the attacks or
having contact with the perpetrators. While acknowledging that the ISIL threat in
Central Africa is evolving, these Member States assess Islamic State’s Central Africa
Province as a rebranding of the Allied Democratic Forces–National Army for the
Liberation of Uganda movement, which they see as primarily concentrating on
survival and lacking developed operational capabilities.
2.

Europe
26. During the reporting period, a reduced incidence of successful attacks was
reported, but Member States in the region judged that the risk remained high.
Notwithstanding online propaganda that highlights various attack methodologies and
online tutorials on how to build home-made chemical and biological weapons, the
threat of ISIL using weapons of mass destruction is assessed to remain low owing to
the complexity of building and delivering such devices undetected by authorities. 16
27. Member States expressed growing concern about homegrown terrorism and the
related potential for domestically driven, inspired attacks at a time when ISIL finds it
difficult to send operatives to Europe. Meanwhile, a relatively high disruption rate of
attacks was noted, owing to poor tradecraft and the low sophistication of would -be
attackers.
28. Radicalization in prison remains a major concern in Europe. Prisons can provide
a venue for radical ideologies to be shared among inmates afflicted by poverty,
marginalization, discrimination, low self-esteem and violence.
29. According to regional Member States in the region, an estimated 5,000–6,000
foreign terrorist fighters travelled from Europe to the conflict zone in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic. Of those, 75 per cent joined ISIL. The number reported killed
amounts to 30 to 40 per cent, while 10 to 15 per cent remain detained in the region,
10 to 15 per cent may have relocated and 30 to 40 per cent may have returned to
Europe. Many remain unaccounted for.
30. Member States report that most returnees, notwithstanding having become
disillusioned with terrorist practices or disappointed with life under ISIL, retain
extremist views. Concerns therefore remain high about the risk posed by returnees, in
particular the most combat-hardened fighters, upon release from prison, and the
sometimes-limited effectiveness of deradicalization programmes.
31. Member States in the region continue to highlight the challenges posed by
dependents of European foreign terrorist fighters living in detention or other camps
in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. Data collection on the numb er of repatriated
European nationals remains a challenge.

3.

Asia
32. The attempted travel of Central Asian foreign terrorist fighters to the Syrian
Arab Republic, and, to a lesser extent, Afghanistan, continues, albeit on a much
smaller scale than in previous years. Since 2012, approximately 1,500 fighters from
Tajikistan and the same estimated number of Uzbek nationals joined established
terrorist groups, with 45 percent believed to be alive. 17 In addition, approximately
2,000 nationals of the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States are
detained in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. Since the start of 2019, 524 of

__________________
16
17

6/17

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
19-12412

S/2019/612

this number, almost all women and children, were repatriated by Kazakhstan, 156 by
Uzbekistan and 84 by Tajikistan.
33. Online propaganda in Central Asian native languages promotes travel to the
conflict zone, fundraising and the establishment of sleeper cells in their home
countries. The Member States in the region are concerned about new fighters and
terrorist sympathizers who are recruited and ordered to stay in their home countries.
In 2019, as a result of a joint operation conducted by special services in the region,
26 ISIL members were arrested, some of them returnees. 18
34. Central Asian countries remain concerned about the terrorist threat emanating
from northern Afghanistan, where Central Asian groups cooperate with organized
criminal networks engaged in drug trafficking across the Afghan -Tajik border, also
using these routes to have fighters enter Central Asia. These groups and individuals
are ostensibly aligned with the Taliban and Al-Qaida, but Member States are
concerned that some of them harbour sympathies with ISIL and might one day decide
to join Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan, which currently has a Central
Asian contingent of approximately 200 fighters. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant Khorasan losses in eastern Afghanistan prompted a leadership change in the first half
of 2019, which took place in the presence of a visiting delegation of l eaders of the
ISIL core. Both entities are assessed to maintain a close command -and-control
relationship.
35. In 2019, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan suffered a number of
military defeats and was forced to decrease the regularity of its atta cks. The group
tried to infiltrate Paktiya and Logar Provinces in south-eastern Afghanistan but was
ultimately unsuccessful. The group is still concentrated in Nangarhar and Kunar
Provinces and has no visible, organized presence outside eastern Afghanistan . On the
basis of a range of Member State assessments, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant Khorasan currently numbers between 2,500 and 4,000 fighters, including foreign
terrorist fighters. 19
36. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan is reported by Member States to
maintain a robust capability to derive income from the exploitation from local
mineral, lumber and talc resources. The group also engages in extortion of the local
population and kidnaping for ransom. There is broad agreement among Membe r
States that it continues to eschew involvement in the narcotics business.
37. Member States in the South Asia region expressed concern about dynamics of
ISIL activities within the region. As ISIL continues its evolution into a global network
inspiring and directing terrorism, it seeks to build platforms for operations in areas
where it has not been active before. Notwithstanding the claim of responsibility by
ISIL, Member State investigations revealed that the ISIL core did not direct or
facilitate the attacks or even know about them in advance. It was a locally instigated
and led attack inspired by ISIL ideology. The bombings were conducted by local
groups, National Towheet Jama’at and Jammiyatul Millatu Ibrahim, albeit with some
foreign connections: some of the suicide bombers had travelled to the Syrian Arab
Republic and received weapons training with ISIL.
38. ISIL affiliates continue to demonstrate an ability to launch attacks in South -East
Asia, targeting places of worship. The role of women in planning and executing
attacks is a worrying development. The attack on 27 January 2019 by the Abu Sayyaf
Group, an ISIL affiliate, on a Roman Catholic cathedral in southern Mindanao, the
Philippines, caused one of the highest death tolls in the region from a single attack,
killing at least 20 people and wounding more than 100. Indonesian authorities
__________________
18
19

19-12412

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
7/17

S/2019/612

disrupted a terror plot by Jamaah Ansharut Daulah in May 2019 involving bombs
timed to detonate at the time of the country’s elections. Malaysian authorities
announced the arrest of terrorists who had received explosives training from Jamaah
Ansharut Daulah and who were targeting non-Muslim places of worship. Member
States have expressed concern that the explicit targeting of places of worship in
South-East Asia and Sri Lanka may reflect a new trend in ISIL operations.

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
39. Since my previous report, the United Nations, Member States and international,
regional and subregional organizations continue to strengthen, refine and promote the
use of effective tools and measures to address the threat posed by ISIL, its affiliates
and supporters, and by returning or relocating foreign terrorist fighters.
40. The United Nations has continued to galvanize international cooperation
through a series of regional conferences that the Office of Counter-Terrorism has been
organizing as a follow-up to the first-ever High-level Conference of Heads of
Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States that I convened in New York in June
2018. The first conference in this series, hosted by the Government of Tajikistan in
cooperation with the United Nations, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, was held in Dushanbe in May 2019 on
“International and regional cooperation on countering terrorism and its financing
through illicit drug trafficking and organized crime ”. A conference on a “‘Whole-ofsociety approach’ to preventing and countering violent extremism and radicalization
that lead to terrorism” was held in Mongolia in June 2019. The African Regional
High-level Conference on Counter-Terrorism and the Prevention of Violent
Extremism Conducive to Terrorism, inaugurated by the President of Kenya and me in
Nairobi in July 2019, also confirmed that, while Member States have the primary
responsibility for countering terrorism, they benefit from strengthened regional an d
subregional cooperation and from coordinated assistance to support the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. In total, 1,497 delegates
attended the conference in Nairobi.
41. In April 2019, my Under-Secretary-General of the Office of Counter-Terrorism
also chaired the second meeting of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Compact Coordination Committee, which approved the revitalized structure of the
Global Compact working groups and their relevant terms of reference and workplans
for the period 2019–2020. The Committee also directed the development of a joint
programme of work for 2019–2020, which will be implemented through streamlined
“All-of-United Nations” working groups based on the thematic priorities of Member
States and aligned with the four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy.

B.

Responding to the loss of territorial control of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant
Current situation and repatriation efforts
42. Member States continue to face multiple challenges in bringing ISIL members
and affiliates and supporters, including foreign terrorist fighters, to justice with fair
trial guarantees and in accordance with their obligations under international law.
Since my last report, thousands of suspected ISIL fighters, and an even greater

8/17

19-12412

S/2019/612

number of suspected ISIL-affiliated women and children, have been detained in Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic following the loss of territorial control of ISIL. Their
detention has raised questions regarding jurisdiction, evidence and criminal
responsibility, which require urgent resolution, including from the perspective of
international human rights law and international humanitarian law.
43. The deteriorating situation faced by thousands of people, some with links to
United Nations-listed terrorist groups, most of whom are women and children, who
remain stranded in overcrowded camps in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic is
increasingly untenable. These individuals have limited access to food, medical care,
a fair trial and other fundamental rights and services.
44. In March 2019, the United Nations system developed key principles for the
protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of women and
children with links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups. The aim of the principles
is to enhance the coherence of United Nations activities in this area to better assist
Member States, including by using the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact framework. I believe that these principles will also assist
Member States in their efforts to design and implement policies and action in line
with international law, including international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.
45. Member States have primary responsibility for their own nationals, including in
the provision of consular services, legal documentation and other fundamental rights
and services, as well as in criminal prosecution. Policies and actions that lead to
statelessness should be avoided, including from a security perspective.
46. While some Member States have repatriated or are in the process of repatriating
their nationals, others are yet to develop clear policies on how to handle such cases.
I recognize that Member States face significant legal, practical and operational
challenges relating to the repatriation of their nationals, including women and
children, from territories previously controlled by ISIL.
47. Several Eurasian States, including Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, the Russian
Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, have repatriated young children, including
orphans, from Iraq or the Syrian Arab Republic. Kazakhstan was among the first
States to undertake a large-scale operation to repatriate its nationals (mainly women
and children) from the Syrian Arab Republic. In May 2019, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms while countering terrorism concluded a visit to Kazakhstan, in which she
noted the country’s pivotal role in efforts to repatriate its citizens who had travelled
to ISIL-held territories to join the group. In June 2019, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concern at the fate of detained family
members of alleged ISIL fighters, calling upon States to repatriate their citizens, and
for those with proven links to crimes committed by ISIL, to be prosecuted for those
crimes in accordance with international standards. 20
Prosecution
48. Member States, with the support of relevant United Nations entities, should
continue to work with those States most affected by ISIL to bring their nationals to
justice, including through the implementation of the 2018 addendum to the guiding
principles on foreign terrorist fighters.
49. Pursuant to its counter-terrorism law, Iraq has prosecuted suspected Iraqi and
foreign ISIL members accused of committing terrorism offences in Iraq or in
__________________
20

19-12412

See www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=24724&LangID=E.
9/17

S/2019/612

neighbouring conflict zones. United Nations entities in Iraq have reported ongoing
challenges in upholding the right to a fair trial. In April 2019, the United Nations
Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions called upon Iraq
to ensure that the prosecution of ISIL leadership is carried out in a transparent, fair
and thorough manner and to include the participation of victims in the legal process.
50. In June 2019, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 20 made
clear that all individuals – men and women – who are suspected of crimes should face
investigation and prosecution with guarantees of due process. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq continues to monitor and report on the treatment of
individuals detained in camps, as well as the application of the counter-terrorism law
of Iraq, with a view to assisting the Government of Iraq in ensuring that the law is
applied in accordance with international human rights standards and includes access
to justice for victims of crimes committed by ISIL.
51. Challenges identified in my previous report regarding risks of radicalization to
violence in prisons persist in many Member States. They include a lack of adequate
tools to assess the risks posed by prisoners or assess their needs and insufficient
capacity to detect early signs of radicalization to violence. In many Member States,
these challenges are further compounded by a lack of resources, prison overcrowding
and poor conditions of detention and treatment of prisoners, contrary to the United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela
Rules).
52. The lack of separation between pre-trial and post-trial detainees poses the risk
of spreading violent extremism that may be conducive to terrorism. The detention of
individuals in such conditions can hinder the capacities of States to address the facts
and grievances that may spur prisoners to join violent extremist groups, as highlighted
in my Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
Rehabilitation and reintegration
53. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, acting in close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, through the joint project on violent extremist
prisoners, continue to provide assistance to Member States aimed at strengthening
security and safety in prisons and enhancing risk and needs assessments,
rehabilitation and social reintegration. Training activities relating to raising
awareness and expertise in prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies
include the effective use of alternatives to imprisonment to decrease the unnecessary
use of imprisonment and pre-trail detention, including for terrorism-related offences.
Since my previous report, prison staff in beneficiary countries have been trained in
prison security techniques.
54. Efforts to rehabilitate and reintegrate prisoners into society, including those
convicted of terrorism offences, need to be further strengthened to provide prisoners
with alternatives to violent extremism and to prevent recidivism. Many States
continue to encounter significant challenges in their efforts to comply with the
requirement of the Security Council to develop and implement comprehensive and
tailored prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for suspected terrorists
and returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters. Those challenges include
knowledge gaps about the location of returnees and relocators, and insufficient
enabling legislation, law enforcement capacity or inter-agency cooperation. In many
cases, Member States have introduced measures that address only one aspect of the
required response, such as the development of disengagement programmes in prisons,
but are not situated within a comprehensive, whole-of-government prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration umbrella. Large numbers of suspects continue to be
10/17

19-12412

S/2019/612

detained, in the absence of policies or legal provisions that enable the relevant
government institutions to manage large caseloads within a reasonable time frame or
to implement tailored responses that incorporate specific considerations relating to
women or children.
55. For some African Member States that have expressed increased interest in the
development and implementation of transitional justice approaches, there is a need to
anchor these in coherent policies and ensure compliance with Security Council
resolutions and international human rights standards, in particular where travel back
and forth across borders, such as in the Lake Chad Basin, is common. The CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate continues to work with UNODC, the
International Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and other United Nations entities to assist States in developing
regional approaches to screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration, as part
of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin. Those approaches recognize the need for
informed decision-making by the relevant authorities, facilitated by an initial screening
process that is based on clear criteria and implemented by an inter-agency body.
56. With the assistance of IOM and supported by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Government of the Niger has made significant progress in
screening some 200 individuals associated with Boko Haram who have been held at
the Goudoumaria camp since 2017. The law enforcement unit responsible for
terrorism investigations has made recommendations with respect to each individual,
whether for further investigation, prosecution or diversion into rehabilitation. The
criteria used in making those recommendations have included the comm ission of a
terrorist offence and its seriousness, as well as other factors, such as age and the
conditions under which the individual joined Boko Haram. Cameroon and Chad are
considering establishing similar screening systems.
57. Although these efforts are to be welcomed, significant challenges remain and are
further compounded by consideration of the use of amnesties or exemptions from
prosecution to incentivize surrenders. When such approaches lead to impunity for gross
violations of human rights, they violated international legal standards, frustrate victims
and communities and undermine compliance with relevant Security Council
resolutions. The national approaches being developed by the Lake Chad Basin States to
deal with persons associated with United Nations-listed terrorist groups should be based
on laws and policies that are compliant with the applicable international legal
frameworks and ensure accountability and the rights of victims, including to reparation.
58. Member States continue to encounter challenges in developing tailored
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies that consider the roles,
motivations and experiences of women linked to terrorist groups. To assist Member
States in developing and implementing gender-sensitive approaches to the
prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of women linked to terrorist groups,
UNODC published the Handbook on Gender Dimensions of Criminal Justice
Responses to Terrorism. Capacity-building activities on the gender dimension and
women’s rights have been delivered in several States in North and West Africa. In
Iraq, UNODC is supporting the efforts of the Government to strengthen the role of
women in law enforcement and in judicial institutions dealing with terrorism cases.
59. In February 2019, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
its trends report entitled “The gender dimensions of the response to returning foreign
terrorist fighters: research perspectives”, 21 found, among other things, that
__________________
21

19-12412

Also available in Arabic at www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/03282019_Trends_
Report_Arabic.pdf.
11/17

S/2019/612

(a) significant knowledge gaps remained with respect to the number and profiles of
women who travelled to and returned from ISIL-held territory, owing to inconsistent
gender-disaggregated data collection; and (b) women tended to receive more limited
rehabilitation and reintegration support, potentially putting them at greater risk of
marginalization and re-radicalization. The Directorate continues to work in
collaboration with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to further strengthen the evidence base on the
drivers of women’s radicalization to terrorism and the impact of counter-terrorism
strategies on women’s human rights.
60. Efforts have also been made to assist Member States in preventing and
responding to violence against children recruited and exploited by terrorist and
violent extremist groups. UNODC has developed a training package consisting of the
Handbook on Children Recruited and Exploited by Terrorist and Violent Extremist
Groups: the Role of the Justice System and three corresponding training manuals.

C.

International judicial cooperation
61. International cooperation, including through mutual legal assistance and
extradition, remains key to addressing transnational operational challenges that
national judicial and law enforcement authorities frequently encounter in terrorist
cases. States should also consider developing and participating in regional
inter-agency judicial and law enforcement cooperation platforms or networks to
facilitate the timely gathering and sharing of information and evidence relating to
suspected terrorists, in accordance with international law.
62. The United Nations is facilitating such cooperation. For example, in the Middle
East and North Africa region, UNODC has supported the development of a
specialized network of focal points for judicial and law enforcement cooperation on
terrorist cases, including cases relating to foreign terrorist fighters: the Multi -Agency
Task Force for the Middle East and North Africa Region. Within the Task Force, focal
points work together to analyse operational challenges encountered in cases involving
foreign terrorist fighters, share good practices in response to those challenges, discuss
ongoing cases and exchange information. The Task Force, with the support of
UNODC, has developed a practical guide to the preparation and transmission of
effective cooperation requests to its constituent Member States.
Digital evidence
63. The United Nations has responded to requests from Member States for
assistance in preserving and obtaining admissible digital evidence in a timely manner
for use in court cases relating to terrorism, including foreign terrorist fighters. The
International Association of Prosecutors and UNODC, in close cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, have continued to provide
technical assistance to Member States seeking to address terrorist abuse of
information and communications technologies and to bring perpetrators to justice,
within the framework of the global initiative on strengthening the capacity of central
authorities, prosecutors and investigators in preserving and obtaining electronic
evidence in counter-terrorism and related cross-border investigations. During the
reporting period, States of sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, South-East Asia, the
Pacific Islands and Latin America received technical assistance in order address the
main challenges and good practices associated with the use of electronic data,
including through engagement with the private sector. The project’s Practical Guide
for Requesting Electronic Evidence Across Borders is currently being used to train
relevant officials.

12/17

19-12412

S/2019/612

D.

Supporting victims of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
ensuring accountability
Investigative efforts of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
64. The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) has made
significant progress in operationalizing its mandate to support efforts in Iraq to hold
ISIL accountable for its crimes by collecting, preserving and storing evidence of acts
that might amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. Core
staffing, facilities and initial evidence-collection practices are now in place and initial
documentary, digital, testimonial and forensic material is being collected in
accordance with the team’s investigative strategy (see S/2019/407), which
emphasizes the forensic analysis of mass grave sites and the exhumation of victims ’
remains. In March and April 2019, the first set of excavations took place in the villa ge
of Kojo, in Sinjar, in north-western Iraq, in cooperation with the Government of Iraq.
Conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
65. On 23 April 2019, the Security Council adopted resolution 2467 (2019) on
sexual violence in armed conflict. The Council, in the resolution, reiterated that sexual
and gender-based violence can be part of the strategic objectives and ideology of, and
used as a tactic by, terrorist groups, and recognized the victims of sexual violence
perpetrated by terrorist groups as victims of terrorism, with the purpose of rendering
them eligible for official support and redress as victims of terrorism.
66. It is essential to comprehensively address the needs of survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence, including by upholding the rights of families with alleged
affiliations to ISIL and other United Nations-listed terrorist groups, and to improve
service delivery and support for survivors in all settings. All Member States should
investigate and prosecute ISIL operatives for their crimes, including crimes of sexual
violence and trafficking in persons, and to do so in accordance with international law,
including international humanitarian law and international human rights law, in
particular regarding ensuring a fair trial. Any State hosting refugee populations who
are victims of crimes of sexual violence committed by ISIL should also ensure that
local prosecution services provide those individuals with access to formal justice in a
victim-sensitive manner.
67. I am extremely concerned at the situation of victims of sexual slavery and other
forms of sexual violence committed by ISIL fighters who are currently displaced in
camps. Those victims, and in some cases their children born of sexual violence, have
not been reintegrated into their communities of origin. While the efforts of Member
States to identify missing women and children who were abducted by ISIL continue,
further assistance is needed to locate and reunite families when possible and provide
reintegration services and support for victims, including victims of sexual violence
and abduction.
68. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict continue to help the
Government of Iraq to work towards the full implementation of the Joint
Communiqué on bringing ISIL perpetrators of sexual violence to justice and
providing redress and relief to survivors. Member States should support the
Government in its efforts to recover from the devastating impact of sexual violence
perpetrated by ISIL on Iraqi communities. Member States should ensure the legal
recognition of children conceived through rape as victims of sexual violence and put
in place special birth registration procedures to protect them from becoming stateless

19-12412

13/17

S/2019/612

and provide them with opportunities to obtain essential services. Religious and
traditional leaders are strongly encouraged to alleviate sti gma and support the
reintegration of women and their children into their communities.

E.

Counter-financing of terrorism
69. Preventing ISIL and its supporters from raising, moving and using funds
remains a key component of international efforts to co unter the group’s threat. Since
my previous report, the Security Council has undertaken various initiatives aimed at
strengthening the responses of Member States, the international community and the
United Nations in this area. In January 2019, at a Security Council Arria formula
meeting on preventing and countering the financing of terrorism, there was discussion
on gaps in responses by States and on ways to further strengthen legal and institutional
frameworks established to counter terrorism financing.
70. On 28 March 2019, the Security Council adopted resolution 2462 (2019), under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, the first -ever Council resolution
devoted solely to preventing and suppressing terrorism financing. The resolution
brings a new focus on assessing and understanding terrorism financing risks, the
strategic role of financial intelligence in counter-terrorism efforts and the importance
of public-private partnerships and effective domestic and international coordination,
cooperation and information-sharing. The Council, in the resolution, also urged States
implementing counter-financing of terrorism measures to consider the potential effect
on exclusively humanitarian activities carried out by impartial humanitarian actors in
accordance with international humanitarian law. The resolution will enable the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to strengthen its counterfinancing of terrorism assessments by conducting targeted and focused follow-up
visits and by issuing, in consultation with the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, an annual thematic summary of gaps to assist in the design of
tailored capacity-building programming by United Nations entities.
71. During the reporting period, the Office of Counter-Terrorism received a growing
number of requests from Member States and Financial Action Task Force -style
regional bodies for support in their efforts to assess the vulnerability of their
non-profit sectors to abuse for terrorism-financing purposes and ensure that measures
are targeted and effective. It is imperative that measures in this area are not overly
broad so as to negatively affect the operational capacity of civil society organizations
writ large. This is a result of United Nations efforts to raise awareness of the
vulnerabilities of some non-profit organizations to terrorist financing and of the need
for targeted responses to address these, while preserving the vital role played by civil
society and non-profit organizations in ensuring holistic approaches to counter
terrorism and prevent violent extremism. This included an expert consultation in
Mauritius in February 2019, organized by the Office of Counter-Terrorism in
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, which helped to
strengthen participants’ understanding of the international standards on combating the
abuse of non-profit organizations. In response to resolution 2462 (2019), the Office
will expand its global capacity-building programme on the counter-financing of
terrorism to include modules on the non-profit sector, the sharing of financial
intelligence, public-private partnerships, financial inclusion, the activities of cash
couriers and terrorist asset-freezing.
72. The United Nations and international and regional organizations continue to
address the linkages between international terrorism and transnational organized
crime. In February 2019, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
published a study on the linkages between human trafficking, terrorism and terrorism
financing entitled Identifying and Exploring the Nexus between Human Trafficking,

14/17

19-12412

S/2019/612

Terrorism and Terrorism Financing. In April 2019, the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) and concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh),
Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) held a
joint special meeting to discuss regional specificities, responses and lessons learned
in addressing the connections between terrorist and criminal groups. The United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute developed a policy
toolkit 22 on “The Hague good practices on the nexus between transnational organized
crime and terrorism”, published by the Global Counterterrorism Forum, which
identifies gaps and challenges to be urgently addressed in this area.

F.

International law enforcement cooperation
73. On 7 May 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism launched the CounterTerrorism Travel Programme to assist Member States in enhancing their capacity to
prevent, detect, investigate and prosecute terrorist offences and serious crime,
including related travel, by using travel information such as advance passenger
information and passenger name record data in accordance with the relevant
requirements of Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). The
Programme supports improvements in the use of existing international databases,
such as those of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), and
enhanced information exchange. It is coordinated by the Office and implemented in
partnership with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the Office of Information and
Communications Technology and UNODC. It is essential that appropriate safeguards
be put in place whenever personal data are being exchanged to ensure that the use,
retention and destruction of the data comply with international human rights
standards. The support package provided by the Programme includes assist ance
regarding the legal, operational, transport industry and technical aspects of building
or enhancing national detection capacity, including the appropriate safeguards to
ensure that such data are collected, used and shared with the full respect for hum an
rights and fundamental freedoms.
74. In March 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate hosted an open briefing to raise awareness of and
strengthen the understanding of the United Nations compendi um of recommended
practices for the responsible use and sharing of biometrics in counter -terrorism. At
the briefing, Member States received information on good practices in the field of
biometrics and on how biometric systems should be developed and manage d in
accordance with the human rights obligations of States.
75. In May 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in coordination with the UNODC
global Airport Communications Project, delivered a training to build capacity at
international airports to address the threats posed by terrorists, foreign terrorist
fighters, returnees and relocators, under the framework of the Office of Counter Terrorism’s global Border Security Management Programme.
76. Attacks recorded during the reporting period are proof of the continued interest
of ISIL in targeting critical infrastructure and “soft” targets, including places of
worship. In March 2019, I tasked the High Representative for the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations to develop an action plan to support Governmen ts in their
efforts to protect religious sites and to develop concrete and action -oriented

__________________
22

19-12412

Available at www.unicri.it/in_focus/on/Policy_Toolkit_nexus_crime_terrorism.
15/17

S/2019/612

recommendations that can help to ensure the safety of religious sites. Meanwhile,
various United Nations entities have continued their engagement on the topic, such
as under the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
working group on emerging threats and critical infrastructure protection. For
example, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and INTERPOL held two regional workshops on South-East Asia
in Singapore, in January and March 2019, and a third workshop focusing on Sahel,
the Maghreb and West Africa in Tunis, in April 2019. Similarly, the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism brought together Member States and local government, cities, civil society
organizations and the private sector at an open briefing in June 2019 to disc uss ways
of collaborating in order to protect soft targets. At the briefing, the importance of
ensuring that all measures comply with the international human rights obligations of
States and the private sector’s responsibility to respect human rights was also
emphasized.
77. In May 2019, the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate highlighted the need
for greater efforts to address the potential risk posed by the use by terrorists of
unmanned aircraft systems against both critical infrastructure and soft t argets. 23

G.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging communities in
approaches to prevent and counter violent extremism
78. In May 2019, the Office of Counter-Terrorism signed a tripartite memorandum
of understanding with the Inter-Parliamentary Union and UNODC to design and
implement a joint programme to support parliamentary action on preventing and
countering terrorism and violent extremism through a whole -of-society approach.
Under the joint programme, they convened two regional conferences: o ne in the
Middle East and North Africa region, focusing on foreign terrorist fighters, and the
other in the Sahel region.
79. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate have piloted a model of co-delivery of tailored capacitybuilding in preventing and countering violent extremism through strategic
communication that builds expertise in countering terrorist narratives. This
co-delivery was successfully trialled in May 2019 at a workshop with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development’s Centre of Excellence in Preventing
and Countering Violent Extremism. That workshop also marked the first time that the
Office had partnered with a regional organization in the area to seek its input prior to
the delivery of a workshop targeting Member States of the region. The Office and the
Directorate will continue to work together to provide practical capacity -building on
global good practice in countering terrorist narratives.
80. The Office of Counter-Terrorism has worked directly with a range of civil
society organizations to assist them in building capacity to provide alternative
narratives to those of terrorist and violent extremists. In May 2019, the Office
delivered a workshop in partnership with UNDP in Jordan, foc used on building the
capacity of grassroots civil society organizations working with young people. In
March 2019, the Office delivered a capacity-building workshop with the Government
of the Philippines and UNDP that brought together civil society and gove rnment
representatives to ensure that communities had a voice in the national strategy to

__________________
23

16/17

See www.un.org/sc/ctc/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/CTED-UAS-Trends-Alert-Final_
17_May_2019.pdf.
19-12412

S/2019/612

prevent and counter violent extremism in the Philippines and a role in its
implementation.
81. In June 2019, I launched the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate
Speech. Led by the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect
and involving 13 other United Nations agencies, the strategy is intended to enhance
United Nations efforts to address the root causes and drivers of hate speech and
facilitate effective United Nations responses to the impact of hate speech on societies.
This is of particular importance in the context of the development of effective counter narratives. The strategy is designed to support and enhance United Nations eff orts in
all related areas, including preventing conflict and terrorism and ending violence
against women.
82. Through its “Reviving the spirit of Mosul” initiative, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has continue d to
implement an education component on preventing violent extremism as part of the
rebuilding of Mosul’s education system, including through capacity-building to
teachers, families and communities. In the Sahel, UNESCO is implementing a
multisectoral programme on the promotion of peace and sustainable development
through strengthening the competencies of young people for life and work in the Sahel
in nine States, including teacher training and the production of the online “Journal
Rappé” (rapped news site).

IV. Observations
83. Notwithstanding the territorial collapse of ISIL, Member States must remain
vigilant to the global threat of terrorism, including by addressing terrorist narratives,
preventing radicalization in prisons and addressing other co nditions that create
vulnerabilities. Concerted efforts are also required with regard to the reintegration
and rehabilitation of men, women and children stranded, especially in conflict zones.
The United Nations system stands ready to assist Member States in that regard, and I
encourage all Member States to benefit from the key principles for the protection,
repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of women and children with
links to United Nations-listed terrorist groups.
84. I remain deeply concerned about terrorist attacks against soft targets, including
places of worship, and encourage all United Nations entities to support Member States
in their efforts regarding the protection of religious sites, in particular by providing a
forum for the sharing of good practices. I am similarly concerned about the rise in
hate speech and will continue to urge the implementation of the United Nations
Strategy and Plan of Action Against Hate Speech. I will also ensure that the United
Nations system continues to provide support to Member States in addressing the
financing of terrorist activities, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
2462 (2019), as well as in addressing the link between transnational organized crime
and terrorism, as requested by the Council in its resolution 2482 (2019).
85. I am also pleased to note that the United Nations will continue to support efforts
in support of multilateral, international and regional cooperation to counter terrorism
through the series of regional conferences that the Office of Counter-Terrorism is
organizing jointly with Member States and regional organizations. Discussions at the se
conferences have proven to be fruitful, and in that regard I continue to encourage
follow-up on their concrete outcomes to contribute to the Counter-Terrorism Week in
June 2020, including the first-ever Global Congress of Victims of Terrorism, to be held
as part of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.

19-12412

17/17
