XVI
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA SIXIEME COMMISSION
167 (II), United Nations Flag

167 (Ill. Drapeau de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies

The General Assembly
Recognizes that it is desirable to adopt a distinctive flag of the United Nation~ and to authorize its u~e and, therefore,

L' Assemblle g,!ncralc
Reconnait qu'il est souhaitable d'adoptcr un
drapcae distinctif de !'Organisation des Nations
Unics cl d'cn autorisc.T l'cmploi et, en consequence,
Decide que le drapeau de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies scra l'cmblcmc officiel adopte par
l' Assemblcc generalc aux termcs de sa resolution
92 (I) du 7 dccembre 1946', au centre d'un fond
bleu pale;
Charge le Secretaire general de fixer les regles
concernant les dimensions et Jes proportions du
drapeau;
Autorise le Secrctaire general a adopter un code
du drapeau en vue de reglementcr l'emploi et de
protcger la <lignite dudit drapeau.

Resolves that the flag of the United Nations
shall be the official emblem adopted by the General A~embly under the terms of its resolution
92 (I) of 7 December 1946, 1 centred on a light
blue ground ;
Directs the Secretary-General to draw up regulations concerning the dimensions and proportions of the flag;
Authorizes the Secretary-General to adopt a
flag code, having in mind the desirability of a regulated use of the flag and the protection of its
dignity.
Ninety-sixth plenary meeting,
20 October 1947.

Quatre-vingt-seizieme seance pleniere,
le 20 octobre 1947.

168 Ill). United Nations Day
The General Assembly
Declares that 24 October, the anniversary of
the coming into force of the Charter of the United
Nations. shall henceforth be officially called
"United Nations Day'' and shall be devoted to
making known to the peoples of the world the
aims and achievements of the United Nations and
to gaining their support for the work of the
United Nations;
Invites Member Governments to co-operate
with the United Nations in securing observance
of this anniversary.
Hundred and first plenary meeting,
31 October 1947.

168 (II). Journee des Nations Unies
L'Assemblce generalc
Declare que le 24 octobre, jour anniversaire de
l'entrce en vigucur de la Charte des Nations
Unies, sera desormais appelc officiellement "Journee des Nations Unies" et sera consacre a faire
connaitre lcs buts et le~ rfalisations de !'Organisation des Nations Unies aux peuples du monde et a
gagner !cur appui a l'cruvre de }'Organisation
des Nations Unies;
·
Invite les Gouverncments des Etats Membres a
cooperer avec l'Organisation en vue de faire observer cet anniversaire.
Cent-unieme seance pleniere,
le 31 octobre 1947.

169 cm. Agreement between the United
Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations

169 (Ill. Accord entre !'Organisation des
Nations Unies et les Etats-Unis
d' Amerique relatif au siege de !'Organisation des Nations Unies

A

A

The General Assembly,
Whereas the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 99(1) 2 of 14 December 1946 signed
with the Secretary of State of the United States of
America on 26 June 1947 an Agreement between
the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations, and
Whereas the Secretary-General in accordance
with the said resolution has submitted the said
Agreement to the General Assembly;

L' Assemblee generate,
Considerant qu'en execution de la resolution
99 (I) 2 le Secretaire general a signe avec le
Secretaire d'Etat des Etats-Unis d'Amerique le
26 juin 194-7 un Accord entre !'Organisation des
Nations Unies et les Etats-Unis d'Amerique
relatif au siege de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies; et
Considerant que le Secretaire general a, en conformite de ladite resolution, soumis cet accord a
l' ~mblee generale;

1
See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during the second part of its first session, pages 185-186.

'Voir ks Resolutions atlopties par l'Assemblee glnirale
pendant la seconde partie de sa pr~miere session, pages
185-18\?.
'Voir les Resolutions adopths par I' Assemblle gtnbaltt
pendant la St'Conde partie dr. sa premierc session, page [95.

' See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during the second part of its first session, page 195.

91
