S/PV.9161

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9161

st meeting
Friday, 21 October 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almedia Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-64533 (E)
*2264533*

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany,
Greece, Poland, Slovakia and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ms. Denise Brown, United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in
Ukraine.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

21/10/2022

According to the Ukrainian Government, 30 per cent
of energy facilities have been hit since 10 October.
Combined with soaring gas and coal prices, the
deprivation caused by those attacks threatens to expose
millions of civilians to extreme hardship and even
life-endangering conditions this winter. To be clear,
under international humanitarian law, attacks targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure are prohibited,
as are attacks on military objectives that may be
expected to cause harm to civilians that would be
excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military
advantage anticipated.
The United Nations continues to support all efforts
aimed at accountability. It is essential that OHCHR be
given complete and unimpeded access to all areas of
Ukraine to continue its crucial work.
For its part, the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine submitted its report
to the General Assembly this week. The document
states that there are grounds to conclude that war
crimes and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have been committed in Ukraine
since 24 February 2022. The Commission stated that
Russian troops were responsible for the vast majority
of the violations identified. It also stated that Ukrainian
armed forces have also committed international
humanitarian law violations in some cases, including
two incidents that qualify as war crimes.

Ms. DiCarlo: The situation for civilians in Ukraine
remains dire. As of 18 October, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded 15,956
civilian casualties, with 6,322 killed, including at least
397 children, and 9,634 injured since 24 February. The
actual figures are likely considerably higher. In a recent
and concerning development, the Russian Federation
launched a series of attacks on cities and towns across
the country. On the morning of 10 October, Russian
armed forces reportedly launched missiles and drones,
killing at least 20 civilians and injuring more than
100, including in Kyiv, Dnipro and Zaporizhzhya.
Many civilian objects, including dozens of residential
buildings and critical infrastructure, were damaged. In
total, between 10 and 18 October, at least 38 Ukrainian
civilians were reportedly killed and at least 117 injured
by missile and drone attacks.

According to the Commission, relentless use of
explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated
areas has killed and injured scores of civilians and
devastated entire neighbourhoods. Additionally,
the Commission documented patterns of summary
executions, unlawful confinement, torture, ill
treatment, rape and other sexual violence committed in
areas occupied by Russian forces.

In addition to the immediate loss of life, the United
Nations is gravely concerned about the destruction of
critical energy infrastructure, such as power plants.

We welcomed the announcement on Monday of
another exchange of prisoners of war between Ukraine
and the Russian Federation: 110 Russian captives

2/26

The impact of these violations on the people
in Ukraine is immense, and so is the need for
accountability. In this regard, the Commission called
for a sound coordination of the multiple national and
international accountability initiatives in Ukraine.
Accountability remains crucial as new allegations of
atrocities have emerged in areas that have recently
returned to Ukrainian Government control. We must
not let impunity prevail.

22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

were exchanged for 108 Ukrainians. This was the first
prisoner exchange in which all freed Ukrainians were
women, among them civilians, military personnel and
national and border guards. Building on the constructive
spirit of the prisoner exchanges, I want to reiterate the
Secretary-General’s appeal to the Russian Federation to
grant full access to the International Committee of the
Red Cross to all prisoners of war, in accordance with
international humanitarian law.
The impact of the war in Ukraine is substantial and
growing. The United Nations has detailed its impact
on food security, energy and finance. The Black Sea
Grain Initiative has helped to bring food prices down
and stabilize and subsequently lower global food prices
and move grain from one of the world’s breadbaskets
to those in need. As of 19 October, the total tonnage
of grain and other foodstuffs exported through the
Initiative had reached almost 8 million metric tons.
To maintain food security worldwide, it is critical
that the Initiative be extended beyond November. It
is equally critical that there be unimpeded access
to Russian food and fertilizers. The United Nations
will spare no effort to achieve food security for
all populations.
We are on a path of further escalation, which can
only cause more suffering for the people of Ukraine,
Russia and the rest of the world. This trajectory must be
reversed. Any suggestion of the possibility of nuclear
or other non-conventional weapons only serves to
further heighten tensions and could lead to a dangerous
spiral. Any damage to the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant, whether intentional or by accident, could have
catastrophic consequences. Any military action against,
from or near the site must cease immediately.
The General Assembly has been clear. Last week,
it declared that the referendums held in the regions of
Ukraine that
“are or have been under the temporary military
control of the Russian Federation, and the
subsequent attempted illegal annexations of these
regions, have no validity under international law
and do not form the basis for any alteration of
the status of these regions of Ukraine” (General
Assembly resolution ES-11/4, para. 3).
This week, the Russian Federation announced the
introduction of martial law in the regions of Ukraine
under its temporary military control that it has attempted

S/PV.9161

to illegally annex. This decision, combined with the
announced evacuation in Kherson amid intensified
fighting on the ground, raises serious concerns.
The General Assembly also expressed strong
support for
“the de-escalation of the current situation and a
peaceful solution of the conflict through political
dialogue, negotiation, mediation and other
powerful peaceful means, with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders and
in accordance with the principles of the [United
Nations] Charter” (Ibid., para. 7).
Indeed, an end to the war founded on international
law and the Charter is the surest way to ensure that
the tremendous suffering of the civilians in Ukraine
will cease.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown: I will speak briefly about the human
toll of this war, the new dimensions of the humanitarian
crisis and the challenge of access to non-Governmentcontrolled areas.
Deaths and suffering of civilians, ravaged urban and
rural areas and the total loss of livelihoods for millions
are the impacts of the war on the civilian population of
Ukraine — now in its 239th day. The people of Ukraine
are under tremendous stress. Mental-health issues are
emerging, which will be one of the most devastating
and long-lasting legacies of this war.
I was recently in Mykolaiv oblast, where the mayor
told me that, since 24 February, they have had only 33
days of silence — 33 days without explosions or air-raid
sirens. Let us do the math. That comes to only one day
a week of reprieve from the sounds and the terror — let
alone the physical toll — of the war.
The sheer depth of the humanitarian catastrophe
is staggering. Almost 18 million people — more than
40 per cent of the entire Ukrainian population — need
humanitarian assistance. Some 14 million have been
forced to flee their homes, including 6.2 million
internally displaced and nearly 7.7 million refugees.
According to UNICEF, some 5.7 million children of
school age have been affected since the start of the
war, including 3.6 million as a result of the closure of

22-645333/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

educational institutions. The World Health Organization
says there have been over 630 verified attacks on healthcare facilities, preventing the sick from having access
to medicine and treatment. The gender and protection
dimensions of this crisis, while extremely sensitive, are
great and need to be addressed through strengthened
programming and monitoring.
With each passing day, we face new dimensions
to the humanitarian crisis. First, temperatures are
plummeting in Ukraine as winter approaches. The
destruction of civilian infrastructure has recently
become more widespread. In some areas, energy-supply,
telecommunications and transport infrastructure have,
been devastated, affecting people’s access to water,
electricity and heat and their ability to communicate.
The damage to power and thermal plants means that
life will be even harder for the already vulnerable,
including elderly people and those with disabilities.
There is an increased risk of death in the months ahead
because civilians may not have access to the essential
services to survive.
International humanitarian law is very clear:
attacks must never be directed against civilians or
civilian objects, and constant care must be taken
to spare them. To address essential needs, we, the
United Nations and the humanitarian community, have
developed a specific plan for the winter months, built
at the oblast level in coordination with the authorities
and in close collaboration with the Government. The
focus is on repairs to collective centres and homes
and the provision of blankets, mattresses, clothes,
food, generators for schools and much-needed thermal
heating for hospitals. Work is under way. The aim is for
civilians to have a safe, dignified and warm place to be
over the winter months.
Despite the challenges, we are helping people.
Already this year, more than 590 humanitarian partners
have been delivering critical assistance and protection
countrywide. Many of those at the forefront of these
efforts come from national and local aid organizations,
women-led organizations or are individual volunteers.
We must commend their leadership, bravery and
commitment. Together, we have reached more than
13 million people across the country, and we continue
to explore options for reaching others where the need
is greatest.
Secondly, newly accessible areas mean that we can
reach entirely new communities with humanitarian
4/26

21/10/2022

assistance and essential services. Aid workers are
acting quickly to reach those in need, taking into
consideration the security risks while upholding our
commitment to stay and deliver. However, in accessible
areas of Kharkiv, Kherson and Donetsk, the threat of
landmines and unexploded-ordnance contamination
hinders humanitarian operations. The immediate
priority for the humanitarian mine action sector must be
to prevent civilian casualties from explosive ordnance
and help enable the safe delivery of humanitarian relief.
Thirdly, with regard to psychosocial trauma, the
Ministry of Health and the World Health Organization
estimate that almost 10 million people will need some
kind of psychosocial support, owing to the trauma
caused by the war. That includes women and girls
suffering sexual violence and other forms of genderbased violence, children hearing warning sirens daily,
families that have been separated and people just trying
to survive every day.
In areas in which the Government of Ukraine has
regained control, particularly in rural areas, civilians
who have witnessed or experienced terrible violations
and ongoing hostilities are among the most at risk. Just
a few weeks ago, I visited the community of Balakliya,
in the newly accessible district of Izyum in the Kharkiv
oblast. The majority of those who remain there are very
old people and those who stayed behind to care for them
and are unable to flee the area.
The United Nations and our partners are working
to strengthen our capacity to address the growing
psychosocial needs of Ukraine. Humanitarian access
to those most in need has been a consistent challenge
in the conflict. Right now, one of the most significant
challenges remains access to parts of Donetsk,
Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhya. We are extremely
concerned about the people in those territories whom
we cannot reach. Regular requests continue to be made
to cross the front line. Yet we are not receiving the
necessary agreement from all parties.
Operationally, we are ready to move with
inter-agency convoys and aid personnel into
non-Government controlled areas. The consequences
of not delivering assistance to the estimated millions
of people in those areas are dire, particularly with the
winter months already upon us.
We must be able to alleviate the human suffering
caused by the war. International humanitarian law,
which already embodies a balancing act between
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

humanity and military necessity, clearly requires
parties to allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian relief for all civilians in need
and through all possible routes. Obstructions that leave
the civilian population without the essentials to survive
run contrary to that obligation.
Finally, the flash appeal has seen unprecedented
donor support. More than $2.9 billion has been received
against requirements of $4.3 billion for this year. That
is the second most-funded country-level appeal in
United Nations history, only second to the support
provided to Yemen in 2019 in the amount of $3.6 billion.
The Ukraine humanitarian fund has also received
significant new funding, with more than $230 million
in contributions and pledges. Of that, $117 million has
already been disbursed, and we have now included
$20 million for local volunteer organizations. I thank
the donors for their generous support.
In conclusion, the people of Ukraine have shown
incredible resilience in this past year. Our urgent
humanitarian task is to continue to help them survive
and be safe.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Brown
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
and the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator in Ukraine, Ms. Denise Brown, for
their briefings.
As we have heard, the war in Ukraine has had a
devastating impact on the civilian population. The
number of civilian deaths and injuries continues to rise,
and everything suggests that the number will continue
to increase if more urgent and effective measures are
not taken. The more than 17 million people in need
of humanitarian assistance, the more than 7 million
refugees in Europe and the more than 6 million
internally displaced persons, as well as the approach of
winter, have made the situation an extremely complex
one that requires an immediate response.
The indiscriminate attacks against civilian
infrastructure in recent days, including by unmanned
aerial vehicles, are in violation of international
humanitarian law. The dimensions of the humanitarian
crisis continue to grow alarmingly in scope. That is

S/PV.9161

why, together with France, Mexico requested this
meeting to consider recent developments and seek to
provide solutions and alternatives.
Respect for the norms of international humanitarian
law, including the 1949 Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional, is an obligation that does
not allow for any exception. The provisions of those
instruments are categorical: the parties must make a
clear distinction between civilians and combatants. The
use of weapons or methods of warfare likely to cause
unnecessary loss or excessive suffering is prohibited,
and the principles of necessity and proportionality must
always be upheld.
As we have heard, the impact of the conflict on
health services has been severe. According to the World
Health Organization, more than 630 attacks on Ukraine’s
health system have been recorded. Deliberate attacks
on hospitals constitute war crimes, are unacceptable
and cannot go unpunished. The conflict has also had
a serious impact on the population’s mental health,
which will directly and indirectly leave a deep mark on
large segments of the affected population. As a result,
psychosocial support must be an integral component of
humanitarian assistance.
The reports of sexual and gender-based violence
are also alarming. All of them must be investigated
to ensure accountability and effective reparations for
violations, with a gender perspective.
In the face of challenges of such magnitude,
the fighting under way is affecting the ability of
humanitarian actors to operate on the ground. It is
imperative to guarantee unrestricted humanitarian
access for the provision of essential services to those
in need, in line with the basic principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence.
We of course welcome the significant commitment
of donors that has helped fund the humanitarian
response in Ukraine. However, as always, funding can
never keep up with needs. It can be expected that the
vulnerability of the civilian population will increase
in the coming months, with the onset of winter and
the severe damage that has been wrought on energy
infrastructure. For that reason, it is urgent that attacks
on civilian infrastructure cease.
Moreover, the presence of mines in Ukraine is a
matter of deep concern. In addition to their impact
on the civilian population, particularly children,

22-645335/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

their presence affects the ability of the humanitarian
community to operate safely, and they clearly pose
a major threat in the medium and long terms. In the
absence of demining efforts, Ukraine’s agricultural
sector will also face serious challenges during the
next planting season. In that regard, we encourage the
parties to reach an agreement to renew the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, which has been critical to alleviating
the impact of the war on global food security.
My country condemns in the strongest terms any
threat of the use of nuclear weapons, and we recall
January’s communiqué, in which the nuclear-weapon
States affirmed that “a nuclear war should never
be waged”.
In the same vein, it is regrettable that a secure
and demilitarized perimeter has not been established
around the nuclear plant in Zaporizhzhya, despite the
recommendations issued by the International Atomic
Energy Agency as well as the calls of the SecretaryGeneral and the international community. We urge the
parties to heed that call.
I conclude by recalling that the most effective
way to protect the civilian population and ensure the
delivery of humanitarian assistance is the cessation of
hostilities. We will continue to insist on seeking avenues
for dialogue and diplomacy in order to end this war.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Brown for their briefings.
Eight months after launching its war of aggression,
Russia has crossed a new threshold. It has been
indiscriminately shelling Ukrainian cities for the
past 10 days, deliberately choosing to strike civilian
infrastructure, especially energy infrastructure, in
Kyiv, Sumy and Dnipro. Russia is no longer even trying
to conceal its crimes.
Russia is violating the founding principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms derived
from it — the prohibition of aggression, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the sovereignty of States and
respect for territorial integrity. The General Assembly
has unequivocally and overwhelmingly condemned
those violations of our Charter. By targeting civilians,
Russia is blatantly violating international humanitarian
law. It seeks in vain to break the morale of the Ukrainian
nation. By indiscriminately striking Ukrainian cities,
Russia seeks to terrorize. By destroying essential
civilian infrastructure, especially in the energy sector,
6/26

21/10/2022

Russia intends to cause electricity and heating shortages
with the arrival of winter. It is counting on the suffering
of civilians, including women, children and the elderly.
All of Ukraine’s partners stand in solidarity with
Ukraine. France has already mobilized resources to
help Ukraine get through the winter.
We urge Russia to comply with international
humanitarian law and to allow humanitarian actors
access to civilian populations in the territories it claims
to occupy, as well as to prisoners of war, including
those held in captivity in Russia. We are particularly
concerned about their fate.
The abuses and destruction resulting from
Russia’s aggression may constitute war crimes, and the
perpetrators will be held accountable. On 22 September,
Minister for Foreign Affairs Catherine Colonna
reiterated to the Council (see S/PV.9135) that there
would be no impunity for criminals. The International
Criminal Court must move forward quickly in its work
by tracing the chain of responsibility as far back as it
can. Along with many partners, France supports the
collection of evidence by the investigative mechanisms
and national and international jurisdictions.
It is now well documented that the Russian armed
forces are using Iranian drones in Ukraine, in particular
to indiscriminately bomb civilian infrastructure. Iran’s
provision of that equipment to Russia is a violation
of resolution 2231 (2015), as we and our German and
British partners stated in a letter to Council members
today. The European Union yesterday adopted new
sanctions against Iranian entities and individuals
involved in the production and transfer of those drones.
France supports Ukraine’s call for the Secretariat to
investigate and report back to Council members, in
accordance with its mandate. France calls on Iran to
immediately cease all forms of support for the war of
aggression launched by Russia against Ukraine. It calls
on Russia and Iran to stop violating resolution 2231
(2015).
France also condemns the complicity of Belarus,
whose territory continues to be used for missile and
drone strikes against Ukraine.
Finally, the General Assembly’s vote last week
(see A/ES-11/PV.14) was conclusive: Russia is alone
and overwhelmingly condemned by the international
community. Ukraine, on the other hand, has the strength
of international solidarity. We will continue, as long as
necessary, to provide the Ukrainian people with all the
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

humanitarian, economic and military support they need
to exercise their right to self-defence and preserve their
freedom.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Denise Brown for
their briefings.
It is regrettable that, rather than turning to dialogue
and diplomacy to end this conflict, we are seeing an
escalation of military activity. The sustained targeting
of civilians and objects indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population, including residential homes,
health facilities, shelters, as well as power and water
infrastructure, is a violation of international law and
international humanitarian law. Civilians continue
to bear the brunt of the conflict in urban areas, as
witnessed in Kyiv and cities in the east and south of
Ukraine. We convey our condolences to the bereaved
families and wish a quick recovery to all the victims.
Also alarming are the persistent threats being made
of the use of weapons of mass destruction. We continue
to urge for the protection of all nuclear installations,
including the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant.
The continued intensification of conflict will
only further undermine the prospects of a longer-term
negotiated peace settlement. It could also give way to
the strengthening of armed alliances in preparation for
a protracted war that could cause State fragility among
currently stable economies in Europe and beyond.
Kenya therefore continues to call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities in order to allow for dialogue for
a long-term solution. In the meantime, Kenya especially
thanks United Nations entities and agencies, as well as
other institutions and Governments, for their steadfast
efforts to alleviate suffering in every possible way. We
continue to call for those United Nations agencies to
be granted unhindered humanitarian access to those
in need.
In already food insecure regions, especially in
Africa, due to extreme weather conditions and conflict,
the war in Ukraine has worsened the situation. It has
disrupted global food supply chains, creating shortages
and sharp price increases. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the agreement to ensure unimpeded
exports of Russian food and fertilizer to world markets
were a promising start, and we continue to advocate for
their maintenance.

S/PV.9161

We also urge that any efforts to deploy emergency
food and energy security mechanisms in industrialized
countries be accompanied by efforts to transform food
systems in food-insecure regions. A major part of that
endeavour would be making the necessary investments
to ensure that Africa is food self-sufficient.
The last two World Wars came as a surprise. We do
not want the war in Ukraine to be remembered as the
beginning of a third world war or for it to lead to the
fracturing of the global governance system. It is high
time that all States involved in the conflict, directly
or indirectly, opened channels of communication and
used them to explore the conditions that can lead to a
cessation of hostilities, followed by negotiations that
address the war in Ukraine and stabilize the European
security order. It is also time for States with influence,
reach and vision for a stable global order to begin a
conversation on the next steps to advance a worldwide
demand for a dialogue on Ukraine and other major
security flashpoints. It is also time to accelerate the
efforts to reform the Security Council. Without reform
of the permanent membership the current format will
lose its relevance and will be overtaken by competing
multilateral arrangements.
Kenya once again reiterates its respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Ukraine.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): In
recent months we have seen a continuing intensification
of the conflict on the ground in Ukraine, an ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and ever
bleaker prospects for peace, which China finds
extremely worrisome. The nearly eight-month crisis
has taken a heavy toll on ordinary people, put the world,
especially developing countries, under tremendous
strain and exposed global economic development
to severe shocks. We must prevent the conflict from
becoming more protracted and complicated, make
every effort to mitigate its humanitarian consequences,
contain its spillover effects and work together tirelessly
to promote de-escalation, a swift ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities. Today I want to emphasize
three key points.
First, we must comply effectively with international
humanitarian law. International humanitarian law is
a code of conduct by which all parties to a conflict
must abide. Civilians and civilian facilities should be
fully protected, and all the parties should facilitate the

22-645337/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

evacuation of people and the provision of humanitarian
relief. Nuclear power plants, energy pipelines, bridges
and other critical infrastructure are vital to public
safety and social stability and should not be the
target of malicious attacks. All the parties involved
should exercise maximum restraint, avoid words and
actions that exacerbate confrontation and result in
miscalculations and work to prevent the conflict from
escalating and becoming more dangerous.
Secondly, we must make constant efforts to step
up humanitarian assistance. The nearly eight months of
intense conflict have led to a severe shortage of supplies
in many places. The delivery of basic public services,
such as water, electricity, heating and medical care, is
now challenging. As winter approaches, millions of
people, especially women, children and other vulnerable
groups, must rely on humanitarian aid to survive. China
appreciates the efforts of international humanitarian
agencies and Ukraine’s neighbours to mitigate the
humanitarian crisis. We call on the international
community to continue to assist Ukraine based on the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, and to help its neighbours share the
burden of resettling everyone affected by the conflict.
Thirdly, we must make every effort to contain
the spillover effects of the conflict. In the era of
globalization, the implementation of all-round,
indiscriminate sanctions will serve only to accelerate
the spread of the crisis, raise the prices of commodities
on international markets, destabilize the global
industrial supply chain and leave every country in the
world, not least developing countries, exposed to its
deleterious effects. The international community should
unite and work together to ensure the uninterrupted
operation of the global food, energy and financial
markets and remove political obstacles to international
economic and trade cooperation. Maintaining and
expanding the return of Ukrainian and Russian food
and fertilizers to the international market is important
in stabilizing global food prices and ensuring the
supply of agricultural products. China supports the
continued effective implementation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative and the memorandum of understanding
on the export of Russian food and fertilizer.
Peace is the fundamental solution to the
humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and the only way to
achieve long-term peace and stability in Ukraine and
the region at large. No matter how great the difficulties
and challenges, the door to a political settlement must
8/26

21/10/2022

not be closed. The process of diplomatic negotiations
cannot be stalled, and the efforts to stop the war and
promote talks must not slow down. The events of
the past eight months have proved that sanctions and
pressure, bloc confrontation and political isolation are
not effective ways to resolve the crisis. The international
community should focus on encouraging peace talks
and seeking a political solution by persuading the
parties to resume peace talks and end the fighting as
soon as possible in order to achieve a peaceful solution
to the crisis without delay.
China’s position on the Ukraine issue is clear and
consistent. We empathize with the Ukrainian people
and their plight. We have put forward a six-point
initiative on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine and
an international food-security cooperation initiative.
We have sent a number of batches of emergency
humanitarian assistance to Ukraine. As a responsible
country, China will continue to play a constructive
role in promoting peace talks and to make positive
contributions to alleviating the humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in Ukraine,
Ms. Denise Brown, for their respective briefings on
the situation in Ukraine, particularly the protection of
civilians and the humanitarian situation.
India continues to be concerned about the conflict
in Ukraine, which has resulted in loss of life and
countless miseries for its people, particularly women,
children and the elderly, with millions becoming
homeless and forced to seek shelter in neighbouring
countries. The reports of attacks on civilians and
civilian infrastructure in recent weeks are deeply
worrisome, and we reiterate our grave concern in that
regard. International principles and jurisprudence
vest responsibility in the parties to the conflict to
ensure that civilians and civilian infrastructure are
not targeted in situations of armed conflict. Civilians
in conflict-affected areas need safe, unhindered
and rapid access to basic services, often provided by
humanitarian workers. As we have reiterated in the
Council, all humanitarian aid and assistance must
be primarily guided by the universal principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,
and such measures must not be politicized.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine,
India has consistently called for an immediate cessation
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

of hostilities and an end to the violence. We have
called on both sides to return to the path of diplomacy
and dialogue and have expressed our support for all
diplomatic efforts to end the conflict. We believe that
no solution should be reached at the cost of innocent
lives. Our Prime Minister has spoken to the Presidents
of Ukraine and Russia on multiple occasions and has
reiterated India’s position. India stands ready to support
all such efforts aimed at de-escalation.
The impact of the Ukraine conflict is not limited
just to Europe. The conflict is exacerbating concerns
over food, fertilizer and fuel security, particularly
in developing countries. It is necessary for all of us
to adequately appreciate the importance of equity,
affordability and accessibility regarding those critical
issues for the global South. Open markets must not
become an argument to perpetuate inequity and
promote discrimination.
In that context, we hope that the grain deal agreed
in July will be implemented earnestly by all parties.
However, we believe that that alone may not be
sufficient to address the food insecurity concerns.
India’s approach to the Ukraine conflict will
continue to be people-centric. For our part, we provide
both humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and economic
support to some of our neighbours in the global South
under economic distress, even as they stare at the
escalating cost of food, fuel and fertilizers, which has
been a consequential fallout of the ongoing conflict.

S/PV.9161

either damaged or destroyed. In just a week, a third
of Ukraine’s power stations are reported to have been
knocked off the electricity grid at a critical time, leaving
people without gas for cooking and heating, with winter
approaching. As the war continues, the Ukrainians’
needs for humanitarian aid are further compounded.
The international community must step up its
support to alleviate the suffering of civilians and
ensure that their basic needs are met. To that end,
the United Arab Emirates announced $100 million in
humanitarian aid to Ukraine earlier this week. However,
other parts of the world cannot be neglected. We must
ensure that those most in need globally do not become
an afterthought.
Access remains a major hurdle for humanitarian
organizations, particularly in the areas witnessing the
most intense fighting in eastern Ukraine. Those unable
to escape the fighting, such as people with disabilities,
the elderly and the sick, have become vulnerable to
shifting battle lines. In that context, we commend the
efforts of humanitarian organizations, and we urge
cooperation by the parties to resolve all impediments
to access.
We once again reiterate our call on the parties
to abide by their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law, so as to ensure
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including energy infrastructure. Civilian objects must
never be a target of attack.

We hope that the international community
will continue to respond positively to the calls for
humanitarian assistance. We support calls urging for
guarantees of safe passage in order to deliver essential
humanitarian and medical supplies. So far, India has
dispatched 12 consignments of humanitarian aid to
Ukraine, and we stand ready to do more.

Despite the deeply concerning developments in the
conflict, we have seen some movement between the
parties, which has led to tangible, positive outcomes on
concrete issues. While the momentum towards broader
negotiations is still lacking, prisoner exchanges,
including the exchange announced earlier this week,
show the potential for positive outcomes.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that the global order
is anchored in the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.

The agreements to facilitate the export of food
and fertilizers were significant and positive steps,
which contributed to a decline in the index for global
food prices. Nevertheless, the full implementation,
expansion and extension of the agreements remain
critical to addressing global food insecurity.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Resident Coordinator Denise
Brown for their briefings.
As we heard today, a significant percentage
of critical civilian infrastructure, including power
stations and water supply infrastructure, has been

Compromise, diplomacy and dialogue remain the
only way forward to prevent further suffering. We
commend the United Nations and others that have
worked to facilitate constructive engagement between
the parties.

22-645339/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

The world wants peace in Ukraine — a peace
that is sustainable and in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. There is
no alternative to a cessation of hostilities throughout
Ukraine and a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start
by thanking both our briefers for their informative
briefings. I will make two comments on the subject.
First, Brazil regrets that, after nearly eight months
of conflict in Ukraine, the civilian population continues
to suffer. There is no justification for attacks perpetrated
against civilian targets, such as those recorded in Kyiv
and other major Ukrainian cities in the past few days.
The damage to the energy sector, which, according
to reports by our Embassy in Kyiv, reached 30 per cent of
its generating capacity, is particularly worrisome. The
rigours of the coming winter will add to the humanitarian
crisis. The continuing reports of civilian casualties
and attacks against civilian infrastructure attest to the
urgency of opening channels of humanitarian dialogue
between the parties.
Brazil recalls the obligations of all States under
international law and those of all parties under
international humanitarian law. Missile launches and
drone strikes must be halted. Unimpeded access to
humanitarian assistance to those in need should be
guaranteed by all parties.
Secondly, we believe that it is important to
discuss our collective response to the conflict. In our
discussions with other delegations, we note increased
frustration at what is perceived as insufficient efforts
by the Security Council to facilitate a peaceful solution.
Many are disappointed by the fact that divisions have
prevailed over what is expected from us: the willingness
to engage in dialogue.
The Charter of the United Nations outlaws war as
a legitimate means of resolving conflicts. Reaffirming
that principle is essential, but is not sufficient in the
light of our collective responsibilities. The Council
should actively contribute to all possible efforts towards
a ceasefire and to negotiations between the parties.
Various ideas have been circulated by other
delegations to facilitate direct talks between the parties.
The Security Council should explore them. Brazil is
willing to engage in such efforts, and we call on other
members to consider new paths in order to alleviate the
suffering of the Ukrainian people.
10/26

21/10/2022

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and
Humanitarian Coordinator Brown for their briefings.
Russia has shown again and again that it disregards
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.
We are in this Chamber today because of the mounting
consequences and human toll of Russia’s unprovoked
and unlawful invasion of its neighbour and fellow State
Member of the United Nations.
As we just heard, there are 7.7 million Ukrainians
living as refugees and more than 6 million more
displaced in Ukraine. That is nearly one third of
the population that cannot go home. Nearly half of
the population needs humanitarian assistance. As
Ms. Brown explained, needs will intensify in the
winter. As needs increase, Russia’s forces hit civilian
infrastructure and humanitarian convoys with renewed
relentlessness, undermining the civilian population’s
ability to survive cold winter temperatures. That
includes a massive barrage against Ukraine’s cities
on 10 October, which the Secretary-General called
“another unacceptable escalation” of the war.
As insecurity, broken supply chains and mass
displacement hamper health care across Ukraine, a
United Nations partner reports some 500 attacks by
Russia’s forces on health-care personnel, facilities and
transportation between 24 February and 7 September.
As humanitarian organizations scale up efforts to reach
recently retaken areas, Russia’s retaliatory strikes
and the prevalence of landmines pose safety risks to
humanitarian personnel and other civilians.
The United Nations estimates that $4.3 billion will
be needed to provide Ukrainians with humanitarian
aid. Since February, the United States has provided
more than $1.5 billion in assistance to that end. We
urge countries to help the United Nations meet those
goals as we continue to stand firmly behind the
Ukrainian people.
From the beginning of its full-scale invasion,
Russia has shown contempt for the Security Council.
That continues with evidence that — since August
and in violation of resolution 2231 (2015) — Iran has
transferred Mohajer-6 and Shahed-series unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) to Russia. Those Iranianorigin UAVs have been subsequently used in multiple
attacks against Ukraine, including the massive
barrage on 10 October, which hit civilians and civilian
infrastructure. In addition to the easily identifiable
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

remnants of those UAVs recovered in Ukraine, there is
significant publicly available documentation, including
photographs and video, of those UAVs being used
against Ukraine.
The United Nations must investigate any violations
of Security Council resolutions. We must not allow
Russia or others to impede or threaten the United
Nations from carrying out its mandated responsibilities.
We take this opportunity to refute resolutely
Russia’s false assertion that the Geneva Conventions
do not apply to captured foreign volunteers. Russia’s
obligations as a party to the Geneva Conventions and
their Protocol Additional I apply to its detention and
treatment of any individuals in the armed conflict.
Members of Ukraine’s armed forces, including thirdcountry national volunteers, must be treated as
prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions and
afforded the treatment and protections commensurate
with that status.
Finally, we cannot forget the spillover effects of this
war, which have exacerbated global food insecurity.
We must continue to champion the efforts of and work
to renew the Black Sea Grain Initiative, under which
more than 300 ships with more than 7 million metric
tons of grain and other food have left Ukraine’s ports.
As the United Nations has pointed out, the initiative
helps calm markets and limit food-price inflation. In
fact, the Food Price Index of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations has fallen since its
spike at the start of the war, and wheat prices are back
at pre-war levels. We cannot tolerate any backsliding at
the expense of the world’s hungry.
In conclusion, to the countries on the Council that
have never mentioned Russia throughout the many
months since the escalation of the conflict, I would
say — if women matter, urge Russia to silence its guns.
If children matter, ask Russia to withdraw its forces.
If the Charter of the United Nations matters, call on
Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence. Vague calls for
diplomacy only enable Russia as it commits further
abuses. We in this Chamber, charged with the protection
of global peace and security, must continue to call for
accountability and Russia’s immediate cessation of its
illegal war of aggression against Ukraine.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Ms. Brown for
their briefings.

S/PV.9161

We meet at the end of another critical week for
Ukraine and its people. They struggle daily with massive
disruption to vital power and water supplies — the
result of continued attacks by the Russian Federation
on Ukraine’s critical civilian infrastructure. There
are direct attacks on hospitals and health-care
facilities — places of care and refuge — many of which
are now only partially functional or reliant on limited
back-up power. Russian attacks have also been hitting
residential buildings, killing civilians as they sleep.
The people of Ukraine are paying the ultimate price
for a senseless war that is not of their choosing. While the
world has called for peace, the Russian Federation has
instead chosen the path of escalation in this war. Across
Ukraine, we have seen explosive weapons, including
prohibited cluster munitions, being used in populated
areas and against civilian infrastructure. Landmines
jeopardize civilians, agricultural production, food
security and safe humanitarian access.
Ireland is concerned about the use of Iraniansupplied unmanned aerial vehicles that bring
death, destruction and horror to the streets of Kyiv
and elsewhere. Their acquisition by Russia would
contravene resolution 2231 (2015). Those attacks on
civilian targets appear to have just one goal in mind:
to intimidate and terrorize the civilian population.
They represent a blatant disregard for human life,
constitute a serious violation of international law and
are simply unconscionable.
We once again call on the Russian Federation to
comply with its obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law. We urge the
Russian Federation to refrain from further escalation,
take all feasible measures to prevent civilian casualties
and damage to civilian infrastructure and facilitate
life-saving humanitarian access without delay. We have
just heard how critical that is as winter approaches, with
the most vulnerable in Ukrainian society — internally
displaced persons, women, children and the
elderly — facing a particularly precarious future.
The people of Ukraine have shown remarkable
resolve and determination in the face of such brutal
adversity. Ireland stands with them today, as always. For
our part, we are determined to ensure that the Russian
Federation be held to account for its heinous actions.
There are rules, even in war, and when those rules are
broken there must be accountability for the targeting
of civilians, arbitrary detention, human trafficking and

22-6453311/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

conflict-related sexual violence. In all situations in
which international crimes may have been committed,
we must ensure that timely, credible investigations are
undertaken, evidence is rigorously documented and
witnesses, victims and survivors are supported.
Last week, the General Assembly delivered a clear
message of support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity (see A/ES-11/PV.12). It was not only
about Ukraine but also about protecting the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
very basis of our rules-based international order. It
was through that very Charter that we, the members
of the United Nations, conferred on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. For exactly eight
months now, the Russian Federation has acted with
utter disregard for that responsibility. It continues to
bring wanton death and destruction to Ukraine through
its illegal war of aggression.
Today I appeal to my fellow members of the
Council to assert our responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, stand united in
calling on the Russian Federation to end the war and
withdraw from the entire territory of Ukraine, and
support all efforts at dialogue and diplomacy to bring
about a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I would like to begin
my statement by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Denise Brown, United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in
Ukraine, for their important and sobering briefings on
the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
Now in its eighth month, the unjustified aggression
against Ukraine has been marked by overwhelming
suffering, death and destruction. Too many people,
especially women, children and the elderly, continue to
suffer needlessly from the fighting that has engulfed
many cities across Ukraine. The humanitarian
statistics, as reported, are indeed concerning but can
only be expected to rise should the fighting continue in
the way that we are witnessing. It is also important to
note the impact of the war on pre-existing humanitarian
situations in other parts of the world, where food aid is
largely supplied from Ukraine.
The growing threats of the use of unconventional
weapons and possible nuclear engagements have
been a source of global uncertainty. Ghana calls for
a de-escalation of tensions, an immediate cessation
12/26

21/10/2022

of hostilities and intensified diplomatic efforts to
end the war now rather than later, when the cost of
reconciliation and reconstruction will be unbearable.
It is vital that the Security Council and the wider
international community forge a consensus on concrete
measures and pathways to halt the rising tensions and
begin a political dialogue for settlement. In that regard,
we welcome the continuing leadership and pacific role
of the Secretary-General and hope that further gains
can be made in the endeavours for a peaceful settlement.
We are grateful to the United Nations humanitarian
agencies and their partners, which are working
under extremely difficult and dangerous operational
circumstances. We pay our respects to all humanitarian
workers who have fallen while in service to humankind
in Ukraine. Their commitment and sacrifice in bringing
relief to the suffering people must be matched by the
international community’s efforts in helping to end the
war. We welcome the humanitarian aid, support and
contributions by some States and international agencies
aimed at seeing Ukrainians through the winter. Food,
water, shelter, warm clothing and medicines will be
critical to the survival of some 6.5 million people
internally displaced by the war. We call on both parties
to grant humanitarian access to all areas where people
require assistance and urge the Russian authorities, in
particular, to grant unhindered humanitarian access to
the occupied territories. As the fighting intensifies, we
believe it will be essential to create new humanitarian
corridors to ensure civilians’ passage to areas of
relative safety. We want to point to the success of the
Mariupol evacuations and call for similar arrangements
to be made as a matter of urgency.
We condemn all human rights violations and
reiterate our support for independent, transparent and
thorough investigations of such violations, including
conflict-related sexual violence. The happenings in
Bucha and Irpin must strengthen our resolve to hold the
perpetrators of such acts to account and avoid impunity.
The parties must refrain from targeted attacks on
civilian infrastructure and other critical infrastructure.
Apart from imposing severe hardships on the people, the
deliberate destruction of critical energy infrastructure,
residential facilities, water stations, health-care
facilities, schools and transport infrastructure
constitute gross violations of international law and the
principles of international humanitarian law relating to
armed conflict.
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

In conclusion, we reiterate our complete
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine and remain
supportive of international efforts to alleviate the
humanitarian suffering of the Ukrainian people.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I once again thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. And
I thank Resident Coordinator Brown for her invaluable
update on the situation on the ground and the work
the United Nations team is doing in the toughest
of circumstances.
So far, this war has killed, maimed and
psychologically damaged thousands of people. Millions
have been forced to flee. Ukrainian towns and cities
have been reduced to rubble, with evidence of atrocities
left behind in the ruins. We have heard unbearable
stories of sexual violence. And the real objectives of
the invasion have been exposed by Russia’s attempts
to suppress Ukrainian national identity and culture
and illegally annex Ukrainian land, an act widely
condemned by the United Nations membership last
week (see A/ES-11/PV.14).
Unfortunately, an already appalling situation
appears to be getting worse. Under the command of
General Sergey Surovikin, a man infamous for brutalities
against civilians in Syria, we have seen a renewed
campaign of drone and missile strikes across Ukraine.
Heavily populated areas have been hit, as well as
playgrounds, rush-hour traffic and apartment buildings
nowhere near front lines or military installations. A new
wave of bombardment has deliberately targeted critical
national infrastructure, leaving some 30 per cent of
Ukraine’s power stations damaged or destroyed. These
are attacks on Ukrainian civilians’ way of life, and
they are a clear breach of international humanitarian
law. They are egregious in their own right, but even
worse as winter approaches. Russia’s attacks mean that
Ukrainians are losing the ability to heat their homes
and cook their food. The intent behind them is clear.
Russia is seeking to subjugate Ukraine by terrorizing
civilians. And it is doing so using weaponry obtained
from Iran in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). Russia
has been trying to distract us with attacks on the United
Nations integrity and its mandate to investigate. But
resolution 2231 (2015) is clear. It asks the SecretaryGeneral to report to the Council on its implementation.
And there are extensive precedents for site visits to
consider evidence. Of course, the key issue is that

S/PV.9161

wherever those drones come from, their use against
civilians is barbaric.
Russia’s actions are illegal and immoral and must
come to an end. So we once again call on Russia to stop
its disinformation and misdirection and its accusations
that the West is somehow responsible for Russia’s own
atrocities. We call on Russia to heed the calls of the
international community, respect its obligations under
international law and stop its attacks on civilians,
energy infrastructure, hospitals and health facilities.
And we call on it yet again to end the war and return to
the path of dialogue it abandoned in February.
Finally, as others have, we recognize the wider
negative impact of Russia’s war. The positive impact of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative on global grain crises is
clear, and we have heard more about that today. So we
welcome and encourage the Secretary-General’s efforts
to ensure the continuation of the agreement. He has the
United Kingdom’s full support.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Let me first thank the briefers
for their candid words to the Council today. Their
accounts leave no doubt about the devastation that this
war has brought upon the people of Ukraine. Norway
will continue to stand with Ukraine and the Ukrainian
people against Russia’s aggression, which is a gross
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.
We are alarmed by the escalation and brutality
of the recent Russian attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure with missiles and drones. Those attacks,
which seem deliberate, have killed civilians and hit
several power facilities across Ukraine. Damage
to energy infrastructure brings great humanitarian
harm and will certainly cause illness and death
when the cold winter arrives. Those attacks have no
military purpose. The aim seems to be to terrorize the
population. They are illegal and may constitute war
crimes. Those responsible must be personally held
to account. Russia’s devastating attacks on cities and
urban areas over the past eight months have killed and
maimed civilians, including children, and have led
to massive displacement, both internally and across
borders. We are concerned about sexual and genderbased violence and human trafficking, which women
and unaccompanied children are particularly exposed
to. We must facilitate the return of the displaced and
the delivery of essential services, and mitigate the longterm effects that Russia’s war has imposed on them.

22-6453313/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

The Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine has concluded that violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
amounting to war crimes have been committed by
Russian armed forces. The killing of civilians, the
discovery of mass graves, incidents of rape and other
forms of sexual violence, forced disappearance and
torture have all been recorded, along with reports of
deportations to Russia and adjustments to procedures
in order to allow Russians to adopt Ukrainian children
without the consent of their parents, among other things.
The victims deserve justice, survivors must be cared
for and those responsible must be held accountable. But
to stop those grotesque violations in the first place,
the war must come to an end. Russia must withdraw
its troops from within the internationally recognized
borders of Ukraine and stop the war.
Norway also remains concerned by the many
prisoners of war who are unaccounted for and others
who are missing because of the conflict. We call on the
parties, at all levels, to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including to
provide support for the International Committee of the
Red Cross in fulfilling its unique mandate as laid out
in the Geneva Conventions, including to visit prisoners
of war.
We commend international and national
humanitarian responders for their bravery in delivering
humanitarian protection and assistance to those in
need. It is critical that humanitarian actors have full,
safe and unhindered access to all those in need. We are
particularly concerned about the situation of the elderly,
persons with disabilities and children in conflictaffected areas.

21/10/2022

European Union. We perceive this only as a desire on
the part of those representatives to make an appearance
on national television, and nothing more than that. In
future, we would ask you, Sir, to be more circumspect
when compiling the list of speakers for our meetings on
this topic.
We note the briefings given by the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, and the United Nations
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator in Ukraine,
Ms. Denise Brown.
We note that the Secretariat has finally decided
to concern itself with the issue of the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. Unfortunately, the picture has
once again been only half painted: we have not heard
a word about the destruction that Kyiv has inflicted for
more than eight years on Donbas or about the civilian
victims of attacks by the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
There was no reaction by the Secretariat to the horrific
terrorist attacks by Kyiv against civilian infrastructure
such as the Crimean bridge or the shelling by the Armed
Forces of Ukraine of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power
plant and the Kakhovka hydroelectric power plant.
Our Western colleagues justified the convening of
today’s meeting based on the intensification of strikes
against Ukrainian infrastructure and civilian facilities
from the Russian side. Let us examine what is actually
happening on the ground.

While the war rages, the world faces a food crisis.
The continuation of the Black Sea Grain Initiative is
vital. We appreciate the tireless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in that regard. In times of war, we need that
beacon of hope.

Over the past two months, the Ukrainian regime
and its Western patrons — apparently in a state of
euphoria thanks to some tactical advances by Ukrainian
troops in a number of areas, achieved at the cost of
astronomical losses in manpower and equipment — have
been propelling in every possible way the idea that
Russia has allegedly exhausted its material and human
resources and is about to start losing on the battlefield.
Meanwhile, so-called Ukrainian strategists, under the
supervision of their Western puppeteers, have long been
using terrorist sabotage methods on Russian territory.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express my
bewilderment. We do not entirely understand the value
added — other than extending the length of today’s
meeting — by including the delegations of Germany,
Greece, Poland and Slovakia on the list of speakers.
Today’s meeting is not a debate but a briefing, while
the position of those countries is already well known
to us and, in any case, could be summarized by the

While there are many examples, the culmination
of those efforts was the terrorist attack committed by
Ukrainian special forces against the Crimean bridge
on 8 October. Four people died and the road, through
which the peninsula’s population is supplied with
food, medicines and other vital goods, was partially
destroyed. Ukrainian officials, including the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Digital Transformation
of Ukraine, Mr. Mykhailo Fedorov, and the Adviser to

14/26

22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Anton
Gerashchenko, openly relished that crime. Ecstatic
announcements about the attack were also published
on the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence’s official
Twitter account.
Although Kyiv, most likely after being reined in
by its Western masters, quickly attempted to follow its
usual modus operandi of shifting the blame to Russia,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Dmytro
Kuleba, confirmed in a video circulated online that
Kyiv was indeed behind the attacks on the Crimean
bridge and Belgorod oblast. Here are his words, which
have become available to millions of Internet users:
“Well, if you were to ask me who is blowing things
up in Crimea and Belgorod, then speaking privately
... I would tell you yes, that was us”.
We are well aware of what the Kyiv regime is capable
of, based on the eight years of bitter experience of the
people of Donbas, and so it was decided to dampen the
militant fervour of the brazen Kyiv terrorists. Russianmade high-precision missile strikes and unmanned
aerial vehicles hit a large number of military targets, as
well as infrastructure facilities, in order to undermine
the military capabilities and potential of Zelenskyy’s
anti-people regime.
Of course, that did not sit well with the West and
caused real hysteria among our Western colleagues,
which we are witnessing in all its glory at today’s
meeting. Of course, as has been the case previously,
they do not want to face the facts and admit that civilian
objects were damaged only in instances in which drones
were shot by Ukrainian territorial defence units, and
therefore had to be diverted from their original course,
or in which civilian objects were hit by Ukrainian air
defence missiles that failed to intercept their targets.
There are plenty of such cases recorded, including in
video footage that anyone can access on the Internet.
Ukraine and its Western backers are now trying to
spin more fake news about alleged deliveries of Iranian
unmanned aerial vehicles to Russia in violation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We reject any attempts to involve
the Secretariat in that unscrupulous undertaking,
including through the note verbale by Germany, France
and the United Kingdom circulated in the Security
Council today. The note makes a de facto appeal to the
Secretariat to violate Article 100 of the Charter of the
United Nations and the mandate conferred upon it in
presidential note S/2016/44, of 16 January 2016.

S/PV.9161

The United States went even further and, in its
own letter, demanded that the Secretariat conduct an
investigation into the matter, which it does have the
authority to do. That is an egregious situation. We also
presented our legal assessments in a response letter that
was disseminated prior to today’s meeting. We expect
a definitive confirmation from the Secretariat that it
does not intend to follow the instructions of Western
countries in violation of the Charter and will not
conduct any such investigation.
However, if United Nations experts do engage in
some kind of pseudo-investigation, baselessly referring
to the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) in order
to pander to Western capitals, we will reconsider the
entire package of our relations with the Secretariat,
whose impartiality in that case will no longer be
deemed legitimate.
Today’s show in the Security Council is also a kind
of smokescreen for the Kyiv regime and its backers. The
West diligently portrays the Kyiv regime as an innocent
victim of Russian aggression that needs constant
military assistance. Last week, additional deliveries of
military goods to Kyiv were announced. The United
States and the European Union have precisely chosen
those systems that have to date demonstrated the
greatest lethality against the populations of Donbas and
the liberated territories.
The United States will provide Kyiv with another
batch of M142 High Mobility Artillery Rocket System
multiple rocket launchers and M31 Guided Multiple
Launch Rocket System high-precision missiles, as well
as AGM-88 high-speed anti-radiation missiles. From
Paris, Kyiv will receive more CAESAR 155-millimetre
self-propelled artillery systems. Germany also
announced deliveries to Kyiv of 155-millimetre
calibre ammunition.
The leadership of those countries explain to their
populations that such weapons are supposed to help
the Zelenskyy regime in protecting Ukraine, but let
us examine what they are actually being used for.
According to the Donetsk People’s Republic and the
Luhansk People’s Republic, from February to October,
Ukrainian shelling using heavy weaponry resulted
in damage to more than 10,000 buildings and more
than 2,000 civilian-infrastructure objects, including
424 educational facilities and 109 medical facilities.
American HIMARS were actively used in this shelling.

22-6453315/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

The French CAESARs also showed how powerful
they are when they were used to attack residential
buildings, schools and other civilian objects. As a result
of French armaments supplies to Donetsk since June,
no less than five people died. Ten more were injured,
and 64 buildings were destroyed.
Ukrainian armed forces have been striking Russian
territory as well as targeting civilians and civilian
infrastructure. On 10 October, Belgorod oblast was
shelled by more than a hundred missiles, including the
infamous Tochka-U with a cluster warhead. A woman
died, and four residential buildings were damaged.
In the village of Tyotkino in Kursk, which has been
subject to shelling since the spring despite the fact
that there are no military objects there, two people
were injured. On 13 October, the Ukrainians shelled
a large residential building in Belgorod. The village
of Krasnoye was shelled, as were a customs post near
Shebekino and other civilian objects. Just now, on the
eve of today’s meeting, the Ukrainian armed forces
destroyed industrial plants in Belgorod oblast.
I would like to recall that in this region, as well
as in Donetsk, Ukrainian armed forces had previously
actively and indiscriminately used remote mine
systems, including anti-personnel “petal” mines,
against civilians. On 16 October, residential buildings
in Nikolskoye were shelled. At the international airport
in Belgorod, two civilians were injured. On 18 October,
the Ukrainian military once again shelled the village
of Belaya Beryozka, in Bryansk oblast. On the same
day, Ukrainian forces attacked six towns in the Kursk
oblast. One woman was hurt, and a number of residential
buildings and electricity supply lines were damaged.
Previously, Ukrainian saboteurs had tried on several
occasions to sabotage the Kursk nuclear power plant.
Since the beginning of October, through indiscriminate
artillery shelling using American HARM missiles,
more than 30 peaceful townships in Belgorod were
shelled, as was the city of Belgorod itself. All the while,
Kyiv, encouraged by its Western patrons, has openly
bragged about these attacks. Is it really possible that
Kyiv and those who are backing it think that we will
put up with this?
With the permission of its Western backers to
commit any crime, the Zelenskyy regime is constantly
striking civilian infrastructure on its own former
territories. For five months, the Ukrainian armed
forces have been shelling the town of Nova Kakhovka,
in Kherson oblast, with up to 120 missile strikes per
16/26

21/10/2022

day, most of them with American HIMARS, and the
Ukrainians are specifically targeting the Kakhovka
Dam in order to bring about a breach that will result
in a water-level rise that would cause flooding of the
adjacent territories and might kill thousands of civilians
and damage thousands of buildings. We have circulated
a letter today in the Security Council calling upon the
United Nations leadership to prevent this horrendous
provocation from happening.
Reckless attacks by the Ukrainian armed forces
against the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant continue,
which creates a danger to nuclear safety. Kyiv does not
appear concerned whether there will be a high number
of civilian victims in case the nuclear plant is seriously
damaged or what could happen if there is a full-fledged
man-made accident with the release of radioactive
materials. The Kyiv authorities are prepared to accept
any human victims so that NATO can continue its
proxy war with Russia and continue supplying Ukraine
with armaments. We continuously inform the Security
Council and the United Nations leadership of these
outrageous incidents but have not yet heard anything
intelligible by way of reaction from them.
Ukrainian fighters managed to seriously damage the
Kakhovka and Antonovka bridges across the Dnieper,
which were used by the citizens of Kherson to receive
food, medicines and so on. Another attempt to destroy
the Antonovka bridge was undertaken by Ukrainian
armed forces on 19 October, but Russian air-defence
systems managed to protect it. Once again, American
HIMARS systems were used for these attacks, and
Ukrainian fighters had previously used HIMARS to
attack a detention facility in Olenivka where prisoners
from the Azov Battalion were held.
Another horrendous illustration of how the Kyiv
authorities treat peaceful people is their executions of
their own nationals who had decided to opt for Russia.
On 29 September, Ukrainian armed forces shot at an
automobile convoy near Kupyansk that was leaving
Ukraine for Russia. Approximately 30 people died.
Furthermore, on 30 September, refugees who were
leaving for the liberated territories in Zaporizhzhya
were hit. Some 30 people died, and 88 people were
injured. Yesterday, on 20 October, Ukrainian armed
forces shelled a ferry that was being used to evacuate
civilians who were seeking to save themselves from
shells and provocation, resulting in many wounded and
killed, including journalists and children.
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

On 4 October, 38 soldiers from the from the 8th
company of the 3rd regiment of the 25th Airborne
Assault Brigade of the Ukrainian armed forces published
an appeal in which they reported that they had received
a criminal order to massacre civilians in Kharkiv
oblast. The Ukrainian Ministry of the Interior recently
made a statement announcing that they would start
searching for “enemies of Ukraine”. Since then, they
have detained up to 40 so-called potential collaborators
per day in Kharkiv oblast, who are later interrogated by
special services. On 9 October, a member of the Azov
unit, Maxim Zhorin, appeared in a video published
on social media to explain what had happened. The
footage shows the bodies of executed civilians being
thrown into a ditch. Zhorin said that these were citizens
of Kupyansk, in Kharkiv oblast, adding that “there will
be retribution”.
The metadata of the video show that it was recorded
slightly more than a half hour before it was published.
The bodies are wearing warm clothing, which is
consistent with October weather in the region. It should
be recalled that Russian forces have been absent from
Kupyansk since the beginning of September, which
shows that these people were executed by Ukrainian
neo-Nazis, as part of their cleansing of the city.
Have we heard one word of condemnation from
Western delegations about this? Their silence is the best
proof that, despite their hypocritical statements, none
of the Westeren countries are worried about the fate
of civilians in Ukraine. They prefer to provide cover
for this criminal regime, which counts among its ranks
nationalist radicals and open Nazis. They help them
with their provocations and join them in spreading lies
about Russia and Russian armed forces.
Incidentally, once again, I would like to recall that,
despite all of our reminders, we have still not received
a list of the names of the victims of the Ukrainian
provocation in Bucha in April. That confirms that the
Kyiv authorities have no evidence to back up their
allegations. Our Western colleagues are trying to
pretend that there is nothing that needs to be proved.
All we need to do is just trust them, they say, and take
the words of the representatives of the Kyiv regime at
face value.
Before concluding, I would like to warn in
advance that I will not listen to yet another serving of
the representative of the Ukrainian regime’s spiteful
tirades in the Security Council and therefore provide

S/PV.9161

him with the very strange and perverse pleasure that
he gets from them. All those who are familiar with his
recent boorish insults against Russian diplomats on
social media will know what I am referring to in this
regard. Regrettably, such outbursts reflect the current
state of Ukrainian diplomacy and show Kyiv’s inability
and lack of readiness for any kind of dialogue, much
less for a civilized one.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Resident Coordinator Brown for
the information they have provided on the situation in
Ukraine
Since 24 February this year, every one of our
meetings on Ukraine has started in a most sobering
way: deploring an unjustified aggression, expressing
deep concern for the useless loss of life and repeating
unheeded calls for Russia to stop. Today’s meeting is no
different, as the situation has not changed, even though
next week we will mark exactly eight months since the
special operation in Ukraine — the special Russian
madness — began.
I would nevertheless like to pause for a moment,
set aside the grim situation at hand and congratulate
Ukraine and its people for receiving the Sakharov Prize
awarded last week by the European Parliament, which
praised Ukrainians for standing up for what we all
believe in, defending themselves, fighting for common
values and protecting democracy, freedom and the rule
of law. It is as symbolic as it is meaningful.
Ukraine remains the only place in Europe where
sirens have sounded day and night since February.
Thousands of people have died or been injured,
mostly as a result of the use of explosive weapons,
including shells, missiles and air strikes. Attacks on
civilian infrastructure, including damage to residential
buildings, schools, hospitals and health-care facilities,
have continued affecting people’s access to critical
services. Russia is now escalating its attacks and is
targeting key civilian infrastructure, aiming at energy
installations in particular but also at residential areas,
with the clear aim of terrorizing the population,
inflicting severe damage and leaving entire families,
women and children without water, electricity or
heating as winter approaches. That is another and a
higher level of cruelty.
Moreover, Russia is now carrying out its attacks
together with the extended malicious hand of Iran,
notoriously known for its destabilizing policies, through

22-6453317/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

an open breach of resolution 2231 (2015). We call on the
United Nations not to yield to threats but — as part
of the regular report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), in accordance
with paragraph 7 of presidential note S/2016/44 — to
undertake an adequate verification of the reports that
hundreds of the drones used by Russian forces in
Ukraine have been unlawfully imported from Iran.
The evidence is there. Everyone can verify it. After
all, my question — and it may not be mine alone — is
about what Russia has to hide from an independent and
impartial investigation, a routine exercise to examine
evidence that the Secretariat has conducted plenty of
times. Did Russia not agree to a similar inquiry by the
Secretariat after the bombing of a prison in Donbas
in which more than 50 prisoners were killed and the
circumstances of which have yet to be elucidated?
In March, in this Chamber, I asked the
representatives of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (see S/PV.9008) if they were able
to corroborate allegations of sexual violence used by
Russian soldiers. It was not an accusation but a request
for information and clarity. The Russian delegation
reacted by stating that Russian soldiers would never
commit such acts, because they have high standards and
rules. Guess what? Now we have United Nations reports,
compiled after meticulous investigations, saying that
they have documented patterns of summary executions,
unlawful confinement, torture, ill-treatment, rape
and other acts of sexual violence committed in areas
occupied by the Russian armed forces. It appears that
this despicable behaviour did not even spare children,
including allegedly a four-year-old girl — a baby. The
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine has reported that family members, including
children, were sometimes forced to witness those
crimes. That is simply sickening and does not meet any
known standard of human behaviour, let alone military
discipline. There is no way these acts can be described
as coming under the category of high standards. They
are monstrous activities, crimes, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, and one day they will be presented
before a court.
Let me highlight another worry. Weeks after Russia
and Belarus announced the formation of a new joint
force, and days after the force started to assemble in
Belarus, there is reason to fear a growing military threat
from the north. Thousands of Russian servicemen,
equipment and aircraft are flooding into Belarus,
18/26

21/10/2022

accompanied by increasingly bellicose rhetoric from
the Russian and Belarusian leadership. I would not
be surprised to hear that that has nothing to do with
Ukraine and that they are performing drills in their
countries and so on and so forth. The fact is that we
have been played this way before, and as we now know,
every time there has been a Russian denial concerning
Ukraine, the exact opposite has happened.
Last week, after the Council was blocked in a
pattern we all are familiar with (see S/PV.9143), the
General Assembly voted overwhelmingly, through its
adoption of resolution ES-11/4, to condemn Russia’s
latest annexation of parts of Ukraine’s territory. The
world’s response was clear and resounding, and Russia
was once again alone, immured in denial. Albania
recognizes none of Russia’s actions. They have no
legitimacy or legal effect. They are null and void, and
Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhya are
and will remain Ukrainian territories. This war must
end, and we call on Russia to end it by respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Gabon.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo and the United Nations Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator in Ukraine, Ms. Denise
Brown, for their briefings.
The war in Ukraine continues. It has become
increasingly brutal and deadly, and the humanitarian
situation is continually deteriorating. Civilians and
civilian infrastructure continue to be attacked and
bombed, with serious repercussions for supplies of
electricity and drinking water and telecommunications.
The use of remote-controlled weaponry is adding to the
overall terror. Rather than itemizing the destruction and
suffering, I would like to say once again that it is time
for the Security Council to act in order to end this war.
It is time for us to channel our discussions, rhetoric and
action towards resolving the crisis in Ukraine.
That has been Gabon’s continued call since the
beginning of the crisis. We have spent almost eight
months counting the numbers of deaths and the names
of the refugees fleeing the war. For the past eight
months, we have turned every one of these meetings
into an occasion to rail against the causes, the situation
on the ground and the devastation, to attribute blame
22-64533

21/10/2022

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

and discuss the current, imminent and potential
consequences of the conflict without attenuating the
scope of the devastation on the ground in the least
degree. Today we have continued to list the fears,
atrocities and humanitarian suffering according to a
logic of one side against the other, which leads us to the
sole postulate that each one of the world’s nations must
align itself with one or the other.

meetings at the beginning of the invasion. I will cite
him very carefully. On 27 February, he said,

It is time to consider a solution to silence the guns in
Ukraine. That is certainly the aspiration of all peoples
in the grip of insecurity caused by war. Silencing the
guns is first and foremost the calling of the Council
and the Organization. We call on the warring parties
to respect international humanitarian law and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2231 (2015), and enable unhindered access
for the delivery of humanitarian aid. As we are on the
threshold of winter, we call for a humanitarian truce
and for the opening of new humanitarian corridors in
order to maintain access to drinking water, electricity,
heating and medical care and to facilitate the delivery
of the humanitarian aid that the people affected
desperately need.

“We repeat again that the goal of Russia’s
special military operation is not to occupy Ukraine
or to harm the local population.” (S/PV.8983, p. 14)

There is a time for everything — a time for war
and a time for dialogue. We believe that the time has
come to silence the guns in order to give dialogue a
chance. My country calls on the parties to engage in
negotiations in good faith to end this deadly war and
achieve peaceful coexistence in the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I am happy that the
months, if not years, of our efforts to remove Russia
from the Security Council have brought forth fruits.
Now at least the Permanent Representative of Russia
has removed himself from the Council. The day
will come when Russia will be removed from the
Council altogether.
I regret that the Security Council was still compelled
to listen to the representative who has just fled, as the
only thing he has done over almost eight months of the
invasion has been to pile lie upon lie at every meeting
and about every aspect of the war of aggression that
his master ordered in February. Let me remind Council
members of what that person said at Security Council

“The Russian military poses no threat to Ukraine’s
peaceful citizens. The military does not fire at
peaceful civilian infrastructure” (S/PV.8980, p.7).
Let me offer another
same representative:

quotation

from

the

And further:
“Russia’s special operation does not impact
critical civilian infrastructure.” (ibid., p. 14)
That was said in this very Chamber on 28 February by
the Ambassador who just left. I wonder whether Putin’s
representative is ready to repeat those statements now.
Apparently not, because he is not physically present. I
wonder if he would be willing to repeat them against
the backdrop of mass graves and tens of thousands of
Ukrainians killed and tortured by Russians, or against
the backdrop of the attempted illegal annexation of four
Ukrainian regions by the Russian Federation, which
the General Assembly rejected on Wednesday by an
overwhelming majority (see A/ES-11/PV.14) or, finally,
against the backdrop of the recent deliberate attacks
against Ukrainian critical energy infrastructure.
In the wake of deliberate attacks by Russia, since
24 February Ukrainian law enforcement agencies
have registered the damage or destruction of 51,412
civilian infrastructure facilities. Since 10 October,
there have been about 300 missile and drone attacks
by Russia targeting energy facilities and other civilian
infrastructure in 14 regions, including the capital. As
a result of those attacks, at least 17 civilians have been
killed and 99 injured; nearly 40 per cent of Ukraine’s
energy facilities have been damaged or destroyed;
power plants, central heating plants, transformers, oil
storage sites, distribution devices, overhead power lines
and other energy equipment throughout the country
remain under Russian fire almost on a daily basis.
In that connection, let me recall some Council
history. I would like to remind the Council that,
on 13 February 2017, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2341 (2017), initiated by Ukraine, on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. The resolution called upon all Member States

22-6453319/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

to ensure that they establish criminal responsibility for
terrorist attacks intended to destroy or disable critical
infrastructure, as well as the planning and financing
of, and training and logistical support for, such attacks.
Even Russia joined consensus on that day. What
is more noteworthy, is that Russia claimed at that
meeting that:
“[i]t is not worthwhile to start negotiations that seek
merely to outline obvious points”. (S/PV.7882, p. 22)
Obvious for Russia, indeed? Can the Russian
representative state it again for the record — apparently
not — that it is obvious that the destruction and
disabling of critical infrastructure should be regarded
as terrorist attacks that entail criminal responsibility?
Every part of the criminal regime in Moscow is soaked
with blood and permeated by crime.
It is not surprising, therefore, that Putin has chosen
as new commander of his army in Ukraine a person
who is infamous for his bloodthirsty and criminal
nature. In 1991, during the coup d’état attempt by
Soviet hardliners, that person, Surovikin ordered his
military unit to drive through barricades erected by
pro-democracy protesters in the streets of Moscow.
Three of them were killed, and Surovikin spent half a
year in a pre-trial centre under investigation. Several
years later, he was convicted for illegal possession
of, and trafficking in, firearms and given a one-year
suspended sentence. As a commander of Russian forces
in Syria, Surovikin was responsible for unrestrained
bombing and attacks on civilian targets, including
schools and hospitals. Now, in an attempt to live up to
the expectations of his masterminds, he is transferring
the practice of making no differentiation between
soldiers and civilians to Ukrainian soil.
We have information that Russia is deliberately
preparing the ground for a large-scale disaster in the
south of Ukraine. Russian terrorists have mined the
dam and aggregates of the Kakhovka hydroelectric
power plant — one of the largest power facilities in
Ukraine. That power plant’s dam holds about 18 million
cubic metres of water. If Russian terrorists blow up the
dam, more than 80 settlements, including Kherson,
with hundreds of thousands of inhabitants, will become
an area of rapid flooding. The water supply of a large
part of the south of Ukraine may be destroyed. Such a
Russian terrorist attack could leave the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant without water for cooling, as that
water is taken from the Kakhovka Reservoir.
20/26

21/10/2022

The Russian representative may call that information
“speculations and unfounded accusations”, triggered by
“a wish to generate hysteria”, both phrases he used at
a Security Council meeting on 31 January (S/PV.8960,
p.2). Accusing those who expressed concerns over
Russian military preparations on Ukrainian borders of
“whipping up hysteria” (ibid., p.11) and claiming that
“discussion about the threat of war is provocative in
and of itself” (supra.), he tried to mock the supposedly
unfounded information about planned military action
that “is going to take place in just a few weeks’ time”
(supra.). We all know what happened a few weeks’
time thereafter.
And now it is necessary to act immediately so that
Russia does not have the chance to commit another act
of terror. An international observation mission to the
Kakhovka power plant is needed. It is also necessary
to return the Ukrainian personnel there and to ensure
the immediate and professional demining of the
aggregates and the dam itself. We are concerned about
the so-called “evacuation” of residents of temporarily
occupied Kherson region announced by the Russian
occupiers. The consequences of such an evacuation
may be unpredictable, because it means the forced
deportation of citizens of Ukraine. And every time, the
Russian fakes and propaganda in that regard have been
refuted by credible and independent sources.
We all remember Russian attempts to avoid
responsibility for the Bucha massacre. Those attempts
failed almost immediately due to numerous eyewitness
accounts, findings and investigations. The most recent
contribution to revealing the truth about Russian war
crimes and crimes against humanity was made by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine, which was established by the Human
Rights Council.
Our memory of the convulsions of the Russian
delegation at the meeting of the General Assembly held
on Monday, 10 October (see A/ES-11/PV.12) are still
fresh. We just witnessed how the Russian delegation
desperately seeks to prevent the United Nations from
looking into allegations of gross violations of Security
Council resolutions.
We are extremely concerned about the use of longrange unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) of Iranian
origin by Russia in its indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure in Ukraine. They
are a blatant violation of the Joint Comprehensive
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

Plan of Action, signed by China, France, Germany,
the United Kingdom, the United States, the European
Union and Russia itself and adopted in resolution 2231
(2015).
As members are aware, according to annex B
to that resolution, prohibitions were imposed on
the supply, sale or transfer to or from Iran of such
equipment. In September, UAVs, marked Geran-2,
were captured by Ukraine’s defence forces and, after
technical examination, they appeared to be similar
to Iranian Shahed-136 UAVs, which are capable of
delivering payloads to targets at a range in excess of
300 kilometres and fully correspond to the technical
parameters set out in document S/2015/546.
As members are also aware, on 15 October Ukraine
officially addressed the President of the Security Council
on those violations and requested the initiation of the
relevant investigations. However, there is even more
worrisome information about Russia’s determination
to continue further attacks on Ukraine using advanced
Iranian missile and UAV systems, including ballistic
missiles and Fateh-110 and Zolfaghar missiles, which
are capable of striking targets at a range of 300
kilometres and 700 kilometres, respectively. That will
bring more death and destruction to Ukraine and will
represent another gross violation of resolution 2231
(2015), which calls on Iran not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons.
Another important issue that must be thoroughly
examined is related to the possible export by Russia to
Iran of dual-use services, including technical assistance
or technical information, by providing Iran, as the
original exporter, with data on the results of the use
of UAVs on the battlefield in Ukraine. Iran must also
face serious consequences for its illegal actions, which
help to escalate the Russian war of aggression against
Ukraine. That is why we call on all States to consider
any possible steps to stop the transfer of UAVs, missiles
or conventional arms from Iran.
We fully agree that a United Nations investigation
should start immediately, and we welcome the strong
support for such steps on the part of many members of
the Security Council. We have already invited United
Nations experts to visit Ukraine to inspect recovered
UAVs of Iranian origin in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

S/PV.9161

Ukraine remains committed to the implementation
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Since its launch, 362
vessels, with 8 million tons of food products on board,
have left Ukrainian ports for countries in Asia, Europe
and Africa. Ukraine continues working with the World
Food Programme to increase the amount of food that
is sent to the most vulnerable countries. In particular,
on 18 October the sixth bulk carrier assigned under
the programme arrived in the port of Chernomorsk to
be sent to Yemen. The export of Ukrainian grain has
already contributed to the stabilization of the global
market, a decrease in prices and a reduction in the
chaos caused by the lack of food around the world.
We therefore support its extension after 22 November,
when the initial 120-day period will expire.
Terrorist attacks by Russia against Ukraine serve
only to mobilize greater support from the international
community for Ukraine and put even greater pressure
on that terrorist State. Each terrorist and war criminal,
including the suspects of war crimes in the Chamber,
will be held accountable, sooner or later, and that
terrorist State will pay for its terrorism in the form of
its isolation and degradation of the assets of both State
and quasi-private entities that are connected with the
Russian regime.
The world must respond with preventive action to
ensure that another Kakhovka or similar disaster does
not happen. As President Zelenskyy said yesterday in
his address to the nation, the principle of preventive
response to security threats should finally become one
of the basic principles of international politics.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Slovakia strongly
condemns the ongoing unprovoked and unjustified
Russian military aggression against Ukraine, which is
a clear sign of a serious violation of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the rules-based
international order.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. It is important to continue focusing
on the situation in Ukraine. The fact that the Council
has to date failed to take decisive action on the crisis
and the war should not stop us from focusing on what
is going on. In that context, I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator Brown for their informative
and important briefings.

22-6453321/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

As a neighbouring country of Ukraine, Slovakia
remains gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine, which is the focus of our
discussion today, and rightly so. If there is one thing
that should never escape our attention, it is the people
who are suffering from this senseless war, who need to
be heard and whose situation must be addressed.
Unfortunately, as we have heard, the situation
continues to deteriorate — and that should not go
unnoticed. Older persons, persons with disabilities and
others belonging to marginalized groups and minorities
are also affected by the consequences of the war. They
face major trauma and are even more likely to become
victims of devastating violations of their rights.
We remain appalled by the huge number of
killings of innocent civilians, the attacks on critical
infrastructure and the huge scale of sexual and genderbased violence committed by Russian soldiers and
occupiers. The thousands of people killed, the hundreds
of schools destroyed or damaged, with negative impacts
on children whose fundamental right to education has
been undermined, as well as the attacks on medical
facilities, are only a short list of the consequences of
the madness caused by Putin’s senseless decision to
begin the war.
It is obvious that the Russian Federation does not
understand the saying “enough is enough”, which the
Secretary-General recently used in this context. In
recent days, we witnessed a slew of attacks by missiles
and Iranian drones, targeting cities in Ukraine,
including Kyiv, Dnipro, Vinnytsia and Ivano-Frankivsk
in central Ukraine, Zaporizhzhya in the south and the
Kharkiv and Sumy regions in the east, among others. We
are particularly concerned about the attacks on energy
infrastructure having an impact on people’s access to
water and heat, which is particularly disturbing with
regard to the coming winter.
We are deeply concerned about the serious effects
of the Russian invasion on global food security. As we
know, millions of people around the world are being
pushed into extreme poverty, hunger and lack of access
to food. In that context, we of course fully support the
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and safe
passage for agricultural deliveries and shipping from
Ukrainian ports, and we hope that that will be done.
Unfortunately, no one can predict when this
senseless war will end, and we want that to be as soon
as possible. But those who believe that, by reaching a
22/26

21/10/2022

truce and silencing the guns, everything will be over
are wrong. The perpetrators of heinous attacks, such
as those in Bucha, Kramatorsk and, quite recently,
Izyum, cannot remain unpunished and must, and will,
be brought to justice.
Slovakia recognizes Ukraine as an independent,
sovereign State with unquestionable territorial integrity.
All acts associated with the forcible acquisition of
Ukrainian territory by the Russian Federation are null,
void and illegitimate. The so-called referendums in the
occupied regions took place during an active armed
conflict in areas under Russian occupation, and they
cannot be called a true expression of the will of the
people. Slovakia will never recognize those territories
as anything but a part of Ukraine.
Last week, the voice of the United Nations was
crystal clear. We received many questions from our
citizens, the media and young people, and the message
needs to be made clear. We therefore urge the Russian
Federation to fully implement the General Assembly
resolution of 12 October (resolution ES-11/4) without
further delay. That is the least that we can do for the
people of Ukraine, for those suffering and for the future
of our planet.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and Resident Coordinator
Denise Brown for their briefings. They yet again made
clear the horrific consequences of Russia’s ongoing
aggression for the people of Ukraine and around
the world.
The world remains united for peace. A total of
143 countries once again condemned Russia’s actions
and demanded that Russia respect the Charter of
the United Nations and end its war immediately and
unconditionally (see resolution ES-11/4).
Russia’s reaction to the world’s call for peace is
shocking. Over these past days, it has escalated its
attacks, deliberately and systematically targeting
civilian infrastructure. Hundreds of missiles and drones,
including drones supplied by Iran, hit playgrounds,
residential buildings, schools, hospitals, bridges and
power stations.
Russia’s aim is clear. The Moscow regime wants to
subjugate Ukraine. It wants to plunge Ukraine, quite
literally, into darkness and make Ukrainians freeze,
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

knocking out electricity and heating for millions
of civilians. Those attacks violate international
humanitarian law and could amount to war crimes.
Those responsible for such blatant violations of
international law will be held accountable.
Let me join colleagues in pointing out that Russia
is also violating resolution 2231 (2015) — yet another
example of how Russia, a permanent member of the
Security Council, undermines the United Nations
Charter. All the information that we have is quite clear.
Iranian drones are being used to terrorize civilians, and
they were delivered to Russia without the prior approval
of the Council. That is therefore in blatant violation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We are greatly concerned by
reports that Iran also intends to deliver ballistic missiles
to Russia. We would welcome an investigation by the
United Nations team responsible for monitoring the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and we stand
ready to support its technical and impartial efforts.
Germany will continue to stand by the United
Nations Charter, wherever in the world it is breached,
and we will continue to stand by Ukraine. We stand ready
to support Ukraine in mitigating the devastation caused
by Russia’s attacks. This coming Tuesday, Chancellor
Scholz and President Von Der Leyen will host the
International Expert Conference on the Recovery,
Reconstruction and Modernization of Ukraine in
Berlin. The conference will galvanize international
support for Ukraine’s recovery and reconstruction.
In conclusion, the Russian Federation must change
its course, fully respect the letter and spirit of the
United Nations Charter and withdraw from Ukraine.
It must comply with the legally binding order of the
International Court of Justice to immediately stop its
military operations against Ukraine and withdraw.
Germany will continue to uphold the territorial
integrity and political independence of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders, and that is the
duty of each and every one of us.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): At the outset, I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important briefing. I
also thank today’s briefers for their valuable statements.
Poland supports the written statement submitted by
Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia and the Czech Republic.

S/PV.9161

The main reason that we again meet today in this
Chamber is Russia’s deliberate strategy to create a
humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine by pursuing its
brutal war. Regrettably, that brutal war is far from
being over. The recent Kremlin decisions on military
mobilization and the illegal annexation of Ukrainian
territory, coupled with nuclear rhetoric and mass air
strikes against civilian infrastructure, indicate that
Russia has chosen the path of escalation. That has
dramatic consequences not only for Ukraine, but also
for global security and economic stability, including
the dire situation in the food and energy markets, as
well as the cost-of-living crisis.
The fierce Russian air attacks against civilian targets
launched on 10 October and in the following days, which
have continued since then, are yet another violation of
international law. They seem to have two purposes.
Moscow wants to intimidate the civilian population
and to destroy Ukraine’s energy infrastructure, which
is critical, especially during the winter period. That is
why the issue on which we need to immediately focus
is the perspective of the upcoming winter. Due to the
Russian bombings, more than 3.5 million people are
left without a roof over their head.
Another immediate aspect of the everyday life of
people that we do not discuss very often is the presence
of explosives deliberately left behind by the Russians.
The challenge ahead of us is therefore the demining of
areas, including agricultural lands, in various regions
of Ukraine. The mines and unexploded ordnance are
a threat to civilians, including children. There is an
urgent need to provide adequate equipment to conduct
those operations efficiently and quickly.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the
recent missile attacks on Ukrainian cities. Shelling
civilians is a war crime. Civilians are not a target.
Civilians are protected by international law, including
the Geneva Conventions of 1949. Civilians must not
be taken hostage. The Russian Federation has shown
a total lack of respect for international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. Its forces have
committed horrific atrocities. Poland will continue to
work with international institutions and Ukraine to
ensure that those responsible for those barbaric acts are
held accountable.
Poland has consistently supported Ukraine and
its citizens in the fight against the aggressor. Poland
became a new home for more than 1.3 million refugees,

22-6453323/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

who enjoy the same access to public services and
social security benefits as Polish citizens. We also help
those who stayed to fight for their country or cannot
leave by providing Government humanitarian aid. The
only appropriate response to the Russian attacks is to
increase the scale of our support for Ukraine. In that
context, let me express Polish support for the brave and
valuable work of the United Nations team in Ukraine.
I would like to emphasize that the whole tragedy and
this enormous humanitarian crisis are purely humanmade. There are no elements to blame. It is Russia that
started the aggression, and only Russia bears the full
responsibility for all the destruction and loss of life that
it has caused. The only way out is peace, and for there
to be peace, we need Russian troops to leave Ukraine.
In its recent resolution ES-11/4, the General
Assembly demanded that Russia reverse course on the
attempted illegal annexation. A total of 143 Member
States strongly reaffirmed Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity in its internationally recognized
borders (see A/ES-11/PV.14). That confirms without
any doubt that no territorial concessions are expected
from Ukraine for peace to occur. Despite that clear
decision, Russia continues on its path of escalation and
acts against peace in Ukraine.
Poland appeals to the members of the Security
Council and the whole international community to
increase pressure on Russia to stop this war. That
would be an immediate, almost overnight, solution
to the whole crisis. Russia must immediately stop the
aggression, withdraw its troops and abide by the rules of
the Charter of the United Nations, which apply equally
to all. That will enable us all to start peacebuilding
and to restore the shattered lives and livelihoods of
the Ukrainian people. And we are ready to do so. Give
peace a chance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening and highlighting today’s meeting. It is very
important that this subject be discussed and that all
concerned be able to address the Security Council on
such an important issue.
Two days ago, the European Parliament awarded
the 2022 Sakharov Prize to the people of Ukraine. For
a people who is safeguarding the values of freedom,
democracy and the rule of law — who has been forced
24/26

21/10/2022

to flee and has sadly lost relatives and friends — no one
deserves that kind of recognition more than them.
We are appalled by Russia’s intensification of
bombardments on civilians and civilian facilities,
which constitute serious violations of international
humanitarian law. This and last week’s air attacks
deliberately targeted critical infrastructure and
terrorize civilians in Kyiv and other Ukrainian cities.
Targeting civilians, schools and energy supplies
can never be legitimate. Almost a third of Ukraine’s
power stations have been disabled. Russia must be held
accountable for those evident violations of international
humanitarian law, which are resulting in hundreds
of civilian casualties every week. The same goes for
those that facilitate the aggression — Belarus and Iran.
We also strongly condemn the clandestine transfer of
combat drones by Iran to Russia without seeking the
Council’s prior approval, which constitutes a material
breach of resolution 2231 (2015).
The damage to Ukraine’s energy infrastructure
is creating major challenges in view of the upcoming
winter and will require stepping up the international
humanitarian response. During his visit to Kyiv
this week, European Union Commissioner Lenarčič
announced the mobilization of an additional
€175 million in humanitarian funding to address urgent
needs and provide education, food, access to water and
protection from the cold winter. However, no level of
humanitarian funding will be enough if Russian attacks
continue to target energy infrastructure and heating
stations. More than 400 of them have been damaged
in the past two weeks alone. The Russian Federation
must immediately stop its attacks, suspend its military
operations in the territory of Ukraine and withdraw all
its military forces, armed groups and other unauthorized
personnel from the territory of Ukraine, as set out by
the General Assembly.
We know that the humanitarian needs in Ukraine
are immense and growing, yet we cannot even assess
their scale in the non-Government-controlled areas. On
Wednesday, we heard a plea from the United Nations
Resident Coordinator for immediate access to be given
to humanitarian organizations to allow them to assist all
vulnerable people in Ukraine, without distinction. This
is not about politics; it is a humanitarian imperative.
We are devastated by the repeated discoveries of
atrocities in liberated areas and the increasing horrific
number of civilian casualties across the country. Where
22-64533

21/10/2022

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

the Russian armed forces have been, minefields are left
behind, making the delivery of humanitarian assistance
impossible and endangering the lives of innocent
people. Shocking are reports of arbitrary executions
and detentions, rape, torture and other ill-treatment,
as well as unlawful forcible transfers and deportations
of Ukrainian civilians, including children, within
territories under Russian military control to Russia. We
note that the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine concluded, based on the evidence
gathered in the regions of Kyiv, Chernihiv, Kharkiv and
Sumy, that atrocities to be classified as war crimes have
been committed in Ukraine.
We stress the importance of collecting,
consolidating and analysing evidence of violations and
abuses of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law and related crimes committed in the
context of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. We also
support measures to ensure accountability, including
the investigations by the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court. We also underline that all international
and regional accountability and monitoring mechanisms
should be granted full, secure and unrestricted access
to the entire territory of Ukraine, including to all
war-related detainees. We therefore urge the Russian
Federation to comply with the appeal of the SecretaryGeneral to grant the International Committee of the Red
Cross full access to all prisoners of war. The release of
more than 100 Ukrainian women, which took place on
17 October, is an important step in the right direction.
Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified and illegal war of
aggression against Ukraine has created a humanitarian
crisis that is also having devastating global impacts.
The deliberate destruction by Russia of Ukraine’s
agricultural and transport infrastructure is causing
worldwide food supply chain disruptions and endangers
the food security of millions of people around the globe.
In that context, the Black Sea Grain Initiative is of key
importance to mitigate the global impact of Russia’s
aggression, and we support the call by SecretaryGeneral Guterres to extend it beyond 19 November.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): The Minister for Foreign
Affairs for Greece, Nikos Dendias, travelled to Kyiv
on Wednesday under well-known extraordinary
circumstances in the only visit that has taken place in
the city during this troublesome period. Kyiv, as the

S/PV.9161

rest of the country, is suffering daily vicious attacks,
resulting in the death and injury of dozens of unarmed
innocent people. It was Minister Dendias’ third visit to
Ukraine since the beginning of the war, as he has visited
Odesa twice, a city connected with Greek history and
the Greek community of Ukraine.
Those visits send a strong message expressing
the full solidarity of the Greek Government with the
Government and the people of Ukraine. For centuries,
Greeks have been present, especially on the Black Sea
shores, in particular in the area of Mariupol, which
has been home to a centuries-long established Greek
community of around 100,000 people. It is also one of
the areas that has been hit the hardest by the Russian
forces. The city of Mariupol has been almost entirely
destroyed. For Greece, respect for international law and
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all countries
is a pillar of our foreign policy. That is why we
condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine from day one.
Recent worrisome attacks carried out by drones are
having far-reaching repercussions, directly affecting
vital civilian infrastructure, leading to an inhumane
continuous and merciless shelling targeting innocent
lives. Greece condemns those attacks in the strongest of
terms. We have repeatedly asked for urgent compliance
with international humanitarian law for the protection
of civilians and their property, for safeguarding the
right of safe passage from conflict zones and access to
valid information concerning areas of safe temporary
shelter, as well as humanitarian access to areas where
civilians continue to reside.
Greece has been providing humanitarian aid from
the very start of the war. We have so far delivered
multiple packages of needs-based, in-kind humanitarian
assistance. Moreover, we are firmly committed to the
reconstruction of Ukraine. We have announced that we
are ready to rebuild a maternity hospital destroyed by
Russian shelling in the city of Mariupol and to contribute
to the reconstruction of Odesa — another city that is
close to our hearts, since our struggle for independence
began there. And we are ready and working together for
the promotion of the candidacy of the historic centre
of Odesa to be designated by UNESCO as a World
Heritage Site.
Given my country’s particular sensitivity regarding
children, we have pledged €200,000 to UNICEF’s
humanitarian action in Ukraine. Furthermore, we have
taken over the treatment of children with cancer at the

22-6453325/26

S/PV.9161

Maintenance of international peace and security of Ukraine

Elpida Oncologic Hospital for Children — “Elpida”
means “hope”.
Also, we responded effectively to the needs of tens
of thousands of Ukrainian citizens seeking refuge from
the war, having welcomed more than 75,000 refugees,
including unaccompanied minors unfortunately
separated from their families in Ukraine, who are
eligible for immediate protection. A call centre was set
up to facilitate communication for displaced persons
from Ukraine, with detailed information provided
in Greek, English and Ukrainian. Actions on the
education level have also been put into effect to ensure
the inclusion of Ukrainian pupils in the educational
system. At the same time, through our commercial

26/26

21/10/2022

fleet, we contribute to the transfer of Ukrainian grain
to key ports in the North Africa region, in an effort to
address the food crisis.
Greece is strongly committed to accountability for
war crimes. Minister Dendias has sent relevant letters
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
and visited The Hague in that respect.
No matter all the efforts by the international
community, the only real solution to the ongoing
suffering of the Ukrainian people is the immediate
cessation of the unprovoked aggression on the part
of Russia.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

22-64533
