A /68/PV.2

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

2nd plenary meeting

Friday, 20 September 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Item 7 of the provisional agenda (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
First report of the General Committee (A/68/250)
The President: May I invite the General Assembly
to direct its attention to section I of the report of the
General Committee. In that section, the General
Committee took note of the information contained in
paragraph 2.
May I request the General Assembly to now direct
its attention to section II, entitled “Organization of the
session”, which contains a number of recommendations
concerning the General Committee, the rationalization
of work, the opening and closing dates for the session,
the schedule of meetings, the general debate and the
conduct of the meetings, et cetera.
In paragraph 20, the General Committee draws to
the attention of the Assembly the fact that the general
debate will be held from Tuesday, 24 September to
Tuesday, 1 October, and recommends that it continue
on Saturday, 28 September 2013. May I take it that the
Assembly takes note of the information contained in
paragraph 20 and approves the recommendation that
the general debate continue on Saturday, 28 September
2013?
It was so decided.
The President: All other recommendations in section
II of the report of the Committee concern established

practice. Therefore, rather than going through them one
by one, I believe it would be beneficial to address all
of those organizational matters concerning the General
Assembly as a whole.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of all of the information that
it is requested to take note of and to approve all the
recommendations of the General Committee contained
in section II of the report?
It was so decided.
The President: Having just adopted the
recommendation in paragraph 18 on waiving the
requirements of rules 67 and 108 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly to declare a meeting open, I
should like to endorse the practical suggestion that has
been made at previous sessions that each delegation
designate someone to be present in the meeting rooms
at the scheduled time, unlike this morning.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the information contained in
paragraph 43 concerning the timely submission of draft
proposals for the review of their programme budget
implications?
It was so decided.
The President: May I now invite members to turn
their attention to section III of the report, which deals
with the adoption of the agenda. The question of the
allocation of items will be dealt with subsequently in
section IV.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-48105 (E)

*1348105*

A/68/PV.2

In section III, the General Committee took note of
the information contained in paragraphs 51 to 56.
In paragraph 57, in connection with sub-item
(j) of item 19 of the draft agenda, entitled “The role
of the international community in the prevention of
the radiation threat in Central Asia”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading A, entitled “Promotion of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and recent United Nations conferences”. May I take it
that the Assembly approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 58, in connection
with item 39 of the draft agenda, entitled “Question
of the Comorian island of Mayotte”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading B, entitled “Maintenance of international
peace and security”, on the understanding that there
would be no consideration of the item by the General
Assembly. May I take it that the Assembly approves
that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 59, in connection with
item 54 of the draft agenda, entitled “Comprehensive
review of special political missions”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading B, entitled “Maintenance of international
peace and security”. May I take it that the Assembly
approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 60, in connection with
item 61 of the draft agenda, entitled “Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India”, the General Committee decided to
recommend that consideration of that item be deferred
to the sixty-ninth session of the General Assembly and
that the item be included in the provisional agenda of
that session. May I take it that the Assembly approves
that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 61, in connection
with sub-item (d) of item 132 of the draft agenda,
entitled “United Nations Capital Development Fund”,
the General Committee decided to recommend its
inclusion under heading I, entitled “Organizational,

2/15

20/09/2013

administrative and other matters”. May I take it that the
Assembly approves that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 62, in connection with
item 125 of the draft agenda, entitled “Strengthening
of the United Nations system”, the General Committee
decided to recommend its inclusion under heading I,
entitled “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”, on the understanding that the General
Committee would further consider and revert to the
proposal made by the Russian Federation during its 1st
meeting, held on 18 September. I have consulted with
the General Committee and understand that there is
agreement on the following proposal in relation to the
consideration of item 125:
“The consideration of the review of civilian
capacity in the aftermath of conflict, under item
125 of the draft agenda, in plenary meeting shall
take place only after the Fifth Committee, the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
and the Peacebuilding Commission have had an
opportunity to consider the question.”
May I take it that the Assembly approves that
proposal?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 63, in connection
with item 171 of the draft agenda, entitled “Observer
status for the International Institute for the Unification
of Private Law in the General Assembly”, the General
Committee decided to recommend its inclusion under
heading I, entitled “Organizational, administrative and
other matters”. May I take it that the Assembly approves
that recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 64, in connection
with item 172 of the draft agenda, entitled “Observer
status for the International Anti-Corruption Academy
in the General Assembly”, the General Committee
decided to recommend its inclusion under heading I,
entitled “Organizational, administrative and other
matters”. May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 65, in connection
with item 173 of the draft agenda, “Observer status for

13-48105

20/09/2013

the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency for Water
and Sanitation for Africa in the General Assembly”, the
General Committee decided to recommend its inclusion
under heading I, “Organizational, administrative and
other matters”.
May I take it that the Assembly approves this
recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: In paragraph 66, in connection with
item 174 of the draft agenda, “Observer status for the
Global Green Growth Institute in the General Assembly”,
the General Committee decided to recommend
its inclusion under heading I, “Organizational,
administrative and other matters”. May I take it that the
Assembly approves this recommendation?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to the agenda
recommended by the General Committee in paragraph
67 of its report for adoption by the General Assembly,
taking into account the decisions just adopted with
respect to the draft agenda.
Bearing in mind that the agenda is organized
under nine headings, we shall consider the inclusion of
items under each heading as a whole. I should like to
remind members once again that, at present, we are not
discussing the substance of any item.
Items 1 and 2 have already been dealt with. We
shall now turn to items 3 to 8. May I take it that these
items are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to the inclusion of the
items listed under heading A, “Promotion of sustained
economic growth and sustainable development in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and recent United Nations conferences”.
May I take it that the items listed under heading A are
included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to heading B,
“Maintenance of international peace and security”.
May I take it that the items listed under heading B are
included in the agenda?
It was so decided.

A/68/PV.2

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): My delegation wishes to
state that we dissociate ourselves from the consensus
to include item 38 in the agenda of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
The President: Next, we turn to heading C,
“Development of Africa”. May I take it that the item
listed under this heading is included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: Now we come to heading D,
“Promotion of human rights”. May I take it that the
items listed under heading D are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: Heading E is entitled “Effective
coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts”. May I
take it that the item listed under this heading is included
in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: Next, we turn to heading F,
“Promotion of justice and international law”. May I take
it that the items listed under heading F are included in
the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: Now we turn to heading G,
“Disarmament”. May I take it that the items listed
under this heading are included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: Heading H is entitled “Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”. May I
take it that the items listed under this heading are
included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: Lastly, we turn to heading I,
“Organizational, administrative and other matters”.
May I take it that the items listed under heading I are
included in the agenda?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to section IV of the
report of the General Committee, on the allocation of
items.

13-481053/15

A/68/PV.2

The General Committee took note of the information
contained in paragraphs 68 to 70. May I take it that it
is the wish of the General Assembly to take note of the
information contained in paragraph 70 concerning the
granting of observer status?
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now turn to the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 72 to 78. We
shall take up the recommendations one by one. Before
we proceed, may I remind members that the item
numbers cited here refer to the agenda in paragraph 67
of the report before us, namely document A/68/250.
We turn first to paragraphs 72 (a) to (j), which relate
to a number of plenary items. May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to take note of all of the
information that the General Committee wishes it to
take note of and approve all of the recommendations
of the General Committee contained in paragraphs 72
(a) to (j)?
It was so decided.
The President: We now turn to paragraph 73,
which relates to item 99, “General and complete
disarmament”.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves
the recommendation contained in paragraph 73?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to paragraph 74,
which relates to item 54, “Comprehensive review of
special political missions” of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).
May I take it that the General Assembly approves the
recommendation contained in paragraph 74?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to paragraph 75,
which relates to sub-item (j) of item 19, “The role of
the international community in the prevention of the
radiation threat in Central Asia”, under the Second
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
approves the recommendation contained in paragraph
75?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to paragraphs 76
(a) to (c), which relate to sub-item (d) of item 131,
“United Nations Capital Development Fund”; item 135,

4/15

20/09/2013

“Programme planning”; and item 143, “Administration
of justice at the United Nations”, of the Fifth Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly approves the
recommendations contained in paragraphs 76 (a) to (c)?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to paragraphs 77 (a)
to (d), which relate to item 170, “Observer status for
the International Institute for the Unification of Private
Law in the General Assembly”; item 171, “Observer
status for the International Anti-Corruption Academy in
the General Assembly”; item 172, “Observer status for
the Pan African Intergovernmental Agency for Water
and Sanitation for Africa in the General Assembly”;
and item 173, “Observer status for the Global Green
Growth Institute in the General Assembly”, of the Sixth
Committee. May I take it that the General Assembly
approves the recommendations contained in paragraphs
77 (a) to (d)?
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now turn to paragraph 78
of the report of the General Committee on the allocation
of items to the plenary and to each Main Committee.
I first turn to the list of items recommended by
the General Committee for consideration directly in
plenary meeting under all the relevant headings. Taking
into account the decisions just adopted, may I consider
that the General Assembly approves the allocation of
the items listed for plenary meetings?
It was so decided.
The President: We come next to the list of items
which the General Committee has recommended
for allocation to the First Committee under all the
relevant headings. Taking into account the decisions
just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly
approves the allocation of these items for consideration
by the First Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to the list of items
which the General Committee recommends for
allocation to the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) under all the relevant
headings. Taking into account the decisions just
adopted, may I consider that the General Assembly
approves the allocation of these items for consideration
by the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)?

13-48105

20/09/2013

It was so decided.
The President: We come now to the list of items
which the General Committee has recommended
for allocation to the Second Committee under all the
relevant headings. Taking into account the decisions
just adopted, may I consider that the General Assembly
approves the allocation of these items for consideration
by the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: We turn now to the list of items
which the General Committee recommends for
allocation to the Third Committee under all the
relevant headings. Taking into account the decisions
just adopted, may I take it that the General Assembly
approves the allocation of these items for consideration
by the Third Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: Next, we come to the list of items
that the General Committee recommends for allocation
to the Fifth Committee under all the relevant headings.
Taking into account the decisions just adopted, may
I take it that the General Assembly approves the
allocation of those items for consideration by the Fifth
Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: Lastly, we come to the list of items
that the General Committee recommends for allocation
to the Sixth Committee under all the relevant headings.
Taking into account the decisions just adopted, may
I take it that the General Assembly approves the
allocation of those items for consideration by the Sixth
Committee?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of the first report of the
General Committee. I wish to thank all the members
of the Assembly for their cooperation. Each Main
Committee will receive the list of agenda items allocated
to it so that it may begin its work in accordance with
rule 99 of the rules of procedure.
I would now like to draw the attention of
representatives to a matter concerning the participation
of the Holy See, in its capacity as an Observer State, in
the sessions and work of the General Assembly.

A/68/PV.2

In accordance with resolution 58/314, of 1 July
2004, and the note by the SecretaryGeneral contained
in document A/58/871, the Holy See, in its capacity as
an observer State, will participate in the work of the
sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, with no
further need for a precursory explanation prior to any
intervention.
I would also like to draw the attention of
representatives to a matter concerning the participation
of the State of Palestine, in its capacity as an observer
State, in the sessions and work of the General Assembly.
In accordance with resolutions 3237 (XXIX), of
22 November 1974; 43/177; of 15 December 1988; 52/250,
of 7 July 1998; and 67/19, of 29 November 2012, and the
note by the Secretary-General contained in document
A/52/1002, the State of Palestine, in its capacity as
an observer State, will participate in the work of the
sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, with no
further need for a precursory explanation prior to any
intervention.
In addition, I would like to draw the attention of
representatives to a matter concerning the participation
of the European Union, in its capacity as observer, in
the sessions and work of the General Assembly.
In accordance with resolution 65/276, of 3 May
2011, and the note by the Secretary-General contained
in document A/65/856, representatives of the European
Union will participate in the work of the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, with no further need
for a precursory explanation prior to any intervention.
Agenda items 14 and 118
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/68/L.2)
The President: Members are reminded that the
debate on agenda item 14 and agenda item 118 will be
held jointly with sub-items (a) and (b) of agenda item
124, entitled “Strengthening of the United Nations
system”, and agenda item 125, entitled “United Nations
reform: measures and proposals”, on 28 October.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.2, entitled “Review of the implementation of

13-481055/15

A/68/PV.2

General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/68/L.2, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social
Council”, I wish to put on record the following statement
on financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
By paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would decide that the arrangements contained
in the draft resolution and its annex would be reviewed
at the seventy-second session.
Paragraphs 4, 5 and 16 of the annex state that the
arrangements set forth in the annex should not lead to
an increase in the number of meeting days currently
provided for the Economic and Social Council. The
Council shall adjust its programme of work to a Julyto-July cycle with immediate effect, and is invited to
consider transitional arrangements for the election
of its Bureau, taking into account the relevant rules,
regulations and practices with regard to the work of the
Council, its subsidiary bodies and United Nations funds
and programmes. The Council shall hold its regular
meetings in New York, with the humanitarian affairs
segment continuing to alternate between New York and
Geneva. On an ad hoc and cost-effective basis, another
United Nations location could be decided upon if that
would contribute to a better discussion on the chosen
main theme.
Pursuant to the changes in the programme of
work of the Economic and Social Council contained
in the various provisions of draft resolution A/68/L.2
and its annex, and in view of paragraphs 4 and 5 of
the annex, it is the understanding of the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management
that the Economic and Social Council would not
need additional meetings beyond what is currently
being provided for the Council. Therefore, there will
be no implications on the meetings workload for the
Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management. However, given that the United Nations
calendar of conferences and meetings for the biennium
2014-2015 has already been prepared and the Economic

6/15

20/09/2013

and Social Council secretariat is not able to specify
the timing and modalities of the Council’s meetings,
at this time it is difficult to determine the feasibility
of those meetings vis-à-vis the meetings capacity of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management. Therefore, the dates of the Economic and
Social Council meetings will have to be determined in
consultation with the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management.
With regard to paragraph 16 of the annex of draft
resolution A/68/L.2, should the Economic and Social
Council hold its meeting at another United Nations
location, the implications for the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management will
depend on the availability of conference servicing staff
at that location. If they are not available, additional
costs such as travel and daily subsistence allowance for
conference-servicing staff sent from other duty stations
will constitute additional requirements. Therefore,
when making a specific decision to hold its meeting at
another United Nations location, the additional financial
implications would be taken into consideration by the
Economic and Social Council.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.2, the Secretary-General will
submit details of financial implications, if applicable,
in accordance with the established procedures when the
modalities of the meeting are determined.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position before taking action
on the draft resolution, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Allow
me, Sir, as this is the first time I take the floor, to
congratulate you warmly upon your election to serve
as President of the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth
session. I promise that I will definitely keep my remarks
to less than 10 minutes.
People are ever more aware that the challenges
of the future cannot be tackled in our interconnected
and globalized world without a systematic vision and
the genuine participation of all of us, from North and
South, East and West, alike. This awareness is acting
as a catalyst for rapid and profound change, including

13-48105

20/09/2013

within the United Nations. Today we are witnessing
changes following the Economic and Social Council
reform process and the intense negotiations that
carried on for several months. We would like to view
that as an encouraging sign for the even more intense
negotiations awaiting us on the post-2015 development
agenda, in which we hope to see an inclusive sustainable
development overcome the old dichotomy that
characterizes the current development architecture.
Switzerland shares the opinion of many delegations
that the Economic and Social Council has not always
made the most of its potential in the past and that it
could fulfil its mandate in a more efficient and effective
way. That is why Switzerland has been and remains
determined to making the Council stronger, more
efficient and more relevant.
From the outset, Switzerland has supported several
reform proposals, including the definition of annual
themes, better coordination between the Council
and the General Assembly in order to avoid any
overlap, streamlined reporting from its committees,
and strengthened participation for all stakeholders,
especially non-governmental organizations.
An essential function of the Council is to monitor the
implementation of decisions relating to the operational
role of the United Nations system. Any reform of the
Council must therefore aim to strengthen that key role.
Important United Nations processes, such as the review
of the United Nations development system through
the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, have a
direct impact on United Nations bodies, including the
specialized international organizations based in Geneva.
Geneva hosts the headquarters of leading international
organizations in the areas of health, trade, labour,
human rights and humanitarian affairs and serves as a
global platform for environmental issues. All of those
issues are essential to the deliberations of the Economic
and Social Council. Disconnecting the governing
bodies of those institutions from the monitoring of
strategic decisions risks having a negative impact on
the United Nations development system and alienating
the Geneva-based United Nations institutions.
In our view, the reform should have brought the
Council closer to the actors on the ground and to the
main beneficiaries of its actions. We fear that the
reform has rather the opposite effect, with the Council
being seen as an ever more distant organization. We
also doubt that the Council would be strengthened if it

A/68/PV.2

could no longer count, in the course of its deliberations,
on the expertise of the wide variety of civil society
organizations based in Geneva that work on issues that
are key for the Council. Moreover, if the operational
segment is to take pace in February, we frankly do
not see how the Secretariat will have time to collect
the data needed for Member States to monitor the
implementation of the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review. We hope that the Secretariat will find a
way of managing that.
We understand that a key argument for stopping
the alternation between New York and Geneva, with
the exception of the humanitarian segment and the
transition day, is that of associated costs. Switzerland
is not convinced that splitting up the different segments
throughout the calendar year will be any more costeffective than having the roughly two-week-long
humanitarian and operational segment directly followed
by the high-level week, which would alternate between
New York and Geneva.
It is for those reasons that Switzerland remains
sceptical with regard to the results of the reform. We
do not know if there will be any true strengthening in
practice of the Economic and Social Council and the
operational system of the United Nations. Moreover,
Switzerland is not convinced of the cost-saving effect
of this measure. However, given the general feeling
prevailing in the Hall and to show our commitment
to a common cause, we do not want to block this
undertaking, aware that it is just the first step leading to
more profound reform of the Council, which will have
to learn how to interact with the General Assembly
in the future, not least through the newly established
High-level Political Forum.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of position prior to taking action on the
draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/68/L.2, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16
on the strengthening of the Economic and Social
Council”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.2?
Draft resolution A/68/L.2 was adopted (resolution
68/1).

13-481057/15

A/68/PV.2

The President: Before giving the floor to the
speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of resolution 68/1, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Mrs. Mørch Smith (Norway): As we accelerate
our efforts to reach the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and prepare for a new sustainable development
agenda after 2015, the improvements to the Economic
and Social Council we have agreed to will strengthen
the ability of the United Nations to drive those efforts.
The reformed Economic and Social Council will give
us a better platform and framework that will make
the United Nations’ work on sustainable development
issues more effective and efficient.
We expect the reformed Council to become a
highly relevant and attractive venue for policy debate.
We want to see broad, high-level engagement on the
part of Governments and the United Nations system, as
well as civil society and other stakeholders. We want
the Economic and Social Council to be a key arena
for driving the implementation of the MDGs and the
post-2015 agenda. Norway would like to thank the
co-facilitators, Ambassadors Talbot and Frankinet, and
their teams for their dedication, wisdom and patience in
conducting the process that has led to today’s decision.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union, who wishes to make a statement following the
adoption of resolution 68/1.
Ms. Kaljulate (European Union): The European
Union and its member States wish to thank the
co-facilitators, Ambassador Frankinet of Belgium
and Ambassador Talbot of Guyana, their teams and
the Secretariat for all their efforts in the process that
led to the adoption of resolution 68/1. It has been a
long process, and we are grateful for their leadership
and perseverance. The Economic and Social Council
is a principal organ of the United Nations and of
great importance to us. We trust that the resolution
will improve its effectiveness, inclusiveness and
responsiveness to today’s challenges.
The Economic and Social Council has seen many
reforms over the years. While we would have gone
further in certain areas and taken different approaches

8/15

20/09/2013

in others, we are still convinced that the resolution
adopted today promises to significantly improve
the work and results of the Council. It will now be
incumbent upon all of us, including the President of
the Council and its Bureau, to ensure that this promise
becomes a reality. Just as we believe today’s resolution
will enable the Council to become more efficient, we
also trust that cost effectiveness will remain a priority,
including with respect to the resolution, which we
believe does not entail any budgetary implications.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 14 and
118.
Agenda item 125
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Draft resolution (A/68/L.3)
The President: Members are reminded that the
debate on agenda item 125 will be held on 20 October
jointly with agenda item 14, entitled “Integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields”;
agenda item 118, entitled “Follow-up to the outcome of
the Millennium Summit; and sub-items (a) and (b) of
agenda item 124, entitled “Strengthening of the United
Nations system”.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.3, entitled “Extension of the intergovernmental
process of the General Assembly on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with
draft resolution A/68/L.3, entitled “Extension of the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system”, I wish to
put on record the following statement on financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
By paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would request the Secretary-General to

13-48105

20/09/2013

A/68/PV.2

provide a comprehensive and detailed cost assessment
to provide background context to support the
intergovernmental process by 15 November 2013, based
on, but not limited to, the report of the co-facilitators.

of the intergovernmental process of the General
Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system at
the Assembly’s sixty-seventh session.

It is the understanding of the Secretary-General
that the requested comprehensive and detailed cost
assessment would be prepared in the format of a note/
background paper, in English only, without editing or
translation into all languages by conference services.
The note/background paper would be submitted to
the President of the General Assembly, who would
then forward it to Member States under the cover of
his respective letter, which would receive an official
document number for future reference.

Allow me to begin by reiterating our sincere
appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly at its sixty-seventh session, His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, for the trust and honour afforded
us and our countries in facilitating such an important
intergovernmental process. We would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for facilitating the process’s smooth
transition to the sixty-eighth session. Despite the delay
in adopting the draft text before us, we are very pleased
that the draft procedural resolution (A/68/L.3) is now
before us for adoption.

It is expected that the note/background paper
would contain detailed information on a number of
costing issues, including the cost of the current system,
including for conference services and documentation,
as well as the additional resources required to clear the
current backlog, and the unit cost of each element of the
treaty body system. On the basis of that information,
preliminary estimates of the practical and financial
implications of measures proposed in the context of
the intergovernmental process and recommended in the
report of the co-facilitators, which was transmitted to
the General Assembly by the note of the President of
the General Assembly contained in document A/67/995,
would be further prepared. All possible efforts would
be made in order to submit the note/background paper,
containing the requested assessment, to the President of
the General Assembly by 15 November 2013.
Similarly, all possible efforts would be made to meet
the additional workload resulting from the request in
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution from within existing
resources available under the respective budget sections
of the programme budget for the biennium 2012-2013.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.3, no additional appropriation
would be sought from the General Assembly with
regard to the requests contained in the draft resolution.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position before we take action on
the draft resolution, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): I make this statement on
behalf of Iceland and Indonesia, the co-facilitators

As mandated in resolution 66/295, we have been
tasked with conducting open, transparent and inclusive
negotiations on how to strengthen and enhance the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system. We have therefore held formal and informal
meetings with Member States, and numerous thematic
and informal consultations and discussions with other
relevant stakeholders, including meetings with the
Chairs of the treaty bodies and video-teleconference
meetings with treaty body experts and representatives
of civil society. Throughout the various consultations
with Member States, we have felt a strong sense of
commitment, cooperation and compromise, which we
believe will serve as a good platform for moving the
process forward at the sixty-eighth session.
We have also received a variety of inputs and
contributions from various relevant stakeholders,
namely, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, treaty body experts, national human
rights institutions and civil society. We take this
opportunity to thank them for sharing their expertise,
which has undoubtedly enriched the discussions on the
matter.
Despite significant progress during the session,
especially towards identifying various concrete
and sustainable measures needed for the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system,
the work of the intergovernmental process requires
additional work before it can be concluded. As is the
case with any intergovernmental process, differing
views and interests have been raised throughout our
deliberations thus far. However, we fervently hope that
we will be able to achieve an outcome that reflects

13-481059/15

A/68/PV.2

the consensus, contributes to the enhancement of the
human rights treaty bodies, and supports the promotion
and protection of human rights at the country level.
In that regard, the draft resolution contained in
document A/68/L.3 requires that the work of that
process be extended until the first half of February
2014 in order to finalize the elaboration of an outcome
of the intergovernmental process. We are confident that
with a renewed and enhanced commitment, that time
frame is not only realistic but achievable. The draft
text also requests the Secretary-General to provide a
comprehensive and detailed cost assessment to provide
background context to support the intergovernmental
process by 15 November, based on, but not limited to,
the report of the co-facilitators. The adoption of the
procedural draft resolution by consensus will, we hope,
pave the way for further deliberations of elements for a
substantive outcome of the intergovernmental process
at the present session.
On behalf of Iceland and Indonesia, we wish to
reiterate our sincere gratitude and appreciation to all
delegations for their support to us as we fulfil our role
as co-facilitators of that very important process.
Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname): As this is the first
time that my delegation takes the floor during the
sixty-eighth session, let me warmly commend you, Sir,
on your election as President of this body, as well as to
assure you of Suriname’s full support to you and your
team.
I have the honour to address the Assembly today
on behalf of the members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) on the adoption of the draft resolution on
the extension of the intergovernmental process of the
General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system (A/68/L.3).
At the outset, allow me to acknowledge the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, Ambassador
Desra Percaya, and the Permanent Representative
of Iceland, Ambassador Gréta Gunnarsdóttir,
and their teams for their skilful leadership of the
intergovernmental process and for their hard work
throughout the deliberations they facilitated and in
ensuring that the relevant documentation was always
prepared for our consideration.
CARICOM welcomed the intergovernmental
process of the General Assembly on strengthening and

10/15

20/09/2013

enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system, pursuant to resolution 66/254.
Our Member States have participated actively and
constructively throughout the process. It is fundamental
for Member States to address the serious challenges with
which the human rights treaty body system is faced and
to make concrete proposals to guarantee the effective
functioning of the treaty bodies. Strengthening the
system in all its aspects will contribute not only to an
improvement of the system but also to safeguarding the
basic tenets of human rights.
We regret, however, that we were unable to conclude
negotiations in the time allocated due in part to the lack
of information and concrete figures on crucial matters.
The consideration in the intergovernmental process of
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the treaty body system provided a useful and much
needed opportunity for all Member States and other
stakeholders to seriously address the challenges
faced by the system, due, among other factors, to the
increased ratification of treaties and the adoption of
additional human rights treaties with the associated
need for increased financial and other resources.
In addressing the challenges for States parties, it
is crucial, in particular, for small States like those in
the Caribbean, to build national capacity in order to
fulfil their reporting obligations. While mechanisms
responsible for human rights reporting are in place
in our States, limited human and financial capacity
compromises our ability to present national reports
within the time frames established in the treaties to
which our countries are parties.
Throughout the process, CARICOM has repeatedly
stressed the importance of the inclusion of appropriate
provisions for capacity-building in the outcome of
our discussions. On those occasions, the region also
requested concrete information on elements for a
capacity-building strategy and how that strategy would
be financed.
We take note of paragraph 4 of the draft resolution
regarding the mandate given to the SecretaryGeneral to provide a comprehensive and detailed cost
assessment by 15 November. In that regard, CARICOM
would like to stress that every effort should be made
by the Secretariat to provide Member States with all of
the information requested to drive the remainder of the
process. Failure to do so will lead to continued deferral
of the finalization of the intergovernmental process and

13-48105

20/09/2013

would surely further compromise the functioning of the
human rights treaty body system.
In closing, I would like to pledge the support of
the Member States of CARICOM and their continued
constructive participation in this process.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the co-facilitators for their
tireless efforts since the start of their mandate. We
are disappointed, however, that the intergovernmental
process could not be concluded during the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, since there were
plenty of opportunities to discuss issues in an in-depth
manner. It is time now for the General Assembly to
shoulder its responsibilities with respect to the human
rights treaty body system and to take the necessary
decisions in line with its authority under the Charter.
Switzerland has made important concessions
to join the consensus on draft resolution A/68/L.3.
Therefore, we expect other delegations to show the
same willingness to compromise in the last stage of
the intergovernmental process on strengthening the
treaty body system. Switzerland is concerned at the
turn that the substantive discussions have taken and
recalls that the goal of the process is to strengthen the
United Nations system for the promotion and protection
of human rights as a whole, and more specifically the
treaty body system. Just as they have done thus far,
the treaty bodies are carrying out substantial work
within the universal system of human rights as credible
oversight bodies for human rights treaties.
However, Switzerland is convinced that the treaty
bodies can and must become more efficient in order
to successfully overcome challenges and problems in
terms of current and future capacity. Treaty bodies
arise from various human rights treaties, which define,
among other things, the treaty bodies’ mandate and
level of independence. The independence and expertise
of treaty bodies are at the heart of the United Nations
system of human rights, and Switzerland will continue
to strongly defend this independence. In this context,
we recall that there is no place for a political document
aimed at restricting the independence of treaty
body members and establishing an accountability
mechanism, whether it be political or legal in nature.
(spoke English)
Since I had to strike a sober note twice, allow
me briefly to take this opportunity to change to a

A/68/PV.2

lighter note and remind delegations that my Mission is
organizing, at 2 p.m. today, a brass band concert in the
rose garden, behind the North Lawn building. Let us
start this session of the General Assembly on a lighter
note. Everyone is welcome, and access is through the
North Lawn building. I apologize, Mr. President, for
this little commercial, but I just wanted to take this
opportunity.
The President: I thank the representative of
Switzerland for the gravity of his statement and for
ending on a lighter note.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): I take the floor to
explain Liechtenstein’s position on draft resolution
A/68/L.3, extending the intergovernmental process of
the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing
the effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system. Liechtenstein joins the consensus on the
draft resolution on the understanding that the General
Assembly is willing to grant a final and limited extension
to the intergovernmental process until February 2014
in order to conclude its work. Liechtenstein continues
to work constructively towards a substantive outcome
within that time frame, much as we are of the view that
we could and should have reached that stage already
by now. On that basis, the intergovernmental process
should continue its work expeditiously and without
interruption on the basis of the draft resolution annexed
to the co-facilitators’ report.
We therefore call upon you, Mr. President, to swiftly
respond to the provision contained in paragraph 3 of the
draft resolution. We also expect the Secretariat to live
up to its responsibility and deliver a detailed statement
on the financial implications of the draft resolution
annexed to the co-facilitators’ report until 15 November
2013 in order to allow the intergovernmental process
to come to an informed conclusion. Until then,
Liechtenstein will consider any requests of individual
treaty bodies for additional funds independently of the
intergovernmental process and solely on the basis of
their merits.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.3, entitled “Extension of the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system”. May I take

13-4810511/15

A/68/PV.2

it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.3?
Draft resolution A/68/L.3 was adopted (resolution
68/2).
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the cross-regional group,
which includes the following States: Belarus, Bolivia,
China, Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Nicaragua,
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and my own country, the Russian Federation.
We have joined the consensus on the adoption
of resolution 68/2, entitled “Extension of the
intergovernmental process of the General Assembly on
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system”, and we are
satisfied that its text is fully in line with the provisions
of the founding resolution on the subject, namely
resolution 66/254.
The cross-regional group attaches great importance
to the goal of strengthening and enhancing the effective
functioning of the human rights treaty body system.
We have been and continue to be committed to a
constructive dialogue and fruitful negotiations aimed
at reaching a successful consensus outcome of the
intergovernmental process established in accordance
with resolution 66/254. The group is convinced that
the end result of the process should contribute to
consolidating the capacity of the human rights treaty
body system to fulfil its principal task under the
relevant international treaties, namely, to assist States
parties in implementing their obligations in accordance
with the respective human rights instruments.
During the sixty-seventh session, we had numerous
rounds of consultations on the issue of strengthening
the treaty body system. The course of the discussion
within the framework of the intergovernmental
process made it absolutely evident that the scope of the
problems regarding the functioning of the treaty body
system is deeper and more complex than it seemed
before we started this process. The “way forward”
document produced by the co-facilitators provides a
useful overview of how they assess the current state

12/15

20/09/2013

of negotiations. We believe that this document should
be treated as purely a vision of the two co-facilitators,
since it does not reflect the views of all Member States
and in some places goes beyond the discussion we had.
The state of consultations clearly indicates that, for
now, it is absolutely impossible to reach a consensus on
all issues related to the functioning of the treaty body
system.
Moreover, the cross-regional group has emphasized
several times that it is premature to consider the issue of
underfunding as the main challenge for the functioning
of the treaty body system. The root causes of the treaty
bodies’ problems are deeper and the lack of funding is
only one of them. No doubt, there is a need to improve
the financing of the treaty bodies, but this should be
done only on the basis of a comprehensive assessment
of their needs. Therefore, we welcome the relevant
provisions of the resolution that was just adopted
regarding the specific request to the Secretary-General
to provide a detailed cost assessment report.
As we mentioned during the intergovernmental
process, there is a need to continue our discussions on the
whole range of issues regarding the intergovernmental
process. Consequently, more time is required so that we
can reach agreement on how to strengthen the system,
and as a result there should be one single package
outcome/decision, rather than case-by-case ad hoc
fixes. Bearing this in mind, we consider it important to
extend the intergovernmental process.
At the same time, we would like to express our
doubts regarding the deadline of the first half of
February 2014 for the finalization of the elaboration of
an outcome of this process, as set out in the resolution.
In our understanding, the determining factor should be
a meaningful outcome, not an artificial time line.
The cross-regional group would like to take
this opportunity to express its sincere and profound
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-seventh session and to the members of his
staff who have been engaged in the intergovernmental
process, and especially to the two co-facilitators,
Ambassadors Gréta Gunnarsdóttir and Desra Percaya,
for all their efforts and hard work throughout the entire
process. We look forward to their re-appointment by
the President of the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session.
Ms. Hewanpola (Australia): Australia would like
to begin by thanking the previous co-facilitators of the
13-48105

20/09/2013

intergovernmental process, the Ambassadors of Iceland
and Indonesia, for their tireless efforts and commitment
over an extended period to driving this process aimed
at strengthening the human rights treaty body system.
It has been no mean feat.
Australia remains deeply committed to working to
strengthen the human rights treaty body system. As the
system is a fundamental international mechanism for
the promotion and protection of human rights globally,
it is clear to us that enhancing its effective functioning
is critical. In that regard, it is imperative that we arrive
at a timely outcome to this process that ensures that
the treaty body system is able to benefit fully from the
measures and efficiencies that we continue to discuss.
Australia regrets that we were unable to finalize
a substantive, comprehensive outcome during the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly. In
adopting resolution 66/295 last year extending the
intergovernmental process to the sixty-seventh session,
we had hoped, as that resolution had set out, that we
would be have been able to identify and agree on
concrete and sustainable measures to strengthen and
enhance the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system during that session.
Indeed, having accepted the need for a short
extension to the process to enable a comprehensive
outcome, it was regrettable that this could not be agreed
on during the sixty-seventh session itself.
Australia looks forward to engaging constructively
with all States when the final phase of the
intergovernmental process convenes, in 2014, to agree
a final substantive outcome that can strengthen the
treaty body system, improve States’ compliance and
implementation of the relevant recommendations and
enhance peoples’ realization of their human rights.
We look forward to an outcome that continues to be
informed by the valuable experiences and contributions
of the treaty body experts and civil society organizations
and which preserves fundamentally the independence
of the treaty body system and its experts, and we look
forward to receiving in the meantime the comprehensive
cost assessment of proposals to help guide our
discussions. We thank the Secretariat for their efforts
to meet this additional workload by 15 November and
from within existing resources.
Ms. Sage (New Zealand): New Zealand joins the
consensus on resolution 68/2 but regrets that we were

A/68/PV.2

not able to conclude the intergovernmental process
during the sixty-seventh session.
We believe that the draft text annexed to the
co-facilitators’ report presents a good package of
measures to ensure a robust and effective treaty body
system. New Zealand is particularly pleased with the
measures that reduce the reporting burden on States.
That is very important for small States. These measures
are not complex or expensive; they are practical and
simple. These, along with capacity-building, resourcing
and a raft of other measures, will help achieve the better
implementation of treaties, an overarching goal of this
process.
We want to take this opportunity to recognize the
tireless efforts of the co-facilitators throughout this
process and to thank them for the resolution. While it
is not the outcome we had hoped for, we understand
that Member States need time to ensure that we do this
process justice and to agree to a comprehensive and
sustainable package.
New Zealand looks forward to this final phase of
negotiations. We should use this time that we now have
to strengthen the text annexed to the co-facilitators’
report, with the clear understanding that in February
2014 we will be concluding this process and have a
substantive outcome.
Ms. Robl (United States of America): My
delegation would first like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Iceland and Indonesia and their
teams for their continued dedication to an issue of
tremendous importance.
The United States believes that treaty bodies play
a critical role in assisting States in the implementation
of their obligations under the human rights treaties
to which they are a party, as well as holding States
accountable in that regard. We have stressed this view
throughout negotiations on this subject.
As we seek to identify the elements of a substantive
resolution in the next round of negotiations, the
United States would like to reiterate the importance
of preserving the independence of the treaty bodies.
Furthermore, civil society, national human rights
institutions and other actors provide vital sources
of information to the treaty bodies, and those voices
deserve to be heard and respected.
The United States looks forward to receiving
and analysing the comprehensive and detailed cost

13-4810513/15

A/68/PV.2

assessment from the Secretary-General in November.
That report will be essential to our negotiations
scheduled for early next year.
Individual treaty bodies, the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the States
participating in this intergovernmental process all have
made laudable efforts to advance the discussion on how
to strengthen the human rights treaty body system.
With the extension of the intergovernmental process,
we seek a substantive resolution that addresses the
myriad challenges facing the treaty body system in as
comprehensive a manner as possible.
We look forward to continuing to work with our
partners to strengthen the treaty body system, thereby
significantly improving the international promotion
and protection of human rights.
Mr. Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to convey to you the congratulations of our
regional group, Mr. President, on your presiding over
the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of our
negotiating group, composed of Argentina, Brazil,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile, the Dominican Republic,
Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and my own
country, El Salvador.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
co-facilitators, the representatives of Indonesia and
Iceland, for their work throughout the entire process.
With regard to resolution 68/2, which we have just
adopted, we would like to make the following comments.
Our Latin American group of like-minded States
has since the outset been committed to the process of
strengthening the human rights treaty bodies. Over the
past two years of negotiations, we have put forward
constructive proposals aimed at aligning the different
positions and having the primary objective of finding
viable solutions to reverse the critical situation that the
treaty bodies are now experiencing.
At the same time, we would like to underscore the
importance that our groups attached to agreement on a
substantive resolution at the session that ended recently,
that is, the sixty-seventh session.
We are surprised that, regrettably, after such lengthy
negotiations, there remain difficulties in and resistance
to finding comprehensive and sustainable solutions
in the context of a process that is the responsibility of

14/15

20/09/2013

all. During this and previous preparatory processes,
we discussed all of the relevant issues at length and
considered the report of the co-facilitators, which
reflects the significant progress we made in the
negotiations as well as all of the elements required to
bring this process to an end.
As was pointed out recently by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, at the opening of
the most recent session of the Human Rights Council,
independent and periodic review by United Nations
treaty bodies is of key importance to the international
community, not only to provide early warning of
emerging human rights crises, but also, and above all,
to support robust national systems, which represent the
first line of defence in terms of averting such crises and
which require sufficient resources in order to function.
The treaty system is at a critical juncture, and
we need urgent solutions, including the necessary
financing, which will be included in the Organization’s
budget for the 2014-2015 biennium, according to the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Our group has joined the consensus in adopting this
resolution in a new display of flexibility and with the
understanding, as other colleagues who spoke before
me have said, that this process will end ultimately in
February 2014, at which time we will have effective
solutions for the treaty bodies and clarify issues related
to funding and capacity-building, which are of great
importance for our group. We will base ourselves for that
purpose on all of the work that has already been done,
which is reflected in the report of the co-facilitators and
in the elements of the future resolution that we hope to
see adopted in this very Hall in a few months.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Ms. Kaljulate (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. I take the floor in explanation
of position following the adoption of resolution 68/2,
entitled “Extension of the intergovernmental process of
the General Assembly on strengthening and enhancing
the effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system”.
Over the previous two sessions of the General
Assembly, the European Union, together with all

13-48105

20/09/2013

delegations, has engaged in the Assembly’s discussions
on strengthening the human rights treaty body system.
We have done so with the objective of ensuring an
improved situation for rights holders on the ground in
addressing the pressing challenges facing the treaty
bodies. We therefore welcomed the goal set by the
General Assembly in its resolution 66/295 to continue
discussions during its sixty-seventh session with a
view to considering a concrete outcome containing
sustainable measures to address the situation, and we
thank the co-facilitators, the Permanent Representatives
of Iceland and Indonesia and their teams, for their
tireless work in that regard.
We engaged actively and constructively in the
consultation process led by the co-facilitators with
those goals in mind during the sixty-seventh session
of the General Assembly. We note the numerous
rounds of consultations held and the constructive
contributions made by various groups, and welcome the
progress made towards concrete solutions during those
discussions. We also recall our strong commitment
to and preference for reaching an outcome during the
sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly. We
strongly regret that this has not been possible, and we
are yet again forced to consider an extension of the
process instead of a substantive and tangible outcome.
We need a clear perspective for our work to bring
this process to a successful conclusion, based on the
progress made to date, as reflected in the elements for
a draft resolution included in the co-facilitators’ report
(A/67/995). The EU has therefore agreed to the final
extension of the process only on the clear understanding
that our efforts will be focused on concluding the
process and reaching concrete and sustainable outcomes
by the first half of February 2014, the final end date for
the process. We believe that the challenges the treaty
bodies and States parties face are urgent, and we cannot
agree to attempts to indefinitely prolong the General
Assembly’s consideration. We also believe that the
General Assembly process should not serve as a means
to block steps to strengthen the treaty bodies, which
can be taken independently and immediately.
We note that the timeline is also crucial in ensuring
compliance with established General Assembly
procedures, considering the potential budgetary
implications arising from the resolution. We call on the
co-facilitators to ensure an organization of work and
timetable that would allow for timely consideration

A/68/PV.2

of those implications by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Committee.
We value highly the work done by all delegations
during the sixty-seventh session. We expect to build on
the draft elements put forward by the co-facilitators in
their report, which reflects the progress made towards
consensus in our work until February.
Throughout all discussions, the EU has emphasized
that the result of the process must strengthen the
capacity of the treaty bodies to address the increased
number of ratifications, and therefore reports, in a
more timely and effective manner and provide for
sustainability with regard to future developments. It
should also lead to a higher level of compliance by the
States parties with the reporting complications and a
better implementation of the concluding observations.
In that regard, the process should also lead to measures
that help the States parties to meet their reporting
obligations. We are therefore determined to reach an
outcome that would address the crucial elements of
cost savings and efficiency, resources and meeting time
and capacity-building. We underline the importance
of receiving an accurate, comprehensive and detailed
cost assessment on those elements, as requested by the
General Assembly in operative paragraph 4 in order to
guide the delegations positions.
In going forward, we recall that the treaty body
strengthening process must respect the competencies
and autonomy of the various stakeholders, as reaffirmed
by resolution 66/295. We also emphasize the continuing
importance of the contributions and participation of all
stakeholders, including treaty body experts and civil
society.
We are committed to reaching a concrete outcome
to that process by February 2014. We believe that this is
necessitated by the pressing challenges facing the treaty
bodies. We are convinced that this is a realistic goal, on
the basis of the substantial work by all delegations to
date. We also believe that proposals before us deserve
to be considered by the General Assembly without
further delay.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
125.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

13-4810515/15
