UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/42
6 August 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3809th meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 August 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council recalls the statements of its President of
27 May 1997 (S/PRST/1997/29) and 11 July 1997 (S/PRST/1997/36) following
the military coup d'état in Sierra Leone on 25 May 1997. It condemns the
overthrow of the democratically elected government of President
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and calls upon the military junta to take immediate
steps to bring about the unconditional restoration of that government. The
Council remains deeply concerned about the situation in Sierra Leone, which
endangers peace, security and stability in the whole region.
"The Security Council underlines the need to implement the Abidjan
Agreement which continues to serve as a viable framework for peace,
stability, and reconciliation in Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council expresses its appreciation to the Committee of
Four Foreign Ministers of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) for their efforts to negotiate with representatives of the
military junta from 17 to 18 July and 29 to 30 July 1997 in Abidjan on a
peaceful resolution of the crisis, and reiterates its full support for the
objectives of this mediation. It deeply regrets the breakdown of these
talks, and considers that the responsibility for this failure rests
entirely with the military junta who refused to negotiate in good faith.
"The Security Council considers that the military junta's attempt to
set conditions for the restoration of the democratically elected government
is unacceptable, and calls upon the junta to renounce its declared
intention to remain in power and to resume negotiations with the ECOWAS
Committee of Four Foreign Ministers without delay.
"The Security Council will, in the absence of a satisfactory response
from the military junta, be ready to take appropriate measures with the
objective of restoring the democratically elected government of President
Kabbah.
97-21187 (E)

060897

/...

S/PRST/1997/42
English
Page 2

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone, and at the continued looting and
commandeering of relief supplies of international agencies. It calls upon
the military junta to cease all interference with the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the people of Sierra Leone. The Council
condemns the continuing violence and threats of violence by the junta
towards the civilian population, foreign nationals and personnel of the
ECOWAS monitoring group, and calls for an end to such acts of violence.
The Council also expresses its concern at the effects of the continuing
influx of refugees into neighbouring countries, in particular Guinea, due
to the crisis in Sierra Leone. It calls upon all States and relevant
international organizations to provide help to these countries in dealing
with this problem.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of this matter."

-----
