United Nations

S/PV.5949

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5949th meeting
Wednesday, 6 August 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Grauls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tiendrébéogo
Mr. La Yifan
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Qwabe
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 1770
(2007) (S/2008/495)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-45136 (E)

*0845136*

S/PV.5949

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

General for Political Affairs, and by His Excellency
Mr. Alejandro Wolff, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the United States, on behalf of the Multinational
Force.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.

The situation concerning Iraq
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 6 of resolution 1770 (2007)
(S/2008/495)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Bayati
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lynn
Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/495, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 6 of
resolution 1770 (2007). I wish to draw the attention of
members to document S/2008/523, which contains the
text of a note verbale dated 4 August 2008 from the
Permanent Mission of Iraq transmitting a letter from
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-

2

Mr. Pascoe: Mr. President, I thank you for this
opportunity to brief the Council on developments in
Iraq and the work of the United Nations in the country.
Our efforts have increased in important ways during
the year since the adoption of resolution 1770 (2007) in
August 2007. Members of the Council have before
them the fourth quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral pursuant to paragraph 6 of that resolution,
focusing on the activities in the latest period of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
From the moment he visited Iraq early in his term
of office, the Secretary-General has made clear his
strong commitment to seeing the United Nations do
more to help the Government and the people of that
country. That has not been an easy task given the
circumstances in Iraq, but today, under the more the
robust mandate of resolution 1770 (2007) and the
strong leadership of his Special Representative on the
ground, the United Nations is steadily expanding its
presence and activities in Iraq, while remaining
mindful of the very complex operating environment in
the country.
During the past year, we have witnessed steady
changes in Iraq that should be noted. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report underscores, political and military
efforts have contributed to improved security in most
parts of the country, most visibly during the past three
months. Violent incidents and casualties have declined
and we have witnessed the improved performance of
Iraq’s security forces during a series of operations.
However, civilian casualties as a result of violence
remain unacceptably high. A string of suicide
bombings just last week killed 60 people and injured
hundreds more in Baghdad and Kirkuk, a brutal
reminder of the lengths to which some are willing to go
to provoke hatred and division among the Iraqi people.
As the Secretary-General’s report also makes
clear, it is necessary to cement the gains on the security
front through strengthened and sustained political
dialogue. While a window for improved political
dialogue may exist, the situation does remain tenuous
and progress achieved thus far could be lost. There has,
however, been some progress. The leading Sunni bloc,

08-45136

S/PV.5949

Tawafuq, recently returned to the Government, and
Prime Minister Al-Maliki filled the vacant cabinet
posts that were empty since the boycotts of last spring
and summer. The proper implementation of the
Amnesty Law, which went into effect in February of
this year, has the potential to contribute to developing
trust between communities in the country. While the
political atmosphere in Baghdad, Kirkuk and elsewhere
deteriorated somewhat during the recent debate on the
election law, we are hopeful that the Iraqi parties are
coming to recognize the need to continue and to
expand the extent of their political dialogue.
Since the Council handed down a new mandate
for UNAMI one year ago, the Mission has worked with
great energy to ensure its implementation. UNAMI
continues to focus on advancing political dialogue,
national reconciliation and the resolution of disputed
internal boundaries, as well as on preparations for the
provincial elections in order to ensure they are seen as
credible and broadly accepted by the Iraqi people.
Iraq’s Independent High Electoral Commission,
with assistance from UNAMI, has reached a number of
operational milestones. Those include organizing the
field structure needed to conduct the voter registration
update, which is successfully under way in all of Iraq’s
governorates. The Electoral Commission, with
UNAMI’s support, recruited and trained nearly 8,000
staff to administer voter registration services to 564
centres nationwide. Almost all centres have been open
throughout the voter registration period, which is a
notable feat considering the immense operational and
security challenges inside Iraq. UNAMI has also
advised the Electoral Commission on how to ensure
transparency and strong oversight in the voter
registration update process. The international electoral
team, in its visits to voter registration centres and field
election offices throughout the country, continues to be
impressed by the knowledge and professionalism of
election
administration
staff.
The
Electoral
Commission has thus far accredited close to 20,000
political party agents and observers to monitor election
events.
Without new electoral legislation, however, those
critical governorate elections cannot go forward. As we
meet here this morning, discussions in the Iraqi
Parliament in Baghdad around the adoption of a new
law remain unresolved. The United Nations has been
doing all it can to urge the reaching of practical
compromises. In that regard, I would include the fact

08-45136

that we have been involved in all of the discussions
that have been ongoing in recent days on the issue,
offering many variations to the parties to try to help
them to reach a compromise. A failure to come to
agreement on a law at this time would be a major
setback, not only for the prospects for elections this
year, but for the larger process of national
reconciliation in Iraq.
In connection with discord over the passage of
the election law, the situation in Kirkuk grew more
tense and turned violent last week. The bloodshed in
Kirkuk illustrated just how fragile the situation has
become and how the lack of dialogue and compromise
could easily lead to renewed violence. The passage of
the draft election law that was subsequently vetoed and
the Kirkuk Provincial Council decision to set in motion
mechanisms for a referendum on the status of Kirkuk
were provocations by both sides that were inevitably
going to raise tensions.
UNAMI continues its work on the issue of
Kirkuk and disputed internal boundaries, and hopes to
establish the firm recognition among Iraqi parties that
sustainable peace can be based only upon collective
solutions acceptable to all concerned. The Mission
plans to present its next set of analyses on disputed
territories to the Presidency Council, the Prime
Minister and the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan
regional Government during the fall. While UNAMI is
working as an honest broker to establish a mutually
acceptable way to handle those complex issues, we
have repeatedly stressed that the ultimate responsibility
to make the difficult decisions lies first and foremost
with the Government of Iraq and the other
representatives of the Iraqi people.
In addition to addressing disputed internal
boundaries and the adoption of an inclusive electoral
law, there is a need for progress on the fundamental
issues that define the nature of the Iraqi State. Those
include defining the nature of the federal framework in
Iraq, establishing a clear revenue-sharing mechanism
and equitably managing Iraq’s considerable resources.
The United Nations continues to assist the
Constitutional Review Committee in the expeditious
conclusion of its work, and important related
legislation continues to be discussed. Tackling those
core issues is as vital as it is difficult and will require
wisdom, patience and compromise by all sides.

3

S/PV.5949

Iraq’s neighbours and other States in the region
have a vested interest in Iraq’s stability and can and
should play a constructive role in that regard. During
the past year, numerous positive steps were taken to
strengthen regional cooperation in support of Iraq.
Following the Stockholm conference to review annual
progress in the implementation of the International
Compact with Iraq and, in the wake of the security
operations conducted with the leadership of Prime
Minister Al-Maliki, several member States in the
region announced the restoration of full diplomatic
representation in Baghdad. Additionally, two meetings
of the expanded Conference of Iraq’s Neighbours took
place at the ministerial level: in Turkey in November
2007 and in Kuwait in April 2008. The SecretaryGeneral and the Iraqi Prime Minister also hosted a
high-level meeting on Iraq here in New York last
September. The second round of working group
meetings on border security, refugees and energy were
also held and UNAMI is currently assisting Iraq’s
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in preparation for the next
cycle of working group meetings, leading up to a
ministerial conference in Baghdad later this year. The
Mission is helping to build the capacity of the
dedicated unit within the Ministry, which has been
playing a pivotal role in preparing those events.
We strongly welcome the developments on the
regional front and hope that other regional States will
seize on opportunities for turning the regional dialogue
process into a real partnership based on mutual
interests and concrete cooperation in diplomatic,
political, economic and cultural areas. Both Iraq and
regional actors must do more, and the United Nations
is ready to assist in that effort.
Supporting Iraq’s reconstruction and development
remains a top priority for the United Nations. While
the economy continues to grow due in large part to
high oil prices, that has not yet translated into
improvements in the lives of ordinary citizens.
Unemployment rates remain stubbornly high and the
same governorates rate consistently low on key
socio-economic indicators such as unemployment,
malnutrition and illiteracy. It is estimated that 60 per
cent of Iraqis do not have access to one or more
essential social services and that 15 per cent lack food
security. However, security improvements present a
new opportunity for Iraq’s oil wealth to reach its
population and improve their lives.

4

In addition to United Nations assistance for the
purpose of meeting those needs, we are working with
the Government of Iraq on economic reform for private
sector development, aimed particularly at increasing
employment opportunities and at diversifying the
nation’s economic output, which is now heavily reliant
upon oil. A new $30-million project will be dedicated
to assist in the development of a viable and functioning
private sector in Iraq.
Economic initiatives were also central to the
agenda of the first annual review of the International
Compact with Iraq, which was held in Stockholm,
Sweden, on 29 May 2008. One hundred States and
organizations were in attendance. The Government of
Iraq presented its initiatives for full integration with
the regional and global economies, including the
establishment of an investment commission, private
sector partnerships and transregional initiatives to
promote investment, trade and greater cooperation with
neighbouring States. The Conference welcomed the
Government of Iraq’s proposal for a partnership for
development, which recognizes that Iraq is a wealthy
country that requires technical assistance more than
aid. As a result, in close cooperation with the
Government of Iraq and donors, we are transitioning
from high-capital projects to co-financing, capacitybuilding and technical assistance.
The Iraq Trust Fund — to which the European
Commission and Japan, among other donors, have been
particularly generous contributors — has already
disbursed $1 billion. The $300 million that remain are
actively being programmed. The Trust Fund goals are
now fully aligned with the Compact. With the consent
of the Government of Iraq and its donors, it is
envisioned that the Iraq Trust Fund will complete
activities at the same time as the Compact, in 2011.
United Nations assistance will continue supporting the
Government of Iraq as it leads its own recovery.
Increased attention has been placed on the
humanitarian needs of Iraqis and on alleviating the
suffering of Iraqi refugees, internally displaced persons
and other vulnerable groups. Over 2.8 million people
are currently displaced inside Iraq, and they, together
with refugees from neighbouring countries, are
returning to their places of origin at a steady rate of up
to 10,000 people per month.
The percentage of United Nations projects
dedicated to humanitarian activities has increased,

08-45136

S/PV.5949

supported by funding received through the 2008 Iraq
consolidated appeal, which currently stands at 47 per
cent funded, or $128 million. A regional appeal is
being prepared for 2009 that will aim to incorporate
into one framework the funding needs not only inside
Iraq, but also of Iraqi refugees in neighbouring
countries. In consultation with the donors, $20 million
of the $55 million that the Trust Fund has gained
through interest have been dedicated to addressing
humanitarian
needs,
including
through
the
development of an emergency response fund, which
will provide a rapid response capacity to handle the
effects of the major military operations that have
transpired during the reporting period.
In the military operations undertaken in Basra
and Sadr City, United Nations agencies provided
emergency water, medicines and food parcels to
affected communities and maintained constant dialogue
with military commanders, briefing them on the
humanitarian situation and its possible deterioration.
However, humanitarian access during military
operations is often constrained and humanitarian actors
at times have felt it unsafe to deliver urgent relief. All
parties to conflict should do their utmost to normalize
and facilitate humanitarian access during these critical
times.
During the reporting period, the UNAMI Human
Rights Office also focused its monitoring and advocacy
activities on the plight of Iraqi civilians who reside in
the areas where intense fighting has taken place in
recent months. Although much has been accomplished
in promoting the protection of human rights and the
rule of law in Iraq, a great deal more remains to be
done. Journalists, educators, medical doctors, judges
and lawyers remained prime targets for armed militia
and criminal gangs. Gender-based violence, murders,
suicides and so-called honour crimes also continued to
be documented. UNAMI continues to seek better
access to detention centres and improved mechanisms
for the efficient legal processing of detainees. Beyond
its monitoring and advocacy actions, UNAMI
continues to run an active programme of human rights
capacity-building and training for Government officials
and civil society groups. The Mission also actively
supports the work of the Ministry of Human Rights and
devotes significant attention to legislative activity
relating to human rights and the rule of law.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
De Mistura, UNAMI, along with the United Nations

08-45136

country team, is working hard to build an enhanced
presence throughout the country, despite the obvious
challenges and continuous security threats to
operations in Iraq. The Baghdad and Erbil offices are
expanding, a presence has been established in Basra
and Kirkuk, and planning is under way to post national
and international staff in Mosul, Najaf and Ramadi.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the World Health Organization have
moved their most senior staff from Amman to
Baghdad, and the overall ceiling for United Nations
staff members in Iraq has been raised further to
accommodate
those
trends.
UNAMI’s
Iraqi
Government liaison officers are currently operating in
the offices of nine governors throughout Iraq. Their
presence has been instrumental in expanding the
breadth and depth of United Nations contact beyond
the nation’s capital.
Security remains essential for the United Nations
to function in Iraq, and support and protection from
Member States is vital. I would like to express
appreciation to the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I), the Department of Safety and Security and
others for the support they have already provided. In
view of the possible changes in the current
arrangement for the presence of the MNF-I after
31 December 2008, it is essential that the security of
the United Nations presence continue to be ensured.
The so-called distinct entity established in 2004
under the unified command of the multinational forces
with a dedicated mission to provide security for the
United Nations presence in Iraq recently received
contributions that will ensure its operation well into
2009. I would therefore like to thank the Governments
of Belgium, the Czech Republic, Finland, Italy and
Germany for their recent generous contributions to the
Trust Fund to Support the Distinct Entity Created to
Provide Security for the United Nations Presence in
Iraq. We encourage Member States to consider further
contributions to the Trust Fund and to provide
additional military advisers to the Mission in Iraq, as
they remain a critical component of expanding our
presence inside the country. We are further grateful to
Georgia, Fiji, the Republic of Korea and South Africa
for providing security and operational support.
Construction of a new integrated compound in
Baghdad is essential to the presence of the United
Nations in Iraq. I would therefore like to thank the
Government of Iraq for its provision of a site for the

5

S/PV.5949

new integrated United Nations compound in Baghdad
and urge it to finalize the arrangement for the
co-funding of that important project.
I would also acknowledge the leadership that
Special Representative De Mistura has displayed in
that very difficult operating environment. He and his
team of national and international staff have done
extraordinary work for Iraq and its people.
As I said at the outset, Iraqis have witnessed an
improvement in security. However, as I said before, the
situation remains fragile and recent gains could easily
be lost. It is imperative that we not become complacent
due to recent achievements. Efforts must now focus on
achieving the political gains necessary to build trust
and confidence across community lines and to improve
the quality of life for all Iraqis, including the delivery
of basic services and the generation of employment.
The United Nations continues to believe that trust is
best established by tackling the issues at the heart of
each community’s competing vision for the future of
Iraq. That includes the federal framework of the
country, the handling of Kirkuk and other disputed
territories, the distribution of wealth from
hydrocarbons and a viable revenue-sharing agreement.
The potential is there, and it is ultimately up to the
Iraqi people to make sound choices that will allow
them to build a sustainable and lasting peace. I can
assure the Council that we in the United Nations are
making a strong contribution and will continue to try to
help Iraq in that process.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I am
pleased to report to the Security Council on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I). I would like
to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing on the important work undertaken by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and extend our appreciation through him to
all our United Nations colleagues on the ground in Iraq
for their ongoing dedication and hard work.
Today, on behalf of MNF-I, I would like to
discuss seven points on the progress achieved thus far.
First, allow me to address the sustained decrease
in security incidents and violence. For the past three
months, total security incidents have remained at their
lowest level in over four years. In just the past year,

6

since June 2007, the overall number of attacks has
decreased by 84 per cent; civilian deaths due to
violence have decreased by 65 per cent; Iraqi Security
Forces deaths have decreased by 67 per cent; United
States military deaths have decreased by 91 per cent;
coalition military deaths have decreased by 96 per
cent; explosions due to improvised explosive devices
have decreased by 75 per cent; suicide explosions have
decreased by 65 per cent; and ethno-sectarian deaths
have decreased by 94 per cent.
Coalition forces and Iraqi Security Forces have
achieved those security gains even as MNF-I has
drawn down forces from surge levels. The United
States has withdrawn, without replacement, the last of
its five surge brigade combat teams, as well as its
Marine expeditionary unit and two Marine battalions.
Also, the Australian battle group has departed from
Iraq and the Polish contingent will soon be withdrawn.
Ongoing security operations in Basra, Sadr City,
Mosul, Amarah and Diyala have produced encouraging
results, further degrading the capabilities of Al-Qaida
in Iraq and reducing the influence of illegal militias in
strategic Iraqi cities. Nonetheless, Al-Qaida in Iraq
remains a serious threat, particularly in the North. It
retains the intent and the capability of carrying out
sensational, lethal attacks, and its use of person-borne
improvised explosive devices and female suicide
bombers remains a particular challenge.
We also remain concerned by the flow of foreign
fighters and lethal aid into Iraq. Syria is the primary
gateway for foreign terrorists moving into Iraq, and the
Government of Syria must do more to halt the
operation of foreign fighter networks within its
territory.
During the recent operations in Basra, Sadr City
and Maysan, Iraqi troops uncovered convincing
evidence that Iranian lethal aid has continued to flow
into Iraq. In addition, during those operations,
numerous Mahdi Army militia fighters and leaders
from the Mahdi Army’s associated, highly trained
special groups fled to Iran, where they received
sanctuary. The lethal activities of Iran’s Islamic
Republican Guard corps, the Qods Force, contradict
Iran’s publicly stated policy of supporting the Iraqi
Government and must cease.
Secondly, I would like describe the continuing
increase in the capability of the Iraqi Security Forces,
which
has
contributed
substantially
to
the

08-45136

S/PV.5949

improvements in the overall security environment.
More than 580,000 personnel now serve in the Iraqi
Security Forces, which represents an increase of over
21,000 personnel since our last report to the Council in
June.
There are now 161 Iraqi army combat battalions
conducting operations, which represents an increase of
14 battalions since our last report. Over 70 per cent or
113 of those Iraqi army combat battalions are assessed
to be in the lead for operations. Of those, 93 are rated
as able not only to take the lead in operations, but also
to fully plan, execute and sustain operations with
minimal or no assistance from coalition forces beyond
enablers and adviser teams. Another 10 battalions are
currently in force generation, and MNF-I plans an
additional 10 for force generation in 2008.
The Iraqi air force and navy have made
substantial progress as well. The Iraqi navy is now
conducting an average of 42 independent patrols per
week in Iraqi territorial waters, a 20 per cent increase
in the past two months. In addition, the Iraqi navy also
maintains security responsibility for the port of Umm
Qasr. The Iraqi air force is providing support to
counterinsurgency operations through intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance patrols of Iraqi
borders and critical electric and oil infrastructure.
Those efforts have resulted in the capture of insurgents
and the identification of damaged infrastructure,
allowing the Government of Iraq to expedite repairs
and re-establish essential services. Furthermore, the
Iraqi air force has proven itself very capable during
combat operations in Basra, Sadr City, Mosul, Amarah
and Diyala by successfully conducting transport
missions, reconnaissance and casualty evacuation.
The national police also continue to increase their
effectiveness and they are continuing their efforts to
achieve a better ethno-sectarian balance within the
force, through both recruiting and assignments, so that
force demographics better reflect the Iraqi population.
As of the end of July, 36 Iraqi national police
battalions were conducting operations alongside a
battalion-sized Iraqi emergency response unit. The
national police forces have conducted more than 15
operational deployments outside of Baghdad, most
recently in Basra, Mosul and Baqubah. That increased
effectiveness and deployability marks the beginning of
a transition from a static force centred on Baghdad to a
rapid response force for the Government of Iraq.

08-45136

Thirdly, I would like to provide an update on the
role of the coalition. The support of the 30 countries
contributing to the coalition, NATO’s training mission
and the operations of UNAMI is critical to the success
of Iraqi efforts to build a stable and secure country.
Coalition members other than the United States
contribute over 9,000 forces to the Multinational Force
and another 450 personnel to UNAMI. Every
contributor, large and small, plays a critical role —
from the Azeris, who have provided security at the
Haditha Dam since 2003, to the Romanians, who
provide route security in the Dhi Qar and Muthanna
provinces. We also welcome the assistance of countries
that continue to provide security for the United Nations
personnel and have contributed to the United Nations
trust fund. We remain committed to ensuring that the
United Nations receives the guarantees necessary for it
to sustain and expand its robust presence in Iraq.
Fourthly, I would like to emphasize that MNF-I is
continuing progressively to transfer responsibility for
security to the Government of Iraq. Ten out of
18 provinces are now under provincial Iraqi control,
with Qadisiyah province having transitioned on
16 July. Other provinces are expected to transition by
the end of this year.
In June, the Iraqi Government continued its
offensive against illegal armed groups and the special
groups, through Operation Promise of Peace in Missan,
which focused on securing the provincial capital,
Amarah, as well as the border and some smaller cities.
Several senior provincial officials were arrested, and
Iraqi security forces seized numerous caches of
weapons of Iranian origin. Such operations show the
willingness of Prime Minister al-Maliki and the Iraqi
Government to confront militants, regardless of their
sect or ethnicity, and to secure the country against the
threat of malign Iranian influence.
Iraqi security forces, working alongside local
groups, have also conducted operations in Mosul
against Al-Qaida elements. Operations Mother of Two
Springs and Lion’s Roar denied Al-Qaida sanctuary in
the urban areas of Ninawa province and captured and
killed several leaders of Al-Qaida in Iraq.
Recently, Iraqi security forces and coalition units
have launched a major clearing operation in Diyala
province, north-east of Baghdad, to clear the remaining
safe havens of Al-Qaida in Iraq and stop the Jaish
al-Mahdi from smuggling and supplying lethal aid.

7

S/PV.5949

Iraqi security forces have significantly extended their
control, not only through the execution of military
operations, but also through the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance and the restoration of basic
services. Following the military operations in Missan
province, the Government of Iraq is beginning to
implement a $102-million programme to refurbish and
rebuild schools, develop municipalities, improve
electricity and health services, build up the police
forces and provide clean water and unemployment
assistance.
That
initiative
follows
similar
reconstruction efforts to reduce the appeal of militant
groups in Basra, Sadr City, Mosul and Amarah.
The fifth point I would like to discuss is political
reconciliation. The willingness of the Government of
Iraq to confront militias, regardless of sect, has
encouraged the Sunni coalition Tawafuq to reconcile its
internal differences and return its ministers to the
Government, thereby providing an additional avenue
for Sunni participation in the political process.
In late July, six ministers representing the Sunni
coalition were approved for the cabinet and four new
Shia ministers have filled vacant Sadrist seats. UNAMI
remains deeply engaged in assisting the Government of
Iraq in various political and diplomatic activities,
including addressing internal border issues, promoting
regional dialogue and assisting internally displaced
persons and refugees, as we just heard. Recently,
UNAMI has been instrumental in advising the Council
of Representatives committee members in the
preparation of the provincial elections law and the Iraq
High Elections Committee as they prepared for and
started voter registration on 15 July. We are encouraged
by UNAMI’s plans to expand its footprint in Iraq and
believe that the assistance of the United Nations will
be critical to Iraq’s long-term development and
stability. The proposed United Nations compound in
Baghdad will ensure that UNAMI is able to continue
its important role in Iraq, and we look forward to Iraqi
support to ensure those facilities are constructed.
Sixthly, I would like to stress the importance of
Iraq’s neighbours in supporting Iraq’s efforts to provide
security, achieve political progress and build its
economy. The Government of Iraq’s security successes
have fostered international confidence. Bahrain,
Jordan, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates have all
named ambassadors to Iraq, and other neighbours,
including Turkey, have recently sent high-level

8

delegations to Baghdad. We hope that others in the
region will follow their example.
Finally, I want to highlight that negotiations
continue between the United States and the Iraqi
Government on our transition relationship, including
with respect to security, which will recognize the
increasing ability of the Iraqi Security Forces to
assume greater responsibility for security and stability.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/495),
which is before the Security Council today, highlights
the sustainable progress that has been achieved by the
Iraqi Government, with the assistance of the United
Nations and the support of the MNF-I and the Iraqi
Security Forces. The international community supports
a free, democratic, pluralistic, federal and unified Iraq,
and I call upon all parties to renew their commitment
to assist the Government of Iraq in continuing the hard
work to overcome the many challenges that remain.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to present our thanks to your
predecessor,
His
Excellency
the
Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam, for his distinguished
efforts during his presidency in the month of July.
I would like to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Alejandro Wolff for the briefing he presented to the
Council on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I) and for the efforts to support security and
stability in Iraq during the previous months. Our thanks
also go to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his statement, and our
appreciation goes to Mr. Staffan de Mistura and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
team in Iraq and New York for their tireless work to
help the Government and the people of Iraq.
My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of UNAMI contained in
document S/2008/495 and would like to present the
following comments. On the political and security
level, the Iraqi Government has succeeded in
preventing a sectarian war in the country and has
proven that it is not a sectarian Government, but that it
is one that represents all Iraqis without discrimination,

08-45136

S/PV.5949

except on the basis of their ability to serve Iraq and
defend its national interests.
During the past few months, Iraq has witnessed a
series of military operations, led by the Iraqi army and
carried out with the support of the multinational forces,
in Basrah, Baghdad, Meesan, Mosul and Diyala. The
operations have targeted members of Al-Qaida and
other armed militia groups as well as other outlaws,
and they have led to the success of the law enforcement
plan, the enforcement of Government control and an 80
per cent decrease in the number of terrorist operations
and violent acts.
The Iraqi Government has also succeeded in
building its armed forces on a national, professional
and neutral basis, which has led to their determination
and will to confront Al-Qaida and other militias and to
strike against those groups. It is now clear that the
loyalty of the Iraqi troops is only to Iraq, not to
particular rulers, parties or sects. The Iraqi Government
is keen to stress human rights principles regarding the
conduct of the Iraqi armed forces and to prevent those
forces from having political affiliations.
The number of army, police and other security
forces has increased in all provinces in accordance
with their security needs. The Iraqi Government has
assumed responsibility for security from the
multinational forces in 10 Iraqi provinces — most
recently, al-Diwaniya province, in July 2008. That is
another step towards the assumption of full security
responsibility for the remaining Iraqi provinces from
the multinational forces and towards the achievement
of complete control over security by the end of 2008.
The decline in violence in Iraq has led to a return
to normal life in all parts of the country and has
encouraged a number of internally displaced families
and Iraqi refugees to return to their homes. The Iraqi
Government, along with the Iraqi Council of
Representatives and in cooperation with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other international organizations, is conducting a
national strategy to encourage the voluntary return of
those families. The Cabinet has allocated more than
$195 million for the repatriation of internally and
externally displaced persons, and the Government has
allocated $140 million to help Iraqi refugees. That
strategy also includes the evacuation of homes
abandoned by their owners because of violence, the
granting of financial incentives and the immediate and

08-45136

unconditional return of those who left their jobs. It is to
be noted that 271 Iraqi families returned from Iran and
31 individuals returned from Refha camp, in Saudi
Arabia, in May 2008. In addition, many Iraqi refugees
have returned from Syria and Jordan in coordination
with international organizations. Iraq has also provided
support for countries hosting Iraqis.
The Iraqi Council of Representatives has adopted
a provincial elections law to ensure the holding of free
and fair elections in all Iraqi provinces, counties and
villages. That legislation has been adopted to ensure
the inclusion of all segments of Iraqi society and to
ensure the holding of democratic elections without any
external interference. We have just received
information from Baghdad that a committee
comprising Iraqi parliamentarians has been formed to
discuss proposals regarding the provincial elections in
Kirkuk and to bridge gaps in that regard.
The Iraqi Government is keen to proceed with the
process of national reconciliation to maintain the unity
of the Iraqi people, make progress in the national
dialogue policy and expand participation in the
political process in accordance with the Iraqi
Constitution, in order to build a free, multilateral,
federal and democratic Iraq. Although the political
process faces some challenges, it is witnessing
progress towards a democratic transition, positive
political developments and coexistence among all
segments of society. Within the context of the
continuing national reconciliation efforts, the Iraqi
Government is seeking to convene an expanded
religious conference bringing together religious clerics
from various religions, sects and nationalities, as a step
to build solidarity among all Iraqis and facilitate the
return of displaced persons to their homes. Moreover,
the Iraqi Government is currently implementing a
campaign to renovate houses of worship, including
mosques and churches.
The adoption of a general amnesty law has had a
positive role in enhancing the national reconciliation
efforts. Under that law, the Ministry of Justice has
released 1,648 detainees; the Ministry of Interior has
released 2,560, including 59 Arab nationalists; the
Ministry of Defence has released 545; and the Ministry
of Labour has released 314. These are in addition to the
detainees released by the Multinational Forces.
Political efforts have resulted in the return of the
ministers belonging to the Tawafuq bloc to the

9

S/PV.5949

Government of National Unity, and the Council of
Representatives has voted to appoint 10 ministers to
fill ministerial posts vacated when the members of a
number of political blocs withdrew from the
Government in 2007.
At the socio-economic level, the improvement in
the security situation has had positive effects on the
economic situation in Iraq. The reports of the National
Committee on Investment have indicated that the
volume of investment in Iraq has reached $7.4 billion,
which has been distributed among various basic
facilities in the country. This has involved, inter alia,
the building of factories, housing units, hospitals,
pharmaceutical plants and refineries and the
development of airports and ports with the involvement
of Iraqi and foreign investors. Najaf International
Airport was inaugurated on 20 July 2008. A large
number of businessmen, investors and investment
companies have already visited Iraq, and a number of
investment agreements have been signed with many
countries.
The Iraqi Government’s top priorities have been
to improve economic conditions and revive trade in
order to move the country away from the brink of
economic and social collapse. The Iraqi Government
was able to reduce the inflation rate from 65 per cent in
2006 to 22 per cent in 2007, and it is expected that the
unemployment rate will have been reduced to 17 per
cent by the end of 2008, as compared with 28 per cent
in 2003.
In April 2008, the Iraqi Council of
Representatives adopted a law on civil servants and
public sector salaries, as well as a university service
law, in a step aimed at supporting higher education and
scientific research institutes. That was part of an effort
to support the public service sector, to prevent a brain
drain and to take measures to encourage the return of
qualified professionals to Iraq.
A social protection network has been established
to provide care for members of certain social segments,
such as orphans, widows and the unemployed, and
$812 million has been allocated for that project. The
share of the State’s general budget for the education
sector has been increased, from 3 per cent in 2007 to
5 per cent in 2008, and 700 new schools have been
built, with another 4,000 to be built by the end of this
year.

10

The process of health sector reform has been
launched in order to provide primary health care and
ensure the equitable provision of health services to all
people. Approximately 300 health centres have been
built, and approximately 37 general hospitals have
been rehabilitated and expanded. In addition, a number
of specialized hospitals and health centres are to be
built in collaboration with a number of international
companies. The Ministry of Health, in cooperation with
UNAMI and the World Health Organization, has made
significant achievements, such as decreases in the
infant, maternal and under-5 mortality rates and
progress in controlling cholera.
The Iraqi Government has launched a strategy to
develop the agricultural sector, to achieve food
security, to increase investment in agriculture and build
capacity in that sector, to improve the quality of
production, to protect the environment, to combat
desertification and to provide modern machinery.
In relation to oil wealth, the Iraqi Government
has made plans to increase production to 3.5 million
barrels per day, with the continuous development of
that sector through the adoption of legislation and an
investment framework and the fair distribution of oil
revenue. The Iraqi Government is keen to utilize its
revenues for the benefit of the Iraqi people in the
budget of 2008 through a financial policy leading to
lowered inflation and the adoption of the largest budget
in Iraq’s history. It is worth mentioning that the Iraqi
House of Representatives adopted a law on combating
the smuggling of oil and petroleum products and
considers oil smuggling to be an economic crime that
threatens the security and economy of the country.
Furthermore, the Prime Minister stressed that Iraq
is
moving
towards
the
implementation
of
reconstruction and investment projects that cannot be
implemented until all forms of corruption are
eliminated. Therefore, the Iraqi Government launched
a national initiative to fight financial and
administrative corruption, which is one of the most
dangerous burdens that Iraq inherited from the former
dictatorial regime.
Following the ratification of the United Nations
Convention Against Corruption, a conference was held
in Baghdad at which the Baghdad declaration on
fighting corruption was adopted. The Iraqi Government
committed itself and has pledged to fight corruption in
all its forms and to promote the principles of

08-45136

S/PV.5949

accountability and integrity. The conference also
resulted in the establishment of a national council to
fight corruption.
With regard to women’s rights and the
importance of their participation in the political
process, the Iraqi Government has stressed that Iraqi
women shall exercise their rights, contribute to the
political process and effectively participate in the
upcoming provincial council elections, in which the
percentage of women candidates will be 25 per cent,
the same as in the Iraqi Parliament. Moreover, Iraq has
ratified a convention on the establishment of an Arab
women’s organization in the context of its aim to
strengthen the role of women in Iraqi society. The
Prime Minister has launched a project to form an
institution to address the issues and problems of
widows, divorcees and elderly women. The
Government has allocated $200 million to that project.
The Iraqi Government has been keen to entrench
the culture of human rights and has achieved progress
in that area by establishing a national system to control
and monitor violations of human rights. Monitoring
teams were formed in the Ministry of Human Rights to
cooperate with human rights departments in all other
ministries. The Iraqi Government, in cooperation with
UNAMI, drafted a law pertaining to the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Iraq.
On the regional and international levels, the past
few months have witnessed a regional and international
openness towards Iraq since Prime Minister Nuri
al-Maliki travelled to Jordan and the United Arab
Emirates and made a European visit to Italy and
Germany. Iraq has also been visited by a number of
high-level delegations from the Gulf States, as well as
by the Turkish Prime Minister and the head of the
al-Mustaqbal bloc in the Lebanese Parliament,
Mr. Saad al-Hariri. Some Arab countries have sent
messages expressing their desire to develop political
and diplomatic relations with Iraq. Those visits have
resulted in a positive change in attitude towards Iraq.
The Governments of Bahrain, Kuwait, the United Arab
Emirates and Jordan have announced the nomination of
their ambassadors to Baghdad.
Furthermore, the visits of senior officials have
resulted in the conclusion of several economic,
security, trade and investment agreements with Iraq.
We would like to mention here with appreciation the

08-45136

initiative of the Government of the United Arab
Emirates to forgive Iraq’s debts of $7 billion.
The meeting of the International Compact with
Iraq held in Stockholm, Sweden, in late May 2008
achieved many positive results. The meeting welcomed
the proposal to form a new partnership for
development that includes the co-financing of new
programmes with the international partners and has
certain arrangements with the Paris Club with regard to
Iraqi debt settlement. In that regard, my delegation
would like to call on all brotherly Arab countries to
promote their historical role with respect to their
brothers in Iraq by forgiving Iraq’s debts and to
reconsider the percentage of the compensation
payments imposed on Iraq because of the invasion of
Kuwait in 1990, a crime committed by the former
dictatorial regime.
I would like to highlight the important role
played by UNAMI in Iraq in providing support and
advice to the Iraqi Government on the political,
humanitarian, human rights, national reconciliation and
constitutional processes, as stipulated in resolution
1770 (2007).
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate my
Government’s request that the mandate of UNAMI be
extended for another year, in recognition of its
important role in implementing its mandate in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.
In demonstration of my Government’s keenness
to facilitate UNAMI’s execution of its mandate, the
Iraqi Government has decided to allocate a
40,000-square metre parcel of land in the international
zone for its new integrated headquarters for 25 years.
We hope that UNAMI will provide support and
assistance in accordance with certain mechanisms and
with the prior approval of the Iraqi Government. We
also look forward to UNAMI having a more effective
and influential role through the return of the United
Nations specialized agencies, funds and programmes to
work inside Iraq and to contribute to Iraq’s
reconstruction.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): As this is the
first time I am speaking this month at an official
meeting of the Council on behalf of the Viet Nam
delegation, I would like to extend to you, Sir, and to
the delegation of Belgium our most heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency

11

S/PV.5949

for this month. You can rest assured of my delegation’s
fullest support and cooperation in the discharge of your
noble task.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his detailed briefing. I also thank
Ambassador Wolff of the United States for his briefing
on behalf of the Multinational Force in Iraq. We
welcome the participation of the delegation of Iraq in
this debate and thank its Ambassador for his statement.
During the four months since the most recent
report of the Secretary-General was issued, Iraq has
continued to make commendable efforts to consolidate
and expand its political and socio-economic
achievements, as reflected in the lowest levels of
overall violence since March 2004; the promulgation
of key legislation on justice, amnesty, provincial
powers and budget execution; the enhanced capabilities
of Iraqi security forces to independently maintain
national security and the rule of law; the intensive
preparations for the provincial elections scheduled for
October 2008; the recent participation of all political
factions in the Cabinet; and the Government’s
announcement of a six-point proposal entitled
“Partnership for Development”. Equally noteworthy
are macroeconomic records in increased domestic
consumption, the revival of local businesses
nationwide, a gross domestic product growth projected
by the International Monetary Fund to be 8 per cent for
the next two years, the decrease in inflation, the
gradual settlement of external debt burdens, and
significant revenues from oil exports.
Against that backdrop, Iraq still faces challenges
that remind us of the magnitude of the tasks to be
completed in order to facilitate the country’s smooth
transition to durable peace and sustainable
development. They include sectarian violence and
criminal acts, as manifested in the recent suicide
bombings in Baghdad and some other areas; the
delayed adoption of a package of laws on election and
hydrocarbons; the unresolved status of Kirkuk; and the
alarming rates of poverty and unemployment, as well
as the humanitarian challenges caused by the internal
and external displacement of Iraqi civilians. At the
same time, much remains to be desired for enhancing
national dialogue and reconciliation, advancing the
legislative agenda and the constitutional review,
curbing the illicit use of weapons and combating
organized crime, promoting disarmament, demobilizing
and reintegrating
ex-combatants,
creating
an

12

environment conducive to foreign and domestic
investment and fostering socio-economic reform.
Given the aforementioned progress that the Iraqi
people and Government have achieved, and given the
challenges they are still facing, my delegation — while
firmly supporting the Iraqi people in their endeavour to
tap their vast natural and human resources and promote
their cause of reconciliation, stabilization and
reconstruction — recognizes the important role that
United Nations agencies, neighbouring countries and
the international community can play in this
connection. We are encouraged by a series of
international events, including the meetings of Iraq’s
neighbours in Istanbul and Kuwait, the meeting of
Arab parliamentarians in Erbil and the Compact
Annual Review Conference in Stockholm, which
reflect the international community’s engagement in
helping Iraq’s reconstruction, development and
reintegration.
Along
with
other
encouraging
developments such as the operationalization of
regional working groups on energy, refugees and
security and the normalization of bilateral relations
between Iraq and neighbouring countries, we hope that
this emerging partnership and cooperation will be
sustained and will be translated into further concrete
action to serve mutual interests of all relevant
stakeholders, on the basis of respect for the political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Iraq.
My delegation commends the efforts of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
to assist the Government of Iraq in addressing key
priority issues as mandated by Security Council
resolution 1770 (2007), especially in terms of
advancing national reconciliation, resolving issues of
disputed internal territories, extending constitutional
and electoral assistance, providing humanitarian relief
and promoting regional dialogue. We support the
continued presence and enhanced coordination of
UNAMI and the United Nations country team in Iraq.
We thank the United States delegation for the
draft resolution on this issue and are ready to work
constructively with other Council members towards a
consensus text for early adoption.
Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Also, we appreciate the outstanding

08-45136

S/PV.5949

contribution made by the delegation of Viet Nam last
month.

account of concerns regarding the safety of United
Nations personnel.

We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing, and we welcome the briefings provided by
Ambassador Wolff and the Permanent Representative
of Iraq on the situation in that country.

We welcome the remarkable progress that Iraq
has achieved in the political, security and
reconstruction areas. But we must not ignore the fact
that the security situation in Iraq remains fragile and
that the number of civilian casualties remains high.
Once again, we urge that military activities in Iraq
avoid causing civilian casualties to the greatest
possible extent. Sustainable security is the basis for the
resolution of other problems faced by Iraq. In order to
cement the gains made on the security front, further
efforts must be made to advance political dialogue and
national reconciliation. We hope that all Iraqi parties
will put national interests above all else, enhance
dialogue and consultation and establish a solid political
consensus on important issues such as the country’s
future. We encourage UNAMI to play an active role in
that regard.

It has been a year since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1770 (2007), which expanded the
mandate of United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). We are pleased to note that, in extremely
complex and difficult circumstances, UNAMI has
strictly abided by its mandate pursuant to the Council’s
resolutions and has made good progress on all fronts.
Those are facts that we fully acknowledge. Changes
and developments in the situation concerning Iraq have
created more space for a United Nations role, while
posing more challenges to the Organization.
We support a 12-month extension of the current
mandate of UNAMI. We hope and expect that Mr. De
Mistura and his team will continue to fulfil their
mandate with great enthusiasm and professionalism
and in an innovative spirit. We wish to stress a number
of points with respect to the future of UNAMI.
First,
UNAMI
should
continue
close
consultations with the Iraqi Government. At the same
time, it should increase its engagement with all
segments of Iraqi society and carry out all its work in a
pragmatic manner, so as to gain as much understanding
and support as possible.
Secondly, UNAMI should carry out all its
mandated tasks in a comprehensive and balanced way,
in areas such as progress on the political front,
electoral assistance, constitutional review, regional
cooperation, economic reconstruction and the
protection of human rights — areas on which UNAMI
can do more.
Thirdly, UNAMI should also play a coordinating
role in the sphere of humanitarian assistance and
economic and social reconstruction, and it should
create synergy with the various United Nations offices
in Iraq.
And fourthly, the safety and security of United
Nations personnel in Iraq is, as always, a key priority.
The Iraqi Government and the countries concerned
should continue to bear primary responsibility in this
area. Any future new arrangement should take full

08-45136

The provincial elections now being prepared will
be a key step in the Iraqi political process. To ensure
that those elections play a positive role in the political
process, it is of no less importance to avoid delays than
to ensure the impartiality and inclusiveness of the
elections themselves.
The security situation, the political process and
socio-economic reconstruction are complementary. Iraq
abounds in natural and human resources and has vast
potential for economic rehabilitation and development.
The international community should honour its pledges
of assistance to Iraq, fully tapping the potential of
mechanisms such as the International Compact with
Iraq and the meetings of Foreign Ministers of
neighbouring countries so as to further promote the
development and reconstruction of Iraq.
Although Iraq continues to face all manner of
challenges and difficulties, we firmly believe that the
situation will gradually improve. Like the peoples of
every other sovereign State, the Iraqi people have the
right and the ability to govern their own affairs and to
live their lives in dignity, free from want and fear.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August and to
reaffirm my delegation’s intention to support you in
your work. I wish also to thank the delegation of

13

S/PV.5949

Viet Nam for its excellent work during the month of
July.
I thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing. Also, I thank
Ambassador Wolff of the United States for his
statement on behalf of the Multinational Force, and I
thank the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
statement.
Costa Rica welcomes the improvement of the
still-delicate situation in Iraq. We acknowledge the
endeavours of the Iraqi Government, with the support
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) and the Multinational Force. In that regard,
my country supports the renewal of the mandate of
UNAMI and welcomes the fact that this will take place
on terms satisfactory to the Government of Iraq.
In our view, the United Nations presence has
been decisive in the progress that has been made. We
recognize and value the relations that UNAMI
maintains with the Government of Iraq and we
advocate its continued strengthening. The extended
mandate of UNAMI, the leadership of Special
Representative De Mistura and the commitment of his
staff have made it possible for UNAMI to become a
facilitator of solutions, an agent for change and an ally
in the peacebuilding and sustainable development of
Iraq. The natural role of the United Nations in Iraq is to
be a promoter of development, a facilitator of change
and a catalyst for the improvement of the living
conditions of the Iraqi people.
Iraq’s problems can be solved only through
reconciliation and understanding among Iraqis without
exclusion. The immediate attention that must be paid to
the security situation must go hand in hand with a
process of extending the legitimacy of the Government
and its institutions. It is for the international
community to support all endeavours to promote
inclusive and meaningful political dialogue, as
indicated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2008/495).
In the tasks of dialogue and reconciliation, of
particular importance is the process of electoral
preparation being carried out in Iraq with a view to the
provincial elections. Here, we urge the adoption of the
necessary legislation providing guarantees to all
political configurations for the important process in
October and conferring all the necessary legitimacy on
the result of these electoral processes.

14

Sustainable peace is the result of a delicate
combination of factors that can provide the certainty of
achieving a better future through effort and discipline.
In that regard, Costa Rica wishes to emphasize the
need to pay special attention to two aspects.
First, there is a need for public investment,
particularly public investment that is more dynamic,
broader and effective for development. There is also a
need to ensure that the security situation is not
improved at the expense of fundamental freedoms, the
protection of the civilian population and the human
rights of all. With regard to public investment, we
believe that Iraq should exploit and invest as quickly as
possible the profits from its considerable oil income.
That which, for countries like Costa Rica, represents an
economic burden can and must be an opportunity to
promote the development of the people of oil exporting
countries, and in this particular case the people of Iraq.
The second aspect that we would underline as an
indispensable ingredient for peace is the necessary
balance to be struck between public security,
fundamental freedoms and the enforcement and full
enjoyment of human rights. Costa Rica joins in the
Secretary-General’s call on all security forces in Iraq,
including the Iraqi Security Forces, to continue to do
everything possible to avoid harming civilians and the
disproportionate use of force.
Political dialogue, reconciliation, strengthening
the legitimacy of the Government and its institutions,
the necessary improvement in the security situation
without undermining the rule of law, and increasing
investment in the people and their welfare are the keys
to a promising future for the Iraqi people. The United
Nations has a fundamental role to play in
accompanying these complex processes.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join my
colleagues in welcoming you, Mr. President, to your
role as President of the Council for the month of
August, and express our thanks to Ambassador Le
Luong Minh and his team for the excellent way that
they guided the Security Council last month.
I would also like to join colleagues in thanking
the Under-Secretary-General for his presentation on the
Secretary-General’s report. We also thank the United
States representative for his presentation on behalf of
the Multinational Force in Iraq. It was very good to see
the Iraqi ambassador here again today, and I express
my thanks to him for the work that his Government is

08-45136

S/PV.5949

doing and for its cooperation with the coalition forces,
which are pleased to work with strong Iraqi leadership.
The United Nations continues to play a vital role
in Iraq’s development as a democratic and stable
country, and on behalf of my Government I would also
like to thank the United Nations and the whole of its
Iraq team for the important work that they do.
As the Secretary-General acknowledges in his
report, and as echoed by most of the speakers today,
thanks to operations led by the Iraqi Security Forces
with support from coalition troops, violent incidents
across Iraq are at their lowest level since 2004, and
more generally the security situation across the whole
of Iraq continues to improve. The Iraqi Government
has taken tough action against armed groups and
militias, regardless of sectarian affiliation, and Iraqi
security forces are delivering on their responsibilities.
The improved security situation has provided a
platform
for
further
essential
progress
on
reconciliation. We have seen not only increased
cooperation between Sunni communities and the Iraqi
Government in areas such as Anbar and Mosul, and the
return of the Tawafuq Sunni bloc to the Government,
but also the passage of key legislation that is helping to
embed democracy. The next stage will be provincial
elections, which will reinforce the political progress
made at the national level. They will allow those who
did not participate in the last provincial elections in
January 2005 to enter the political process and they
will contribute to the political reconciliation that the
Secretary-General rightly highlights in his report as
required for long-term stability.
As previous speakers have said, we recognize, of
course, that progress is fragile and that we cannot take
it for granted. Millions of Iraqis remain displaced, the
infrastructure continues to suffer the impact of 30 years
of mismanagement, and the level of unemployment
remains too high. The attacks in Baghdad and Kirkuk
last week remind us that there are groups that are still
determined to inflict violence and create instability.
I would like to use this occasion, if I may, to say
a few words about the British role in Iraq, particularly
in the light of some recent misinformed press
speculation. It was very good, also, to hear from the
Iraqi Ambassador just now how successful Iraqi-led
military operations have been in parts of Iraq.
The British Prime Minister explained the latest
United Kingdom plans in a statement made on 22 July

08-45136

2008, but I would like briefly, if I may, to summarize
those plans here. Ten months ago, we set out the key
elements of our strategy for handing over security in
Basra to the Iraqis and we set up stages for completing
the tasks we had set for ourselves.
The initial phase was completed when Basra was
transferred to provincial Iraqi control in December of
last year. That transfer reflected a judgement on our
part that the Iraqi authorities and security forces were
ready to take the lead in delivering security in Basra, a
judgement that has been borne out by the Iraqi Security
Forces’ subsequent decisive action to establish the rule
of law in Basra and to conduct successful operations,
to which we were pleased provide support.
The Iraqis are now very much in the lead in
Basra, and the over 4,000 British troops remaining in
southern Iraq are focused on completing 13 key tasks
in support of that Iraqi lead. Those key tasks include
completing the training and mentoring of the
fourteenth division of the Iraqi army in Basra,
including through the embedding of around 800
personnel in the fourteenth division command
structure; finalizing the preparation of Basra airport for
civilian control; and continuing to develop the capacity
of the Iraqi navy and marines to protect territorial
waters, the port and oil platforms.
As we complete those tasks, and as progress
continues in those different areas, we will continue to
reduce the number of British troops in Iraq. Of course,
future decisions will, as they have always been, be
based on the advice of our military commanders on the
ground and will be taken in consultation with the
Government of Iraq and our coalition partners. We
expect a fundamental change of mission in the first
months of 2009 as we make the transition to a normal
bilateral relationship with Iraq similar to those that we
have with other key partners in the region.
Sustainable progress in Iraq will be achieved only
with continued support from the international
community. As we have heard today, important
challenges lie ahead. Some of these include the need
for progress on key nation-building issues, such as the
review of the constitution and disputed internal
boundaries; the provincial elections scheduled for later
this year; the humanitarian situation, both inside and
outside Iraq; developing the infrastructure essential for
promoting and protecting human rights; and the need to
support the maturing Iraqi democratic structures and

15

S/PV.5949

institutions. We welcome the involvement of the
United Nations in these issues and we will continue to
work with the Organization to ensure that these
challenges are overcome in a timely fashion.
Let me conclude by saying that the United
Kingdom remains committed to Iraq through our
United Nations and coalition obligations. I would like
to take this opportunity to encourage all Member States
to support both the United Nations work in Iraq and the
work of the Government of Iraq. But above all, I would
like to make it clear that we will stand by the
commitment we have made to the people of Iraq to
ensure that Iraq continues to develop as a democratic,
prosperous and stable country, free from terrorist
violence and secure within its borders, and a stable
presence in the region.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): As this is the first time my
delegation is taking the floor this month, we would like
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
for the month of August and assure you of our full
support. I would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Ambassador Le Luong Minh of Viet Nam and his
delegation for their excellent work last month. My
delegation would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his informative briefing, as well as
Ambassador Wolff for his update on the ongoing
efforts on the part of the Multinational Force in Iraq
and the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
remarks.
The present report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) (S/2008/495) once again has shown that Iraq
is making strong, albeit measured, progress, especially
in the security and political fields. Croatia welcomes
the assessment, made by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 56 of his report, that “Thanks to concerted
political and military efforts ... there has been
continued improvement in the security situation across
Iraq”. We believe that these efforts, aimed at creating
an adequate and reliable, as well as a safe and secure,
security environment for all Iraqis, are commendable.
Although we note that casualties among both
Iraq’s security forces and the civilian population
continue to occur at unacceptably high levels, we have
noted with satisfaction the increased cooperation and
partnership demonstrated by local officials with the
Government, which has been coupled with renewed
efforts by the Iraqi Security Forces to break the cycle

16

of violence. This strengthened cooperation with local
elements has proven to be crucial to the success of a
number of security operations conducted during the
reporting period against rebel or terrorist groups, with
increasing levels of success.
That said, we do recognize, as is mentioned not
only in the report of the Secretary-General, but also in
the draft resolution of UNAMI’s extension, that many
security challenges remain in Iraq. More needs to be
done to ensure civic and political freedoms, and the
wider human rights situation throughout Iraq remains
alarming. While we understand the many challenges
associated with simultaneously attempting to
strengthen and uphold the institutions of democracy
while faced with armed rebel groups and criminal
gangs responsible for abductions, assassinations and
numerous other crimes, we hope that in addressing
these issues the Iraqi police and security forces will
manage to strike the necessary balance between public
safety and upholding international humanitarian and
human rights law on the one hand, and the need to
stamp out the operations of these criminal gangs on the
other.
While it goes without saying that security must
be a prerequisite for any successful political process,
we also need to keep in mind that democracy is an
ongoing practice that requires both time and resources
to succeed. We welcome UNAMI’s continued work
with Iraq’s Independent Electoral Commission and
welcome what was just mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of Iraq: that with UNAMI’s
professional guidance and assistance, the Government
has been able to overcome the remaining problems
associated with the passing of the new provincial
election law, including on the inclusion of women
candidates. The adoption of the election law will not
only provide a platform in which local elections can
take place this year, but will also give ordinary Iraqis a
chance to make a difference in those areas with which
they are best acquainted: their local communities.
The constitutional review impasse continues to be
of concern for my delegation, especially as the
stumbling blocks to the success of this operation are
being revisited time and again. We hope that the
Constitutional Review Committee, which itself
recognizes that the stumbling blocks are mainly
political in nature, manages to use the time requested
until the end of this year in order to address these
issues and finalize its report.

08-45136

S/PV.5949

Moreover, we continue to be concerned with the
persistent and ongoing problems associated with the
passage of laws on hydrocarbons, especially when
taking into account Iraq’s increasing oil revenues,
which need to be managed effectively and responsibly
for the benefit of all Iraqis. We hope that the committee
of central and regional Government officials,
established to resolve these outstanding issues, will
complete its work in a timely manner.
Croatia also welcomes the confidence-building
efforts being conducted by UNAMI with regard to
helping to address the issue of disputed internal
boundaries, with the analyses conducted and presented
on several areas in northern Iraq. It also hopes that the
Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan regional
government will continue to use the good offices and
advisory role provided by UNAMI to find a solution to
the internal boundaries question as soon as possible.
We recognize that, as was mentioned in previous
reports, wider regional cooperation and dialogue are
crucial for the long-term stabilization and prosperity of
Iraq and its surroundings. The active and willing
engagement of neighbouring countries in strengthening
Iraq’s international standing is essential in this process.
We are pleased to see that a number of neighbouring
countries — Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait and the United
Arab Emirates — have announced that they will be
resuming full diplomatic representation in Baghdad.
We welcome especially the visit by Turkish Prime
Minister Erdogan to Iraq in July this year. This, along
with Iraq’s accession to the Gulf Cooperation Council,
the successful holding of the third expanded
Ministerial Conference of the Neighbouring Countries
of Iraq, held in Kuwait in April this year, as well as the
high-level International Compact with Iraq Annual
Review Conference, held in Sweden in May, are all
vital for Iraq’s continued reconstruction and
development.
Allow me to finish by reiterating Croatia’s belief
that UNAMI, under the able leadership of Special
Representative De Mistura and his staff, continues to
be well placed to undertake a central and leading role
in the international efforts aimed at helping Iraq
overcome the plethora of challenges it is still faced
with, including but not limited to its role in assisting
the central and local governments in advancing
political as well as economic dialogue, assisting in the
constitutional reform process and facilitating dialogue
on the regional level.

08-45136

The progress achieved thus far gives us hope that
the Iraqi people are determined to overcome these
challenges so as to transform Iraq into a fully
integrated and consolidated member of the
international community. We support them in that goal.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I should like to congratulate
Ambassador Le Luong Minh and the delegation of Viet
Nam on their successful guidance of the Security
Council in July, and to wish you, Sir, equal success for
the delegation of Belgium in doing your difficult job as
President of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe, who introduced the report describing the
situation in Iraq and the work of the United Nations
structures (S/2008/495). We listened with interest to
the comments of the Permanent Representative of Iraq,
Mr. Al-Bayati, who has given us an assessment by his
country’s authorities regarding recent events there. We
are also grateful to Ambassador Wolff for his briefing
on the activities of the Mulitnational Force in Iraq.
On the whole, the report submitted to us
objectively reflects today’s realities in Iraq. We agree
with most of the report’s findings and conclusions. We
are pleased to note that the report describes a certain
amount of progress on security, which has taken place
in some Iraqi governorates. However, it is still too soon
to talk about the irreversibility of that process.
In recent days and weeks, certain high-impact
terrorist acts have taken place in Baghdad and Kirkuk,
and several less sensational but no less ruthless clashes
and attacks have been committed by extremists in
various areas of the country. We support the approach
of Iraqi leaders and all political forces to achieve a
lasting settlement by advancing a real, comprehensive
inter-Iraqi dialogue and by strengthening national
reconciliation and understanding. In that connection,
we think that expediting the adoption of laws regarding
local elections and hydrocarbon is critically important
to the sustainable political and economic development
of the country and to the stabilization of the situation
there as a whole.
We note the active efforts made by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to help
Iraq resolve those challenges. We believe that, in that
context, the question of maintaining the unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq remains a top priority. An
important event in that regard will be the elections to

17

S/PV.5949

the local organs of power, preparations for which are
under way with the active assistance of UNAMI. We
believe that the elections should take place in
transparent conditions and that the results must be
accepted by all Iraqis.
An equally important goal is the facilitation of a
settlement in Iraq by the States of the region and by the
international community as a whole. In that regard,
steps are being taken, in terms both of political issues,
as mentioned in the report — for example, the opening
of new embassies in Baghdad — and of economic
issues, which include in particular processes to write
off Iraq’s foreign debt. We are pleased to note that,
following the lead of the Russian Federation, a number
of other countries are stepping up to resolve that
problem.
We welcome the prospect of establishing a
general time frame for the presence of foreign troops in
Iraq. We think it is important that the appropriate
agreements not infringe on Iraq’s sovereignty or cause
new conflicts or fissures in Iraqi society. We believe
that a democratic, unified Iraq, strengthened in its
sovereignty, will become an important factor for the
stability of the Persian Gulf region and for the entire
Middle East.
We agree with the concerns expressed in the
report of the Secretary-General about the serious
violations of human rights in Iraq. We support the goal
of UNAMI to continue to work with the Government
of Iraq and Iraqi officials to put an end to impunity and
to redress the human rights situation as a whole. We
support UNAMI’s practice of preparing periodic
reports describing the humanitarian and human rights
situation in Iraq. Those reports must include statistics
about the number of civilian casualties, which
unfortunately remain high.
We strongly condemn attacks on civilians and
civilian deaths resulting from indiscriminate and
excessive uses of force. There is no justification for
armed groups that use suicide bombers and engage in
the process of hostage-taking to attain their goals.
We are very concerned about the activities of
private security companies and other mercenary
structures in Iraq, which often violate the rights of
innocent civilians and the norms of international
humanitarian law.

18

We welcome the recent accession by Iraq to the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. We call upon all parties to implement
resolution 1612 (2005), including the full deployment
in Iraq of a monitoring and reporting mechanism. We
hope that those steps will help mitigate the inhumane
treatment of children in Iraq, including the detention of
underage children in military jails in contravention of
international standards, and the still widespread
practice of using child soldiers.
In conclusion, allow me to once again express our
profound gratitude to the United Nations personnel,
who, in extremely difficult conditions in today’s Iraq,
are valiantly and effectively doing their jobs, as
defined in the Security Council’s mandate.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Allow me to first
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
our work in August and to express our heartfelt thanks
to the Vietnamese delegation for its excellent work and
stewardship of the Council in the intense month of
July.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe; the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United States, Ambassador Wolff; and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al Bayati, for their
thorough and informative remarks.
Italy welcomes the improvements in the security
situation in Iraq and greatly appreciates the progress
made by the Iraqi authorities and the Iraqi Security
Forces to counter terrorism and unlawful armed groups
in a framework of growing self-reliance and ownership
by those authorities and with increasing cooperation
from local communities. Further improvements in the
security framework are indispensable to promoting
economic and social growth.
It is therefore our hope that the objective of
completing the transfer of responsibility for security to
Iraq — which has already taken place in 10 out of 18
governorates — will soon be achieved in all
governorates. Increasing the reliability of the Iraqi
Security Forces is one of the objectives to which Italy
attaches the utmost importance and to which it
contributes concretely through its participation in the
NATO training mission.
As stated by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2008/495), the security and political gains of the

08-45136

S/PV.5949

past months have to be sustained through meaningful
political dialogue and national reconciliation. All
expressions of democracy in the country should be
included in the political process so as to enable the
consolidated political dialogue to make a strong
contribution to improving security conditions. We also
appreciate any measure aimed at countering
sectarianism or attempts to discriminate against ethnic
and religious minorities.
To consolidate the progress made thus far, we
also appreciate the efforts to offset the potentially
negative effects of the question of Kirkuk and other
contested areas. We fully support the United Nations
initiative for an agreed political solution articulated
through a gradual approach, starting with the
administrative reform of the less problematic areas. We
also encourage all Iraqi political forces to do their
utmost to reach an agreement on an electoral law so as
to be able to hold provincial elections within the year.
We are also most appreciative of the recent
allocations decided on by the Iraqi Government to
alleviate the conditions of refugees in Syria and Jordan
and of internally displaced persons, as well as
initiatives to foster their re-entry and reinsertion into
the country. That is an issue that deserves all our
attention.
Finally, allow me to state once again Italy’s belief
in the central role that the United Nations — through
the brave and committed efforts of Special
Representative De Mistura and all national and
international staff of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) — can play in helping
Iraqis, in accordance with the broad mandate provided
by resolution 1770 (2004). We are therefore honoured
and proud to be one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution that, on the basis of a request by the Iraqi
Government, will renew UNAMI’s mandate for one
more year.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your delegation
on your assumption of your responsibilities as
President of the Security Council for the month of
August. I wish also to express our profound
appreciation to Ambassador Le Luong Minh and the
delegation of Viet Nam for their able stewardship of
the Council’s work in the past month.
I would like to join others in thanking the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn

08-45136

Pascoe, for his comprehensive briefing, Ambassador
Wolff of the United States for his statement on behalf
of the Multinational Force in Iraq, and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for his important remarks.
The continued improvements in security across
Iraq during the past three months have given the
country and its people a chance to achieve peace,
stability and prosperity. My delegation recognizes the
contribution of combined political and military efforts
to that progress.
Despite the positive developments, security in
Iraq remains fragile. The recent suicide bombings in
Baghdad and Kirkuk that claimed a considerable
number of civilian casualties are a reminder that
investment in security is still of paramount importance.
We recognize the significance of the military efforts by
the Iraqi Security Forces in building peace and stability
in Iraq. We welcome the fact that the Iraqi Security
Forces are gaining confidence and capability, with an
increasing number of units capable of leading
operations.
My delegation continues to underline the
importance of the protection of civilians. As indicated
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/495), civilian
casualties in Iraq have often been caused by the failure
of all parties to the conflict to make the distinction
between combatants and civilians, as well as by
disproportionate attacks on civilian areas. My
delegation therefore reaffirms that all parties should
respect international human rights and humanitarian
law and continue to take the necessary measures to
ensure the protection of affected civilians. We also
share the concern of the Secretary-General over the
psychosocial impact of violence and deprivation on
millions of Iraqi children. We recognize the need for
greater efforts and resources to address that challenge.
Military initiative alone cannot offer a solution.
Achieving sustainable peace in Iraq will also require
meaningful and inclusive political dialogue and
reconciliation across the various divides. Significant
support from all segments of the Iraqi population is
critical to the achievement of long-term stability in the
country. My delegation therefore believes that it is
important for the people of Iraq to resort to peaceful
means in settling disputes and to engage in political
dialogue and reconciliation. The reconciliation meeting
in Helsinki on 29 April 2008, which involved

19

S/PV.5949

30 representatives from Iraq’s main political and ethnic
groups, was a welcome step.
My delegation also recognizes the importance of
the political progress that Iraq has achieved to the
stability of the country. We welcome some recent
positive steps aimed at strengthening unity within the
Iraqi Government. The upcoming provincial elections
will be an important stage in the democratic process in
Iraq. We welcome the role of the Independent High
Electoral Commission of Iraq in that regard. We also
recognize the challenges that Iraq continues to face in
the early passage of its electoral law and in the
constitutional review process. We welcome the
commitment of the Government of Iraq to making
progress in those efforts.
The current growing relations between Iraq and
its neighbouring countries are a laudable development.
We welcome the convening in Kuwait of the third
expanded Ministerial Conference of the Neighbouring
Countries of Iraq on 22 April 2008, as well as the first
annual review conference of the International Compact
with Iraq in Stockholm on 29 May 2008. We continue
to attach primary importance to the International
Compact with Iraq, which serves as a new partnership
between Iraq and the international community in
achieving
the
consolidation
of
peace
and
comprehensive development.
The continued presence of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and its
contribution in Iraq remains pertinent and essential,
considering the ongoing efforts of the Government and
the people of Iraq towards economic development,
embracing democracy, good governance and the rule of
law, and promoting peace and stability.
UNAMI’s role in supporting the secretariat of the
International Compact with Iraq in Baghdad and in the
review of its management to increase its effectiveness
is commendable. Its assistance to the electoral
processes at the governorate level, its support for
reconciliation efforts and its contribution to
establishing a process to address disputed boundaries
are also laudable. We recognize the request of the
Government of Iraq for UNAMI to continue its
presence and its work in Iraq. Mindful also of
UNAMI’s important contribution to building a
peaceful, stable and prosperous Iraq, my delegation
very much welcomes such a request.

20

Finally, my delegation wishes to reaffirm our
support for the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Iraq and the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation joins in the congratulations extended to you,
Sir, and to your country as you assume the presidency.
We also join in the congratulations extended to
Ambassador Le Luong Minh of Viet Nam, his
delegation and his country for the excellent way in
which he presided over the Council in July. I should
also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, for his briefing, as well as
the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States and the Permanent Representative of Iraq.
My delegation is pleased to note the positive
evolution of the situation in Iraq, particularly in terms
of security, with the exception of the recent attacks in
Baghdad and Kirkuk. The ceasefire in Sadr City
remains in force, with tangible benefits for the people,
and the reintegration of the various political blocs into
the Government represents significant and noteworthy
progress. However, the Council must take into account
the remarks of the Secretary-General to the effect that
the situation is still critical and that the challenge
requires redoubled efforts on the part of the
Government of Iraq, as well as the combined efforts of
all sectors of the population and the continued
cooperation of the international community.
We acknowledge the important work being
carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) to assist the Government of Iraq in
developing an inclusive electoral system that will allow
the holding of fair and transparent elections
guaranteeing the participation of all. A peaceful Iraq
also requires certain important common goals to be
achieved, such as the law on hydrocarbons and the
demarcation of internal boundaries. We should like to
thank the Ambassador of Iraq for the information he
has provided to us today on the progress made in those
matters.
The delegation of Panama notes with optimism
the recent initiatives of regional and international
dialogue, in particular the commitments achieved at the
meeting of the International Compact with Iraq in
Stockholm and the decisions of Bahrain, Jordan,
Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates to reopen their
diplomatic missions in Iraq. Those events reaffirm the

08-45136

S/PV.5949

commitment of the international community to the
cause of Iraq. We should also like to acknowledge the
gesture by the United Arab Emirates in cancelling
Iraq’s debt.
Despite all those endeavours, the humanitarian
situation in Iraq remains critical and deserves the
greatest attention of the United Nations and Iraq. While
we acknowledge the work that has been done, we also
urge UNAMI and the Government of Iraq, in
particular, to strengthen their response with regard to
the basic needs of the most vulnerable population
groups both within the borders of Iraq and beyond, so
as to provide aid to the refugees in the region and to
guarantee their safe and voluntary return. We also urge
the international community to lend its efforts and
cooperation to that difficult task.
Lastly, we note with concern the observations of
the Secretary-General indicating that the human rights
situation in Iraq remains alarming. The Council must
pay more attention to the report prepared by the
UNAMI Human Rights Office. To that end, the cycle
of reports and discussion thereof must be improved.
We are concerned about the serious situation of
children, reports of gender violence and the excessive
use of force against civilians, and the position of
detainees. The consolidation and development of
political and administrative institutions in Iraq must go
hand in hand with security and the respect for the
fundamental rights and freedoms of its people. Here we
echo the appeal to Iraq by the Secretary-General to
take the necessary measures to enhance its system of
protection and information with regard to human
rights.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to express the thanks of the French delegation to
the representative of Viet Nam and his delegation for
the excellent work accomplished during Viet Nam’s
presidency last month. I should also like to thank
Mr. Pascoe and Ambassador Wolff for their briefings.
France has noted with satisfaction the continued
progress made in Iraq over the past several months in
the area of security. In that regard, we welcome the
increased transfer of responsibilities to the Iraqi forces
and the efforts of the Iraqi Government. Disarmament
of the militias is an important objective aimed at full
restoration of State authority with regard to the security

08-45136

and maintenance of order. That initial progress, which
has been made in particular as a result of the efforts of
the Iraqi authorities, must now be supported by
responses to the persistent challenges facing the people
and the Government of Iraq. The United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has an important
role to play in that respect.
The first challenge is the essential process of
national reconciliation and constitutional review, which
are objectives crucial to the consolidation of the Iraqi
State. That process must be inclusive and must make it
possible to isolate the forces that want Iraq to fail. It
requires cooperation by all Iraqi political leaders, who
must agree on an equitable sharing of power and
resources on a consensual basis. It is now urgent that
their stated intentions be translated into action. France
hopes that UNAMI will continue its work of advising
and supporting the Iraqi Government in carrying out
political reforms and holding elections, which are
essential for the consolidation of democratic
institutions, the promotion of national dialogue and the
reintegration of illegal armed groups.
The second challenge is related to the
humanitarian and human rights situations. The
humanitarian situation remains particularly worrisome.
The French delegation welcomes the work done by
UNAMI and all the United Nations entities concerned,
particularly the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, as well as the efforts of
neighbouring States. It is now important that the Iraqi
Government honour its commitments — particularly its
financial commitment — with a view to the sustainable
and safe return of refugees and internally displaced
persons.
Strengthening the rule of law and promoting
human rights are also important commitments
undertaken by the Iraqi Government at the Compact
with Iraq Annual Review Conference, held in
Stockholm on 29 May — commitments that we
encourage. UNAMI’s reports on the human rights
situation in Iraq arouse great concern on the part of the
French delegation, particularly with regard to
observance of the rights of the many detainees held in
Iraq. France fully supports UNAMI’s work in that area
and calls on all actors concerned to intensify their
efforts. France and the European Union will continue
to help to strengthen the rule of law in Iraq.

21

S/PV.5949

The third challenge concerns the economy. The
French delegation welcomes the consolidation of Iraq’s
budgetary resources. That should make it possible for
the Iraqi Government to continue to rebuild the country
and to improve its people’s access to basic services, in
keeping with the aforementioned commitments
undertaken at the first ministerial-level International
Compact with Iraq Annual Review Conference. My
delegation supports the work carried out by UNAMI in
coordination with the Iraqi Government. However, the
results will depend in particular on progress in the
areas of financial transparency and economic
governance.
Finally, the fourth challenge concerns the
regional process. The support of countries in the region
that have expressed a willingness to contribute to the
stability and reconstruction of Iraq remains crucial. We
welcome in particular the involvement of neighbouring
States in the process begun at Sharm el-Sheikh in May
2007, on which there has been progress, as we were
able to note at the expanded Ministerial Conference of
Neighbours held in Kuwait on 22 April 2008. Here
again, the role of UNAMI, in cooperation with the
Iraqi Government, is important, as shown by the
establishment of an ad hoc follow-up mechanism
within the Iraqi Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
I should like to conclude my statement by
welcoming the initial results obtained on the ground by
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, thanks
in particular to the personal commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura. My delegation reaffirms its full support for
the efforts made by UNAMI under its mandate, which
was strengthened by resolution 1770 (2007). We hope
that the mandate will be renewed for one year, as
provided for by the draft resolution circulated by the
United States delegation.
In accordance with resolution 1770 (2007), those
efforts should be carried out in a safe environment.
Since in a few days’ time we will be commemorating
the fifth anniversary of the attack on the United
Nations in Baghdad, which claimed the lives of
22 people, including Sergio Vieira de Mello, I should
like to stress that — particularly given the possibility
that the mandate of the Multinational Force might not
be renewed at the end of the year — all the actors
concerned should plan and take the measures necessary
to maintain an appropriate level of security to ensure
the smooth functioning of the Mission.

22

France, which currently holds the presidency of
the European Union, is committed to the unity,
sovereignty and integrity of a democratic Iraq. We wish
to stress the Union’s willingness to assist the Iraqis, in
support of United Nations efforts, in restoring the
peace and security to which they are entitled within a
united and richly diverse State.
Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): We join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also thank the
delegation of Viet Nam for the good work done last
month. In addition, we thank Mr. Pascoe, the
representative of the United States and the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for their briefings.
We note the relatively positive developments that
have taken place over the past few weeks in Iraq.
These include enhanced cooperation, both among
political groups in Iraq and between Iraq and
neighbouring countries. However, notwithstanding
those positive developments, fundamental challenges
remain. As the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/495) indicates, high levels of violence
continue and civilian casualties remain unacceptably
high.
The Secretary-General also reports that the
human rights situation remains serious, particularly the
violations of the human rights of civilians and
detainees. Moreover, the dire humanitarian situation
continues to have a negative impact on Iraqi and
regional stability. A recent report from Refugees
International indicates that more than 2 million Iraqi
refugees live in neighbouring countries and that almost
3 million Iraqis are internally displaced. The continued
delays regarding the finalization of the electoral and
hydrocarbon laws, which are central to equitable
representation and the equitable distribution of natural
resources, are a further destabilizing factor.
We welcome the initiatives of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to establish a
process for addressing disputed internal boundaries in
Iraq. We also support all of UNAMI’s efforts to assist
the Iraqi people and Government in strengthening
institutions for a representative Government, in
promoting
political
dialogue
and
national
reconciliation and in engaging with neighbouring
countries. Indeed, the work of the United Nations in
Iraq is testament to the international community’s

08-45136

S/PV.5949

determination to help the Iraqi people move beyond the
current crisis.
South Africa therefore continues to support the
presence of UNAMI in Iraq under its present mandate,
in line with our commitment to multilateralism and
conflict resolution. We believe that the United Nations
has a particularly important role to play with regard to
national reconciliation in Iraq. As the SecretaryGeneral has previously indicated, the United Nations
not only enjoys good relations with all parties across
the political spectrum in Iraq, but also brings to the
table its considerable experience and best practices
gained from operating in other conflict situations.
However, an expanded role for the United Nations, as
foreseen in resolution 1770 (2007), can be realized
only as circumstances permit. The safety of United
Nations personnel must be an overriding consideration.
We conclude by reiterating the observation made
by the Secretary-General in the present report that the
gains made so far need to be sustained through
meaningful
political
dialogue
and
national
reconciliation. Time is of the essence, and Iraq can no
longer afford continued delays in finding political
solutions.
Mr. Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also express our gratitude
to the delegation of Viet Nam for its outstanding
conduct of our work last month.
Allow me also to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing and Ambassador Wolff for describing the
situation with regard to the implementation of the
mandate of the Multinational Force in Iraq. I further
thank the Permanent Representative of Iraq for his
important statement.
We are pleased to note that the overall situation
in Iraq is improving, but it is clear that major
challenges remain, in particular with regard to security.
Fortunately, we note encouraging signs at the national
level and welcome the ongoing compliance with the
ceasefire in Sadr City, announced on 11 May, allowing
for the gradual restoration of essential services and
State authority in that neighbourhood. We also stress
the good cooperation among local communities in
preventing acts of violence and the ongoing capacitybuilding of the security forces.

08-45136

The return to the Government of groups that were
boycotting the political process reflects the
considerable progress that has been made at the
political level. Burkina Faso welcomes the dialogue
begun among the Iraqi parties and facilitated by the
meetings held in Helsinki on 29 April and in Baghdad
on 5 July. We urge them to maintain and expand that
process and to comply with the decisions taken at those
meetings.
Furthermore,
the
risks
of
disagreement
concerning the constitutional review process, the draft
electoral law and hydrocarbons legislation must be
mitigated. Equally important to national reconciliation
is the delicate question of internal boundaries, which
should be resolved as soon as possible through
negotiation.
My delegation appreciates the regional efforts
being made, in particular the high-level contacts
between Baghdad and countries of the region, several
of which have already announced the reopening of
their diplomatic offices and the return of
representatives of regional organizations. We urge the
entire international community to promote regional
dialogue and to maintain its support for the
International Compact with Iraq, the implementation of
which will help in rebuilding and developing the
country.
We welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), in particular in the quest
for a solution to the issues of disputed internal
boundaries and electoral assistance. We welcome the
considerable fall in the number of attacks on the
international zone and encourage all Iraqi parties to
continue to cooperate with the Mission.
The Secretary-General’s report describes a human
rights and humanitarian situation that is still very
worrisome. The Iraqi Government and all parties
involved in Iraq must take the necessary and effective
steps to guarantee respect for human rights, combat
impunity and improve the overall humanitarian
situation. The international community has a duty of
solidarity with the Iraqi people. The country still faces
a multitude of challenges, and that is why we support
the renewal of the mandates of UNAMI and the
Multinational Force, as sought by the Iraqi
Government.

23

S/PV.5949

Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): It is my pleasure at the outset to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I assure you of our
full engagement and cooperation with your work.
We also express our appreciation for the excellent
work of Ambassador Le Luong Minh and the
delegation of Viet Nam in presiding over the Security
Council in July.
Allow me further to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. We highly
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and thank Ambassador
Wolff, Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America, for his briefing on the activities of
the Multinational Force in Iraq (MNF-I).
We welcome the improved security situation in
some regions of Iraq, as clearly reflected in the
statistics provided by Ambassador Wolff in his
briefing. We also welcome the positive political
developments in Iraq, including the end of the boycott
of the Government by the Tawafuq bloc. Nevertheless,
we wish to caution yet again that the stability of the
security situation is contingent on national
reconciliation and the conviction of all Iraqi parties
that they have the opportunity to contribute to and
participate in the governance of the country and to
share the country’s wealth equally, beyond all sectarian
and ethnic considerations. The stability of the security
situation is also contingent on the end of the
occupation and on convincing Iraqis of their own full
sovereignty over their territory.
Regrettably, there is much of concern in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2008/495).
First is the rising level of violence. Operations
undertaken by the MNF-I and Iraqi security forces
continue to claim large numbers of civilian casualties.
That is perhaps best reflected in paragraph 27 of the
report.
Secondly, the human rights situation has been and
remains grave. The report notes that
“The human rights situation in Iraq remains
serious … UNAMI remained concerned about the
physical safety and legal protection of hundreds
of suspects arrested, as well as detention
conditions and lack of due process following
detention. Those apparently rounded up as

24

suspects included a
(S/2008/495, para. 26)

number

of

children.”

Furthermore, as a representative of the MNF-I
noted recently, the Force is currently detaining 21,000
individuals under the pretext that the United Nations
mandate gives the Force the right to detain any person
it deems to be a threat to security.
Thirdly, ongoing abuses against children —
including their recruitment and attacks on schools and
hospitals — are widespread. The report states in
paragraph 29 that “[a]pproximately 1,500 children are
known to be held in detention facilities for alleged
association with armed groups”.
Fourthly, it is also a source of concern that
refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
continue to face very difficult circumstances. The rate
of return — 10,000 per month — is extremely low,
which indicates that genuine efforts have not been
made to create conditions conducive to return. We hope
that the adoption of an Iraqi national policy on
refugees and returnees will lessen the suffering of
displaced persons and make resettlement easier for
them. There have been reports that there are 2.5 million
IDPs in Iraq and a similar number of refugees in
neighbouring countries. We believe that this issue too
merits special attention by the Security Council. We
hope that future reports of the Secretary-General will
contain greater detail on this matter.
Fifthly, yet another matter of concern is that the
adoption of some fundamental laws — such as an
electoral law making possible the organization of
elections to governorate councils — continues to be
delayed. We were delighted to hear the Permanent
Representative of Iraq speak of developments in that
regard. On other contentious constitutional issues, we
are also concerned about the ongoing dispute on the
status of Kirkuk.
Libya supports all ongoing efforts towards
national reconciliation in Iraq. We support a stable
security situation, an end to occupation and the
maintenance of Iraq’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity. We greatly appreciate UNAMI’s
efforts to assist Iraq, along with those of all other
United Nations entities. We attach importance to the
observations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral before us today. In particular, we support his
observation that

08-45136

S/PV.5949

“Iraq can no longer afford continued delays in
finding viable political solutions. Long-term
stability will require significant political buy-in
from all segments of the population, many of
which are not yet fully engaged in the political
process”. (S/2008/495, para. 56)

In that regard, we echo the Secretary-General’s
appeal for the adoption, as soon as possible, of an
electoral law making possible the organization of
provincial elections. That would further enhance the
inclusiveness and legitimacy of the Iraqi political
debate.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Belgium.

I turn secondly to the rule of law. We welcome
the assessments of the Secretary-General and of
Ambassador Wolff regarding the increased capacity
and autonomy of the Iraqi Security Forces. The fatal
attacks of recent weeks in Baghdad and Kirkuk should
make all stakeholders realize the importance of
continuing their efforts to ensure respect for basic
principles of the rule of law, in particular regarding the
protection of civilians, as well as respect for their
fundamental rights, including the rights of detainees.

I too take this opportunity to thank my
predecessor, Ambassador Le Luong Minh, for the
excellent work of his team during the month of July. I
also thank members for their good wishes as my
country assumes the presidency of the Council for the
month of August.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
presentation and Ambassador Wolff for his briefing on
behalf of the Multinational Force. My thanks to also to
Ambassador Al Bayati for his participation in the
Council’s debate today.
A year after the adoption of resolution 1770
(2007), Belgium reaffirms its support for the expanded
mandate it gave to the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). We thus welcome the wish
of the Iraqi authorities to extend the mandate of
UNAMI. That extension will come at a turning point.
We have noted the positive developments in the areas
of security, national reconciliation and regional
dialogue, and more generally we note the increased
assumption of responsibility by the Iraqi authorities.
But that progress cannot eclipse the magnitude of the
challenges that remain; to the contrary, this
underscores the urgent need to consolidate that
progress.
The first way to do this is by deepening the
political dialogue. We welcome the growing political
involvement of diverse elements of Iraqi society, but
the slow progress in the constitutional review and on
the issue of disputed internal boundaries indicate the
ongoing difficulty the Iraqis are experiencing in
finding a comprehensive agreement on power-sharing
and wealth-sharing. Here, Belgium welcomes
UNAMI’s constant readiness to provide technical
assistance and mediation. Such assistance should
facilitate the Iraqis’ search for responses — responses
that they alone have the legitimacy to make.

08-45136

Thirdly, regarding Iraq’s interactions at the
regional and international levels, the close cooperation
between the United Nations and the Iraqi authorities, in
the context of the expanded Conference of the
Neighbouring Countries of Iraq and the International
Compact with Iraq, has made it possible to enhance the
role of those mechanisms. Last month’s debate
provided an opportunity to welcome the willingness
shown by the Iraqi Government, along with its
neighbours and the entire international community, to
deepen the dialogue with the common goal of ensuring
the long-term stabilization of Iraq. Although this was
reiterated in Kuwait and in Stockholm, it is nonetheless
important to recall that this mutually beneficial
dialogue must take place in the context of respect by
all for the sovereignty of Iraq.
Turning, fourthly, to humanitarian affairs, it is an
important underpinning of stability that the progress be
reflected in the daily lives of the Iraqi people, starting
with those of the 4 million Iraqis who have been forced
to flee their homes. Belgium encourages the
Government of Iraq to increase its efforts to assist
them, in cooperation with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
More generally speaking, we welcome the
willingness of the Iraqi authorities to make better use
of the country’s potential, by progressively taking
ownership of reconstruction projects, while relying on
an increased presence by United Nations agencies and
on their expertise. Here, we noted last month’s
announcement by the Iraqi Government of its intention
not to seek the renewal of the mandate of the

25

S/PV.5949

Multinational Force, as well as the start of negotiations
on a bilateral security agreement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I conclude by recalling that the Security Council
is duty-bound to ensure that the United Nations
mandate is carried out in adequate security conditions.
Here, it my honour to announce that it is the intention
of my Government to make a contribution of €250,000
to the special trust fund to support United Nations
security in Iraq.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

26

The meeting rose at 12.30 p.m.

08-45136
