A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/194
11 March 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 112 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/50/635/Add.3)]
50/194.

Situation of human rights in Myanmar

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and
protect human rights and fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the
United Nations and elaborated in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1/ the International Covenants on Human Rights 2/ and other
applicable human rights instruments,
Aware that, in accordance with the Charter, the Organization promotes
and encourages respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and
that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that the will of the
people shall be the basis of the authority of government,
Recalling its resolution 49/197 of 23 December 1994,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/58 of
3 March 1992, 3/ in which the Commission, inter alia, decided to nominate a
special rapporteur to establish direct contacts with the Government and with
the people of Myanmar, including political leaders deprived of their liberty,
their families and their lawyers, with a view to examining the situation of
human rights in Myanmar and following any progress made towards the transfer
of power to a civilian Government and the drafting of a new constitution, the

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992,
Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap. II, sect. A.
96-77101

/...

A/RES/50/194
Page 2

lifting of restrictions on personal freedoms and the restoration of human
rights in Myanmar,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1995/72 of
8 March 1995, 4/ in which the Commission decided to extend for one year the
mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar,
Gravely concerned that the Government of Myanmar still has not
implemented its commitment to take all necessary steps towards democracy in
the light of the results of the elections held in 1990,
Noting the recent developments regarding the composition of the National
Convention,
Welcoming the release without conditions, on 10 July 1995, of Nobel
Peace Prize Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi and a number of other political
prisoners, as called for by the General Assembly,
Also gravely concerned, however, at the continued violations of human
rights in Myanmar, as reported by the Special Rapporteur, including killings
of civilians, arbitrary arrest and detention, restrictions on freedom of
expression and association, torture, forced labour, forced portering, human
rights abuses in border areas in the course of military operations, forced
relocations and development projects, abuse of women and the imposition of
oppressive measures directed in particular at ethnic and religious minorities,
Welcoming the continuing cooperation between the Government of Myanmar
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the
voluntary repatriation of refugees from Bangladesh to Myanmar,
Noting, however, that the human rights situation in Myanmar has resulted
in flows of refugees to neighbouring countries, thus creating problems for the
countries concerned,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur of the
Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Myanmar for his
interim report; 5/
2.
report; 6/
3.

Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
Deplores the continued violations of human rights in Myanmar;

4.
Welcomes the release without conditions of Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi and other prominent political leaders;

4/
Ibid., 1995, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1995/23 and Corr.1
and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
5/

See A/50/568.

6/

A/50/782.
/...

A/RES/50/194
Page 3

5.
Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to release immediately
and unconditionally detained political leaders and all political prisoners, to
ensure their physical integrity and to permit them to participate in the
process of national reconciliation;
6.
Urges the Government of Myanmar to engage, at the earliest
possible date, in a substantive political dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and
other political leaders, including representatives of ethnic groups, as the
best means of promoting national reconciliation and the full and early
restoration of democracy;
7.
Welcomes the discussions between the Government of Myanmar and the
Secretary-General, and further encourages the Government of Myanmar to
cooperate fully with the Secretary-General;
8.
Again urges the Government of Myanmar, in conformity with its
assurances given at various times, to take all necessary steps towards the
restoration of democracy in accordance with the will of the people as
expressed in the democratic elections held in 1990 and to ensure that
political parties can function freely;
9.
Expresses its concern that most of the representatives duly
elected in 1990 are still excluded from participating in the meetings of the
National Convention, created to prepare basic elements for the drafting of a
new constitution, and that one of its objectives is to maintain the
participation of the armed forces in a leading role in the future political
life of the State, and notes with concern that the working procedures of the
National Convention do not permit the elected representatives of the people
freely to express their views;
10.
Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to take all appropriate
measures to allow all citizens to participate freely in the political process,
in accordance with the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and to accelerate the process of transition to democracy, in
particular through the transfer of power to democratically elected
representatives;
11.
Also strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to ensure full
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, including freedom of
expression and assembly, and the protection of the rights of persons belonging
to ethnic and religious minorities, and to put an end to violations of the
right to life and integrity of the human being, to the practices of torture,
abuse of women, forced labour and forced relocations, and to enforced
disappearances and summary executions;
12.
Appeals to the Government of Myanmar to consider becoming a party
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 7/ the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 7/ and the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or
Punishment; 8/

7/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

8/

Resolution 39/46, annex.
/...

A/RES/50/194
Page 4

13.
Urges the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its obligations as a
State party to the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), and to the Freedom
of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize Convention, 1948
(No. 87), of the International Labour Organization;
14.
Stresses the importance for the Government of Myanmar to give
particular attention to conditions in the country’s jails and to allow the
International Committee of the Red Cross to communicate freely and
confidentially with prisoners;
15.
Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to respect fully the
obligations of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 9/ and to make use
of such services as may be offered by impartial humanitarian bodies;
16.
Expresses its grave concern at the attacks by Myanmar army
soldiers on the Karens and the Karennis during the past year, resulting in
further refugee flows to a neighbouring country;
17.
Welcomes the cessation of hostilities following the conclusion of
cease-fire agreements between the Government of Myanmar and several ethnic
groups;
18.
Encourages the Government of Myanmar to create the necessary
conditions to ensure an end to the movements of refugees to neighbouring
countries and to create conditions conducive to their voluntary return and
their full reintegration, in conditions of safety and dignity;
19.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his discussions with
the Government of Myanmar in order to assist in its efforts for national
reconciliation and in the implementation of the present resolution and to
report to the General Assembly at its fifty-first session and to the
Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-second session;
20.
Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its
fifty-first session.
99th plenary meeting
22 December 1995

9/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
