United Nations

S/PV.5334

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5334

th meeting
Tuesday, 20 December 2005, 11.05 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir Emyr Jones Parry/Ms. Howe-Jones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen
Mr. De La Sablière
Mrs. Papadopoulou
Mr. Kitaoka
Mr. Mercado
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Brencick

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Twenty-seventh report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (S/2005/777)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-65294 (E)

*0565294*

S/PV.5334

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Twenty-seventh report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(S/2005/777)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I understand — and this is a bit unusual — that
the representative of Sierra Leone has been delayed
because of problems caused by the transit strike. I
would be grateful if the secretariat could take him to
his seat at the Council table when he arrives.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Daudi Mwakawago, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sierra Leone.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mwakawago to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/777, which contains the twentyseventh report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing from the Special Representative. I now give

2

the floor to Mr. Mwakawago, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Sierra Leone.
Mr. Mwakawago: Two years ago today, the
Secretary-General, with the Council’s endorsement,
appointed me as his Special Representative for Sierra
Leone. Today brings a close to the final chapter in a
country’s gradual rise from the ruins of a devastating,
decade-long conflict and its remarkable turnaround that
now leads towards a future filled with hope and the
promise of a better life for its population. On behalf of
my predecessors and on my own behalf, I would like to
take this final and auspicious occasion to express my
profound gratitude to the Council for its guidance and
support over the past six years in directing the effort
that succeeded in hauling Sierra Leone back from the
brink of collapse. The Secretary-General’s trust and
confidence was absolutely invaluable, and I am
extremely grateful for it.
When the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) was established in 1999, pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1270 (1999), the odds were
heavily stacked against its success, and very few
people gave it any chance of achieving its objective.
That perception was further strengthened by the early
setbacks that the Mission suffered, which included the
capture of some peacekeepers and blatant disregard for
the ceasefire agreement by the Revolutionary United
Front rebels. However, as we bid farewell to the people
of Sierra Leone, there is on the horizon no serious
threat to the internal security of the country. The only
aberrations that we have observed are a few isolated
and localized incidents of public disorder, which,
hopefully, were effectively brought under control by
the national police.
The establishment of a comprehensive security
network, known as the Office of National Security, has,
over the past few years, created a framework for
coordination among the security agencies at the
national level and right down to the local level.
However, the country’s security structure, including the
Office of National Security and the provincial and
district security committees, still require additional
assistance in capacity-building. International support
will continue to be critical to that process.
No major threats have been discerned in the area
of external security, while the situation in neighbouring
Liberia continues to stabilize. Nonetheless, border
security patrols have continued in order to guard

S/PV.5334

against any unforeseen mishaps that might occur.
Ongoing discussions regarding the settlement of the
Yenga border issue with Guinea are expected to yield
the desired resolution, which should eliminate a
potential catalyst for future friction. UNAMSIL has
invested substantial resources to ensure the success of
that initiative. The simmering situation in Guinea will
also need to be monitored closely to ensure readiness
to mitigate the security and humanitarian consequences
that could ensue.
The Council may be pleased to learn that the
Secretary-General’s initiative aimed at mobilizing
support to strengthen the capacity of the Republic of
Sierra Leone Armed Forces elicited positive responses
from Switzerland, the United Kingdom, India and the
Netherlands. For our part, we have supported the
International Military Advisory and Training Team in
providing training in limited areas of specialization;
joined forces with the United Nations Development
Programme in improving the welfare and living
conditions of the armed forces; and donated properties
and equipment that were left behind by UNAMSIL
military units, as per the relevant General Assembly
resolution.
That generosity notwithstanding, large funding
gaps still exist with respect to meeting security sector
running costs and the acquisition of transport assets,
especially support services, communications equipment
and the provision of adequate accommodation. The
restructuring of the armed forces to reduce their troop
strength has continued.
One of our most satisfying achievements has
been the realization of the benchmark to strengthen the
manpower capacity of the Sierra Leone police to reach
its pre-war target level of 9,500 personnel, under the
supervision of the United Nations police. Similarly,
training has also been conducted to impart a diverse
range of skills to serving police personnel. It is
encouraging to note that the rivalry that had existed in
the past between the Sierra Leone police and the
Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces has continued
to dissipate.
UNAMSIL’s troop withdrawal is on course and
will be completed today, while the present 33 United
Nations police details are to be scaled down to 10 by
the end of December. A smaller team chosen from that
group of officers will be temporarily retained in
Freetown to facilitate a seamless transition to the

United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL).
On the civilian side, local staff have been
deployed elsewhere, while others have been given their
terminal packages and offered the opportunity to
receive training to start self-help schemes and small
businesses. The majority of the international civilian
staff are in the process of being reassigned to other
missions, while some are being absorbed by UNIOSIL.
The United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
has now assumed command of the Nigerian company
military unit that is currently providing security
protection at the premises of the Special Court, until
15 January 2006. UNMIL is already finalizing plans to
provide permanent support to the military guard force
at the Special Court.
Following the local government elections in
2004, after a 30-year hiatus, the Government has begun
implementing the devolution of some public services to
local councils. Generally, the process is on track;
however, challenges remain pertaining to limited
capacity and the paucity of resources.
I wish to bring to the attention of the Council the
fact that, in the past two years, revenue collection from
diamonds has increased dramatically as a result of
reforms and the overhaul of the sector. Diamond
exports increased from $10 million in 2000 to
$130 million in 2004. By November 2005,
$131 million worth of diamonds had already been
exported. The remedies that are needed include:
tightening security; reviewing the licensing system;
combating illegal sales; tackling the issue of child
labour; the equitable distribution of benefits from the
mining of diamonds; and resolving the persistent
boundary disputes among local communities.
The main political parties, the ruling Sierra Leone
People’s Party (SLPP) and the opposition All People’s
Congress (APC), have already begun gearing up for the
elections in 2007 by appointing their respective
candidates for the presidential poll. However, both
camps are experiencing internal fissures that are likely
to have an impact on the conduct of the elections. As
the 2007 elections draw nearer, it is very likely that
both inter- and intra-party rivalry will intensify.
However, the mere fact that there is vibrant political
interaction among Sierra Leoneans is a welcome
change.

3

S/PV.5334

I should also indicate that organizational
preparations for the 2007 elections, including the
restructuring of the National Electoral Commission and
the delimitation of constituencies, are ongoing. It is
also encouraging that both Government and
international support for the electoral process have
been forthcoming. It is therefore my conviction that the
holding of a free and credible poll in 2007 will
constitute a key benchmark in the achievement of longterm stability in Sierra Leone. Meanwhile, the longawaited formalization of the Political Parties
Registration Commission has been completed.
However, the preceding delays developed into a critical
test of the Government’s commitment to levelling the
political playing field.
Against that background, UNAMSIL has initiated
a series of programmes designed to promote inter-party
dialogue as well as reconciliation and tolerance among
the political parties. A different but related conflictresolution task that UNAMSIL has taken up is the
provision of assistance to the Government of Sierra
Leone in resolving issues that have created tensions in
communities, such as disputes over chiefdom
boundaries.
With respect to access to justice, I wish to report
that efforts are being made to ease the backlog in court
trials and to support training and capacity-building for
court personnel, and steps are being taken towards the
rehabilitation of prisons. Further efforts, however, are
required to address existing challenges in those areas.
The Mission has also joined forces with other local and
external stakeholders in efforts intended to strengthen
the
Anti-Corruption
Commission,
which
has
experienced structural and operational problems in the
recent past.
At the subregional level, it is also encouraging to
note that inter-Mission cooperation has improved.
Indeed, the heads of Mission of UNAMSIL, UNMIL
and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) have continued to share information and to
coordinate their peace efforts through regular meetings.
To achieve similar goals, United Nations country teams
in the Mano River Basin and Côte d’Ivoire have drawn
up a regional plan of action for cooperation among
them.
The establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone owes a great deal of
its success to the implementation of the preceding joint

4

UNAMSIL-United Nations country team transition
plan for 2005. That has facilitated the seamless
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding and
enabled the follow-on mission to become operational
by 1 January 2006. The appointment of Mr. Victor da
Silva
Angelo,
the
current
Deputy
Special
Representative at UNAMSIL, as the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General for UNIOSIL
has enhanced the handover process between the two
operations.
Considerable progress has been achieved on the
economic front in the past few years, but it needs to be
consolidated. This will be particularly significant with
regard to job creation and the tackling of poverty.
Poverty remains the main threat to the stability of the
country. With an unemployment rate of 70 per cent,
especially among young people, the challenges to
security are quite evident. Therefore, more local
savings, private-sector development and foreign direct
investment will be needed in order to offset the major
decline in donor funding that is anticipated in the light
of the competing demand for resources worldwide. The
pledges made at the meeting of the Consultative Group
in London represent the first step forward in
implementing the country’s social and economic
programmes, which will serve as one of the pillars of
UNIOSIL’s peace-consolidation strategy.
In the area of human rights, I should stress that
UNAMSIL leaves behind improved human rights
conditions in terms of fundamental freedoms,
especially in the area of civil and political rights.
Preparations for the establishment of a national human
rights commission are now at an advanced stage.
Regrettably, progress in building a reformed and
effective judiciary system has been slow, and
improvements in prison conditions are outstanding as
the Mission departs. This has retarded efforts for the
effective delivery of justice.
The report of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is now out and has been widely exhibited.
UNAMSIL, assisted by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Geneva, worked very well in promoting the outreach
campaign. To this end, the Mission encouraged civil
society participation and local ownership of the
national reconciliation process.
We have also endeavoured to ensure scrupulous
adherence to and implementation of the zero tolerance

S/PV.5334

policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and the United
Nations code of conduct. This has been complemented
by extensive training for military and civilian
personnel. As a consequence, there have been very few
cases that the Mission was called upon to deal with. It
is my hope that the existing mechanisms to prevent and
investigate cases of sexual exploitation and abuse will
continue under UNIOSIL.
It is a great source of satisfaction and pride for
me, and all at UNAMSIL, that I am able to report that
the Mission has completed most of the tasks this
Council had assigned it. Prominent among these
achievements are the disarming, demobilization and
reintegration of over 72,000 combatants, the return of
over half a million refugees and close to two million
internally displaced persons, the restoration of
Government authority throughout the country, the
organization of national and local elections and the
retraining and restructuring of the country’s security
apparatus.
Concrete support for this assertion was provided
by a public opinion survey designed by Jean Krasno of
Yale University in early 2005, which revealed that a
huge number of Sierra Leoneans had a very positive
perception of the work done by UNAMSIL since it
commenced its operations. The success of UNAMSIL
has demonstrated how through collaboration the
international community can respond to the needs and
demands of countries in conflict in a rapidly changing
global environment.
I am convinced that the Mission has also
provided a model for successful peacekeeping missions
in the future. The various innovative approaches and
strategies put into practice by the Mission, including
the well-calibrated plan for troop withdrawal and the
integrated mission concept, are workable undertakings
to be emulated. The regional approach to
peacekeeping, which has gained currency in the West
African subregion, must be encouraged and sustained.
Sierra Leone is certainly on an immutable course
towards peace and development. While UNAMSIL has
done much, Sierra Leone is still fragile. Sustained
stability will also depend on the ability of the
Government to successfully carry through the security
sector reform programme and reinforce good
governance, in particular the reform of the judicial
sector. Such efforts are beyond the capacity of Sierra
Leone on its own. Continued donor support is required

for the completion of critical reform programmes.
Needless to say, the funds pledged at the Consultative
Group meeting recently held in London should provide
reasonable support to the Government in its effort to
create an enabling environment for the consolidation of
peace.
Last but not least, my final remarks are directed
to all the military and civilian personnel in UNAMSIL
at both the local and international levels. To the troops
who formed the backbone of our operations, I salute
you all and wish to pay a special tribute to those who
lost their lives or were injured in the line of duty. I also
wish to thank the troop-contributing Governments for
making such a vital investment in the search for global
peace and security. To all the civilian staff, I commend
your efforts for enduring tough conditions, and
sometimes hardships, and wish you well in future
endeavours, wherever you go.
It would be remiss of me to end this report
without
mentioning
the
pioneering
Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
for
UNAMSIL, Ambassador Oluyemi Adeniji, currently
the Foreign Minister of Nigeria. His diplomatic skills
carried the day in presiding over a feeble peace process
that included monitoring a shaky ceasefire. It laid the
foundations for transition to democratic governance.
Whatever success was attained depended very
much on the cooperation of the Government of Sierra
Leone, the United Nations country team, the
diplomatic corps — especially those representatives
most involved in the efforts to resolve the crisis — the
non-governmental organizations and, above all, the
people of Sierra Leone. I thank them all. I would like
to single out the indispensable role the United
Kingdom has played and is playing in the success of
UNAMSIL in particular and peace operations in Sierra
Leone in general.
I also wish to thank all our partners in the local
and international communities, without whom this
Mission could have faltered or failed. As the owners of
this process, the Security Council deserves due
recognition, but then, as its servant, I may not be the
appropriate source. However, I am convinced that the
Council, as the servants of the people of the world, has
already started to be showered with accolades on its
success in Sierra Leone. We at UNAMSIL are
convinced that we will bequeath to the people of the

5

S/PV.5334

world the legacy of a mission that has been a great
success.
At a personal level, this has been a journey full of
new and exciting experiences that have provided
invaluable and fascinating insight into the intricacies of
multilateral diplomacy. I will retain the fulfilling
aspect of my tenure, which enabled me to meet and
develop a mutually beneficial relationship with
members of the Security Council in our professional or
individual capacities.
Finally, I thank the Secretariat, under the very
able leadership of the Secretary-General, for constant
guidance and support.
The President: On our collective behalf, may I
thank Mr. Mwakawago for his briefing, for a very
positive report on the situation in Sierra Leone. And
may I, on behalf of the Council, at this particular stage
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, thank
him and his team for what they have actually been
doing on the ground. In particular — let me be quite
clear — those of us who visited Mr. Mwakawago in
Freetown in June 2004 understand exactly what it was
he was achieving on the ground.
Now, as was agreed in prior consultations, I
propose, under rule 33, that we suspend this meeting.
As I
suspended.

hear

no

objections,

the

meeting

is

The meeting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. and
resumed at 11.40 a.m.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): Let me thank you, Sir,
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Daudi Mwakawago, for his eloquent
presentation a few minutes ago.
Of course, I wish to commend the United Nations
mission teams in Sierra Leone for their dedication and
resilience over the past six years in advancing the
peace process.
I would have hesitated to speak after the historic
decision taken by the Security Council on the creation
of the Peacebuilding Commission, but what we have
acknowledged with regard to the United Nations role
and involvement in Sierra Leone is also, in our view, a
historic moment as we note the successful completion
of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and of the peacekeeping phase in
that country.

6

Sierra Leone represented a major test case for the
Security Council’s approach to peacekeeping
operations. The transformation of UNAMSIL from the
vulnerable mission of 2000 into the robust operation
that subsequently conducted disarmament and
demobilization and facilitated the elections in 2002
was indeed remarkable. The strengthening of
UNAMSIL — which, at a certain point, stood out as
the largest active peacekeeping mission —
demonstrated the ability of the United Nations to learn
from past experience and even past mistakes. We are
pleased to see that the Secretariat has already started
extracting the best practices from that experience.
The change in the United Nations strategy was
strongly upheld by the leadership exercised by the
United Kingdom. We take the opportunity to recognize
the important contribution played by your country, Sir,
in steering the international efforts towards today’s
achievements.
After the challenges faced by the Mission in the
crisis of 2000, Sierra Leone became the area in which
the Security Council showed a new resolve to sustain a
complex peace operation in Africa. We acknowledge
the innovative spirit impressed upon the Mission —
one of the first to reflect the concept of the integrated
mission. The same creative approach has been taken in
crafting UNAMSIL’s exit strategy and in establishing
the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) with a comprehensive peacebuilding
mandate.
UNAMSIL has also been involved in the first
significant exercise of concrete inter-mission
cooperation, given the fact that the United Nations
Mission in Liberia is supposed to ensure, starting next
year, the protection of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone.
This is a time to take a step back and look at the
general picture. A great deal of effort and resources
have been invested in the pacification and stabilization
of the country. As we can see today, those have born
fruit. The prospects for Sierra Leone seem promising.
Significant progress has been achieved in restoring
State authority throughout the country, rebuilding the
security sector and promoting national cohesion and
reconciliation.
Sierra Leone is now at peace, but many chronic
problems are still to be addressed. They require a
cohesive and long-term action plan involving national

S/PV.5334

actors, the United Nations and other relevant partners.
It is in that context that UNIOSIL has been created
with the main aim of supporting and coordinating such
efforts.
The potential threats to national stability should
be perceived no longer solely in security-related terms,
but rather within socio-economic parameters. The main
challenges in the post-building phase are related to
issues such as job creation, improvement in the quality
of public service delivery and fighting corruption.
Sierra Leone is still at the bottom of the Human
Development Index. The economic recovery is slow
and painful, despite the increase in diamond exports
and agricultural output. Clearly, the assistance of the
international community remains crucial to the success
of the reconstruction process.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the decline in foreign aid following the
completion of the peacekeeping phase. The
mobilization of resources is also being complicated by
competing priorities, given the United Nations pattern
of making multiple requests for voluntary contributions
to other operations.
Last but not least, the continued engagement of
the international community in that country should be
matched by a renewed commitment of the national
political parties to the principles of reform and
democratic governance. As 2007 is an electoral year,
we caution about the need to avoid sterile political
disputes with possible destabilizing effects. Human
rights, the rule of law and an effective judiciary sector
must remain top priorities in the new phase. We note
with concern the stagnant situation with regard to the
establishment of the National Human Rights
Commission since the last report of the SecretaryGeneral.
To conclude, I would like to thank the British
delegation for preparing a draft presidential statement,
which we can fully support.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation should like to begin, Madame, by thanking
you for convening this public meeting to solemnly
acknowledge the withdrawal of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). I take this
opportunity to pay a very well-deserved tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Mwakawago, his predecessors and the

UNAMSIL personnel now preparing to leave Sierra
Leone with a sense of pride in a job well done. Our
thoughts are with those who paid with their lives to
help the people of Sierra Leone to put war behind them
and to live in peace and security.
In his remarks introducing the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Special Representative briefed us
on the situation in the country on the eve of the
departure of UNAMSIL. He analysed the Mission’s
exit strategy, its achievements and its shortcomings. He
also spoke of the future and opportunities now open to
that country.
Sierra Leone has undoubtedly made progress
towards stability with the assistance of its partners and
UNAMSIL. It has developed its own capacity to deal
with internal crises. Its security services — primarily
the police — are now able to deal with problems
related to law and order, and have done so for some
time without UNAMSIL’s assistance. Considerable
progress has also been made towards strengthening the
authority of the State and towards economic recovery.
Moreover, positive signs are emerging in the political
and security climates in the subregion.
Despite all this, the country remains fragile and
vulnerable on several fronts, and an urgent response is
called for. Sierra Leone indeed remains vulnerable to
structural problems. Owing to the weakness of the
State and its institutions, the Government is not yet
able to take complete responsibility for the essential
and pressing needs of its people. Despite the
performance of the economy, the country is still
suffering from extreme poverty and a very high rate of
unemployment, in particular among young people.
That poses a threat to the country’s fragile stability.
Inadequately equipped and lacking the resources
to carry out restructuring, the Army is not yet in a
position to take sole charge of providing external
security for the country. Sierra Leone must improve its
relations with its neighbours, and subregional
cooperation must be intensified, in particular in the
framework of the Mano River Union, in order to
overcome national insufficiencies and provide
essential, complementary efforts in the area of security
and the fight against cross-border problems.
The role of the United Nations peace missions in
the subregion is vital in that regard. The success of the
peace process in Sierra Leone largely depends on the
international community’s capacity to provide adequate

7

S/PV.5334

assistance to the country during the peacebuilding
phase. The international community’s determination
will be demonstrated through the implementation of a
peacebuilding strategy that builds the country’s longterm capacity for conflict prevention and that improves
economic governance. The international community’s
determination will also be demonstrated through donor
support for the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone, which is tasked with assisting the
Government in implementing that strategy.
In that context, the 2007 elections constitute a
test for the new State institutions, for the society of
Sierra Leone and for the country’s emerging
democracy, as well as for the international community,
which aspires to make its handling and settlement of
the conflict in Sierra Leone a model of success and a
textbook case that can be applied in other situations.
In that regard, it should be recognized that,
although the tasks are still not completed, there are
certainly lessons to be drawn from that experience that
can enrich the body of best practices for the design and
the management of peacekeeping operations. The
concept of benchmarks has turned out to be highly
useful for measuring and assessing the progress of
strategies implemented, and the United Nations would
benefit from implementing benchmarks more
systematically.
In conclusion, I would like once more to convey
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
my friend Mr. Daudi Mwakawago, our sincere thanks
for the work that he has accomplished at the head of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone,
and we wish him every success in his future
endeavours.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Daudi
Mwakawago, for his briefing. We commend him and
his team for the very positive results that the Council is
acknowledging today. Upon the completion of the
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), Sierra Leone will enter a new
phase in the path towards stabilization and sustainable
peace. We concur with the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2005/777) that remarkable achievements
have been obtained by the people of Sierra Leone and
by UNAMSIL. Peacekeeping is no longer necessary,
while peacebuilding activities are increasing in
intensity and variety. The international partners must

8

be able to sustain their attention on the country,
according to national priorities, thus helping
sustainable peace to take root.
The decision to establish the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone was very appropriate,
and it sets a positive precedent of timely action by the
Council to sustain international attention through the
post-conflict recovery phase. We expect the
Peacebuilding Commission will soon be entrusted with
that aspect, as it makes recommendations and promotes
greater coordination among United Nations bodies, as
well as between the United Nations and international
financial institutions.
We welcome the appointment of Victor da Silva
Angelo as the Executive Representative and Head of
Mission for the Integrated Office. We are confident
that he will work closely with local authorities towards
the common objective of tackling unemployment, in
particular youth unemployment, poverty and the many
social and economic challenges still facing Sierra
Leone. As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
it is critical that the population begins to feel tangible
peace dividends. In that context, the remarkable growth
experienced in diamond exports is a promising source
of direct and indirect employment, having generated
$109 million by the end of September.
While security sector reform and the rule of law
both need sustained attention in Sierra Leone, Brazil is
pleased that the human rights situation has shown
improvement and that progress is being made on
preparations for the 2007 presidential
and
parliamentary elections. We look forward to those
additional milestones in the consolidation of peace.
With respect to the subregion, Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire, as well as Guinea and Guinea-Bissau, may
present risks for Sierra Leone. We welcome the
increased cooperation between the United Nations and
entities in the subregion, as well as the consultations
with the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union, which have resulted in a more
focused approach to the difficulties facing various
countries.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate what I said in
yesterday’s Council meeting (see PV.5332) as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1132 (1997)
concerning Sierra Leone. It is my delegation’s
understanding that, as UNAMSIL has fully

S/PV.5334

implemented its exit strategy in December, the Council
should start reviewing the sanctions regime.
Discussions that could raise concerns in Sierra Leone,
in particular with respect to the sensitive work of the
Special Court, have been avoided. But it will soon be
time to update the sanctions’ legal basis, after hearing
the views of the national authorities.
Before I conclude, I wish once again to commend
the work undertaken by UNAMSIL military and
civilian personnel and commend the troop-contributing
countries for their dedicated service to the cause of
peace.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, the Chinese delegation would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Mwakawago, for his briefing. Today’s
briefing could be Mr. Mwakawago’s last to the
Council. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to him
and his team for their important role in helping Sierra
Leone achieve peace and stability.
The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) is about to leave the land of diamonds.
Over the past six years, the Blue Helmets have worked
with the Sierra Leone Government and the
international community, so that Sierra Leone could
emerge from its war and embark on the road of postconflict reconstruction.
Today, in Sierra Leone, basic stability has been
achieved, the national authority has been extended
throughout the country, and economic recovery has
made significant headway. Those encouraging
achievements can be attributed to the efforts of
UNAMSIL. The Mission also implemented numerous
innovative approaches, including an exit strategy based
on benchmarks, the concept of an integrated mission
and a coordination mechanism for subregional
peacekeeping forces. Those approaches will, no doubt,
provide useful lessons for other peacekeeping
operations.
As the Secretary-General points out in his latest
report, many challenges lie ahead in the reconstruction
of Sierra Leone. We urge the international community
to continue to provide Sierra Leone with the assistance
it needs to promote lasting peace and development.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
is soon to be established, and we hope that it will begin
to function efficiently and according to schedule.

We are confident that through joint efforts by the
Sierra Leone Government and the international
community, Sierra Leone will have a bright future
ahead of it.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On 31 December, the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) will
come to an end on a positive note. We are certain that
its activities will have set a good example for other
peacekeeping operations — and not only those in the
West African region — in terms of creating the
conditions necessary for the achievement of long-term
stability and the development of democracy in
countries that have endured many years of bloody
conflict.
Over the past several years, the Government of
Sierra Leone has achieved significant success in postconflict recovery. A stable security situation has
evolved, the restructured Sierra Leone armed forces
and police have been operating with increasing
effectiveness throughout the country, and control has
been asserted over the diamond industry. An important
criterion for assessing the Government’s efforts will be
the, we hope, successful conduct of the national
elections to be held in 2007. Here, the United Nations
must provide the necessary assistance.
Naturally, the long-term prosperity of the people
of Sierra Leone will to a large extent depend on the
Government’s ability to meet complex social and
economic challenges: building a new justice system,
rooting out youth unemployment, creating new jobs,
reintegrating former combatants into civilian life and
dealing with overall complex socio-economic
problems. The implementation of all such programmes
will require additional support from the donor
community, international financial institutions and
development partners.
We agree with the Secretary-General that
UNAMSIL was a pioneer in a number of important
areas of United Nations peacekeeping. With
UNAMSIL participation, coordination was established
among United Nations presences in West Africa,
including the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, and we
saw the implementation of the concept of a complex
United Nations mission designed to consolidate the
efforts of the organizations and specialized agencies of

9

S/PV.5334

the United Nations system and other international and
humanitarian organizations.
Beginning on 1 January 2006, UNAMSIL will be
handing over to the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL), whose establishment is
another important precedent in peacebuilding. We will
all help facilitate its productive work.
I wish in conclusion to associate myself with
other members of the Council in expressing gratitude
to all the present and former international civilian staff
and military personnel of UNAMSIL, and to the
successive Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, in particular Mr. Mwakawago, who is with us
in the Chamber today. It was their selfless endeavours
that made possible the successful completion of the
Mission’s mandate.
Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): My thanks
go to Mr. Daudi Ngelautwa Mwakawago for his
briefing. Today is a real occasion for optimism. The
departure of the peacekeeping force, the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), is good
news for the people of Sierra Leone and their
international partners. It underscores how far the
country has come since the early days of UNAMSIL:
from teetering on the brink of complete State collapse
to making solid progress towards a fully functioning
State.
UNAMSIL itself has undergone a transformation
from a peacekeeping to a peacebuilding operation. We
thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representatives, in particular Mr. Mwakawago, as well
as all the troop-contributing countries, which have
helped make the Mission a success. We should like
also to thank the United Kingdom, which came to the
Mission’s rescue at a particularly critical juncture. The
importance of the British over-the-horizon security
guarantee for the stabilization of Sierra Leone must not
be underestimated.
UNAMSIL has created conditions for stability
and has assisted the Government in its commendable
efforts to tackle the consequences of war. A good part
of UNAMSIL’s accomplishment lies in the innovative
methods employed. Extracting and disseminating
lessons learned from UNAMSIL would be helpful for
existing and future peace operations, including the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) next door.
We are hopeful that the new United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone will provide an equally strong

10

role model for the next peacebuilding phase and will
succeed in providing the necessary support to the
Government, together with the country’s development
partners.
Looking ahead, the most delicate phase will be
from now until the elections in 2007; there remain a
good number of unfinished aspects of the peace
process. These challenges essentially relate back to the
sources of the war, including the cynical manipulation
by unscrupulous politicians of basic human needs:
livelihood, security, fairness and respect. The key
objective for the next peacebuilding phase must be to
facilitate the development of Sierra Leone society in
order to ensure that such basic needs can be met
without resort to violence, and that self-serving
spoilers are denied the space in which to operate.
A continued successful transition will depend
also on the Government’s commitment to good
governance and the principle of zero tolerance for
corruption and cronyism; on the implementation of the
poverty reduction strategy paper, the rule of law and
gender equality; and on the capacity of the security
agencies to act in a professional and efficient manner.
The massive youth unemployment is of particular
concern. Young men without proper employment and
with despair for the future are a recipe for instability
and could far too easily be manipulated by political
players.
Also in that regard, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone provides an important reason for optimism.
Here, justice is served against those who used to be
untouchable. Establishing the rule of law in a society
which has hardly known it before is important for
reconciliation and is a key step towards confronting
new attempts at destabilization.
Finally, Sierra Leone’s prospects depend on those
of its neighbours, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral. It is vital to revive the Mano River Union,
strengthen the Economic Community of West African
States and harmonize the efforts of the United Nations
agencies across borders. Robust development cannot be
achieved in a vacuum, but entails viable cross-border
collaboration and trade.
Let me conclude on a more general note. Despite
the challenges still facing the country and its
international partners, Sierra Leone is an example of
what a concerted international community can do about
State failure — and it can do a lot, as we have seen.

S/PV.5334

The cost of UNAMSIL, at one point the largest United
Nations operation, has been considerable. But the cost
of doing nothing would have been much higher. It
would have been devastating not only for Sierra Leone
but also for the region and beyond. If anything, the
wars in Sierra Leone and neighbouring Liberia have
shown that State failure is deadly and contagious. They
have shown why the United Nations needs to continue
its peacekeeping and peacebuilding effort, and to
become even better at it.
Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation
thanks the British presidency for convening this
meeting to discuss the successful transition process in
Sierra Leone. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Daudi Ngelautwa
Mwakawago, for his comprehensive briefing.
As the chapter of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) closes and the era of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) opens, we cannot but commend the
combined and coordinated efforts of the United
Nations presence, the Government of Sierra Leone and
their international partners over the past few years in
achieving valuable progress towards building a
sustainable peace.
Indeed, Sierra Leone can now be called a
peacekeeping success story, and we should
acknowledge the factors that contributed to that
success. First would be the alignment of political will
and resources; secondly, the speedy deployment of a
robust and well-equipped Mission with a strong
mandate; thirdly, agreement among warring factions;
fourthly, the institution of civil affairs operations to
win the hearts and minds of the population; and fifthly,
the implementation of properly designed disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
The next step now is to translate peacekeeping
success into peacebuilding accomplishments. In that
regard, various challenges face Sierra Leone in its
process of reconstruction: decline in foreign aid, good
governance issues, social problems and external
threats. This, however, can be overcome as long as the
international community, the partners, the United
Nations presence and regional organizations continue
their engagement in Sierra Leone.
We believe that the first priority is to focus on the
economic front. Efforts must be undertaken to help
Sierra Leone make up for the expected decline in

foreign inflows due to the phasing out of humanitarian
and post-conflict recovery aid by developing and
maximizing its revenue-generating sources, such as
agriculture and mining.
Creating jobs and stimulating private investment
and sustained economic growth should be a major
concern. The Security Council can actually be of
assistance here. The Council’s sustained attention to
Sierra Leone, as exemplified by today’s meeting,
encourages donors to continue to provide development
assistance and pursue investment opportunities. Since
peace and security are paramount considerations for
investors, the Council’s imprimatur can entice
investors to bring in resources, for example to rebuild
physical infrastructure, an important requirement for
long-term economic development.
In the same vein, Council advocacy of
transparency and accountability in governance builds
institutional stability and will encourage sustained
international donor support and, equally important,
improve the business climate for investor confidence.
The newly established United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) is also expected to
assist the Government in dealing with the challenges
just mentioned. We believe that UNIOSIL’s integrated
structure, as provided for by resolution 1620 (2005),
will positively contribute to the efforts at peace
consolidation through enhancing economic governance
and creating lasting national capacities for conflict
prevention.
By coincidence, as we consider the situation in
Sierra Leone today, the Council and the General
Assembly have just adopted the resolution creating the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that Sierra
Leone would be the ideal first candidate for assistance
from the Peacebuilding Commission because of the
good foundation already laid and its great potential for
success.
The realization of the promise of Sierra Leone
will not be complete without regional efforts. Support
from the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union will be crucial
to maintaining external peace and security. Regional
players would be wise to acknowledge the positive
developments in Sierra Leone and Liberia and to work
towards the common goal of achieving peace and
security in the subregion.

11

S/PV.5334

Continued inter-Mission cooperation among
United Nations missions and offices in West Africa —
UNIOSIL, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL), the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) and the United Nations Office for
West Africa (UNOWA) — also reinforces peace and
security in the region.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the
innovations introduced by Sierra Leone in the area of
peacekeeping will be followed in other operations and
that another example could be set by Sierra Leone, this
time in the area of peacebuilding. It is incumbent upon
us, as a member of the family of nations, to help Sierra
Leone in its transition from relief to development.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): It
is with special regard that we welcome Ambassador
Mwakawago to the Security Council and thank him for
having presented the report of the Secretary-General.
We are particularly pleased to receive the most recent
report of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) given its significance, namely that it
shows the progress that Sierra Leone and its people
have made, with the help of the United Nations and the
international community, especially that of your
country, Mr. President — the United Kingdom.
It is obvious that UNAMSIL’s initial setbacks
brought into question the viability of United Nations
peacekeeping efforts worldwide. The SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report is clear testimony that
Sierra Leone is one of the United Nations success
stories in peacekeeping operations. We note with
satisfaction that the country is now peaceful and that
the political situation has remained calm and stable
since the last report, in September.
We are especially pleased to note that the overall
security situation in the country remains stable and that
the national security agencies have continued to
operate satisfactorily since UNAMSIL transferred
security responsibility to them last year.
We are glad that the drawdown of UNAMSIL in
all categories is on schedule and that administrative
preparations for the establishment of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL)
are in the final stages.
It is true that the country is still faced with
potential threats to its security and political stability,
including unemployment among young people,

12

corruption, weaknesses in the judicial system, and
resource constraints. These are problems that Sierra
Leone must now seek to confront with renewed
dedication. Despite the fact that Sierra Leone still faces
those challenges, it is important to appreciate how far
it has come.
Socio-economic recovery remains one of the
country’s crucial prerequisites for its political and
security stability. We are therefore pleased to note that
the Government is continuing to implement measures
to reassert its control over the country’s natural
resources. It is important that the international
community continue to render its assistance to Sierra
Leone so as to help the country face up to its future
political, security and socio-economic challenges.
Finally, we join the Secretary-General in
expressing our gratitude to Ambassador Mwakawago
and to all the staff of UNAMSIL for the successes
achieved by the Mission.
Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): At this important
stage, when the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) is successfully completing its
peacekeeping mandate, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representatives, as well as to the personnel of the
Mission, who have spared no effort in promoting peace
and stability in the country and have enabled the
people of Sierra Leone to face the future with hope.
As UNAMSIL withdraws, we would like to
commend the innovative methods and practices it has
introduced over the past six years to ensure the best
possible outcome for its operations. UNAMSIL
brought together the efforts and resources of the United
Nations family as well as of humanitarian
organizations, in pursuit of a common goal.
Sierra Leone has already embarked on a serious
effort towards economic and democratic reform. The
progress made so far cannot be easily sustained unless
considerable efforts are made by the Government to
address the root causes of the problems that led to the
civil war in the first place.
Emphasis should be placed on fighting
corruption, improving the economy and the living
standards of the population in general, dealing with
unemployment and improving public services,
continuing security sector Reform, and remedying the
weaknesses that exist in the judiciary system and in the

S/PV.5334

administration of justice. With regard to the last point
in particular, we would stress that civil unrest and a
culture of impunity are major threats to the political
stability and to the long-term prospects of the country.
In that respect, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, which aims at ending impunity,
strengthening the rule of law and promoting national
reconciliation.
Organizing peaceful and credible elections
constitutes the next crucial step towards completing the
process of peace consolidation and making Sierra
Leone a true success story. The newly established
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) should work to ensure that the country will
achieve sustainable development and will break out of
the vicious circle of successive internal conflicts and
economic crises.
Greece hopes that UNIOSIL will draft a strategy
to support in an effective and coordinated manner the
Government of Sierra Leone in enhancing its capacity
to pursue policies aiming at social and economic
development in order to address the remaining
challenges and eliminate the possibility of future
conflicts, in particular through a poverty reduction
strategy.
I would like to reiterate our strong conviction that
only through a close and coordinated partnership of all
those involved, including civil society, will it be
possible for the international community to reconcile
immediate requirements with long-term goals and to
rally all the resources required to capitalize on the
efforts made so far and consolidate peace, stability,
security and prosperity in the country. The
international community should stand by Sierra Leone
in this critical phase and provide all the necessary
support in this regard, including through the
Peacebuilding
Commission,
which
has
been
established.
Mr. Brencick (United States of America): My
delegation would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mwakawago
for his final briefing to the Council and to express deep
appreciation for his dedicated service. We also salute
Force Commander Major-General Akram, Police
Commissioner Benzu and all the civilian and military
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra

Leone (UNAMSIL), past and present, for their
successful mission.
Finally, looking ahead, we congratulate Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Victor
da Silva Angelo on his well-deserved appointment as
the new Executive Representative for the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL).
The successful end of any peacekeeping
operation, especially one that, just a few years ago, was
the largest peacekeeping operation in the world, is truly
a momentous occasion. My Government is pleased to
join others today in congratulating UNAMSIL on the
completion of its long and exceedingly difficult
mission. Despite the problems, the Sierra Leone of
today is, thanks to UNAMSIL, an altogether different
and far more hopeful place than it was during the wartorn decade of the 1990s. We salute all those who have
participated in and supported UNAMSIL over the past
six years for the many accomplishments that have
taken place in that country since the Lomé Peace
Agreement.
While the time for peacekeeping is over, the time
for peacebuilding is at hand. It is highly appropriate
today, as the Peacebuilding Commission has been
created by the General Assembly and by this body, for
us to have this discussion. With the establishment of
UNIOSIL and with donations from many quarters
around the world, the international community has
underscored that it is, and will remain, part of this
rebuilding process.
Myriad challenges remain, of course. These
include the consolidation of democratic institutions,
improvement of human rights practices and a
transformation of the economy. Better governance,
greater transparency and more inclusive policies by the
Government will be especially critical for building on
the current peace in Sierra Leone.
We look forward to working with the United
Nations and with Sierra Leone to help it help itself
during this important phase. We also agree with the
Secretary-General, who has drawn attention to the
wealth of lessons for future peacekeeping operations
provided by UNAMSIL’s experience. We welcome the
focus on closer cooperation among regional
peacekeeping
operations,
among
other
fresh
approaches to peacekeeping. Innovation will be part of
UNAMSIL’s proud legacy, and in this regard we note
the essential security support and other assistance

13

S/PV.5334

provided by UNAMSIL to the Special Court in Sierra
Leone. We are very pleased that the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) will be continuing to
provide the security the Court needs as it winds up its
work.
Finally, we commend Special Representative
Mwakawago and the entire United Nations team for
UNAMSIL’s very well-planned, well-balanced and
well-executed drawdown and completion strategy. We
thank them all for a job well done.
Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mwakawago for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
The Japanese delegation is particularly pleased to
note that UNAMSIL is expected to successfully
complete its mission very soon. We are also
encouraged that there has been steady progress in
Sierra Leone in the areas of security and general living
conditions of the people. Thus, Sierra Leone now finds
itself in transition from the decade-long conflict to
finding peace, however fragile. The successor
arrangement, the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL), is now proposed to replace
UNAMSIL in order to consolidate this fledgling peace.
In this connection, we welcome the appointment of
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral da Silva Angelo as the Executive
Representative for UNIOSIL.
Despite some difficulties at the beginning of its
deployment and some delays in its scheduled
withdrawal, UNAMSIL has proved to be a successful
peacekeeping operation. It is worthwhile to analyse
factors that contributed to the success of the Mission.
From our own perspective, we would like to point out
the following four factors as important.
First, we should like to note the high quality of
leadership provided at the top of the Mission, first by
Mr. Adeniji, the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at UNAMSIL and current Foreign
Minister of Nigeria, and then by Mr. Mwakawago, the
current Special Representative. They have shown both
decisiveness and quality leadership in steering the
Mission through some of its difficult phases and have
worked in close consultation with Headquarters in New
York. For their leadership, they deserve the Council’s
full commendation and gratitude.

14

Secondly, we note that efforts to restore peace
have been made in a manner that respects to the fullest
the ownership of the host country, Sierra Leone. The
designation of specific benchmarks to provide
direction and to measure future progress has also
proved particularly useful.
Thirdly, UNAMSIL worked in close collaboration
with
other
international
organizations,
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and the donor
community on the ground. For example, UNAMSIL’s
security-related work on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and on capacity-building for the local
security authorities was carried out in a manner that
complements and supports peacebuilding projects
implemented by the donors, international organizations
and NGOs. As a donor participant, Japan was part of
such collaborative efforts in Sierra Leone and has been
satisfied with the way the United Nations peace
mission has taken care to ensure good teamwork
among various actors involved in assisting in the
consolidation of peace in Sierra Leone.
Last but not least, in addition to being equipped
with the necessary resources, in particular the military
personnel, UNAMSIL was successful because
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), particularly Nigeria and Ghana, had
a positive involvement in the peace process of Sierra
Leone.
UNIOSIL includes a United Nations country
team, and its leader is expected to fulfil concurrently
the roles of Resident Coordinator and United Nations
Development
Programme
(UNDP)
Resident
Representative. This type of mission composition
could serve as a good model for the peacebuilding
presence in a post-peacekeeping phase. Recently, my
delegation, as the Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, hosted a workshop that
focused on the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. In that workshop, we
learned in some detail that the modalities of
UNIOSIL’s activities, as presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, had been elaborated through close
consultations between Headquarters and the field
mission. That method of work, no doubt, contributed to
fostering an environment conducive to reaching a
consensus among all stakeholders in UNIOSIL.
On the basis of what I have just said, my
Government is reasonably hopeful that UNIOSIL

S/PV.5334

should be able to take the achievements of UNAMSIL
further in consolidating gains, as well as to play a key
role in the transition to the development process in
Sierra Leone. In that context, we consider two things as
relevant and essential.
First, stability in neighbouring countries is
essential. It is clear that development in peace and
stability in Sierra Leone will be difficult to achieve in
isolation, without peace in neighbouring countries. It is
therefore essential that we tackle the task of
peacebuilding in a broader perspective that takes into
account the regional dimension. We would therefore
like to see the various United Nations missions and
offices deployed in the subregion of West Africa
continue to closely cooperate and collaborate with one
another towards that goal.
Secondly, from the mid- and long-term
perspectives, the importance of local ownership cannot
be overemphasized in the next phase into which Sierra
Leone is moving under UNIOSIL. As I have already
noted, one of the reasons for the success of UNAMSIL
was its respect for, and encouragement of, Sierra
Leonean ownership of the process during its transition,
with the support of the international community. That
practice should continue to prevail, and should be
reinforced as the country moves to the next phase, in
which development will begin to take on greater
importance.
In conclusion, there are enormous needs and high
expectations among the population, not only in
Freetown but in rural areas as well, for improvement in
such areas as education and health care. In addition,
the issues of unemployment among young people —
who should be key to the future development of the
country — corruption and the vulnerability of the
judicial system are potential threats to the security and
political stability of Sierra Leone. They must be
addressed urgently under the ownership of the Sierra
Leone Government.
At the November meeting of the Consultative
Group, Japan affirmed its commitment to continue to
be actively involved in the consolidation of peace in
Sierra Leone in collaboration with the Government of
Sierra Leone and working closely with UNIOSIL and
other international actors.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to join other speakers in
expressing my gratitude to Mr. Daudi Mwakawago,

Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Sierra Leone, for the comprehensive briefing he has
just given us on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) and on the preparations to
establish the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIOSIL). As that was his last briefing on
UNAMSIL, allow me to also commend the work of the
members of the Mission. In many respects — including
with regard to cooperation between United Nations
missions in the subregion — this has been a very
innovative peacekeeping mission.
The report, which we have had an opportunity to
review, and the briefing given to the Council are
sources of encouragement, and they make us optimistic
about the future of Sierra Leone. UNAMSIL’s effective
completion of its peacekeeping mission means that,
after six years of operations and following the
Mission’s withdrawal at the end of this month, Sierra
Leone is now on the path to post-conflict recovery.
Stable security conditions were established; progress
was made in rebuilding the security sector; State
authority was restored; and progress was made in
reasserting State control over the diamond industry.
There were also improvements in the area of human
rights. There was sustained economic recovery, and the
country established peaceful relations with its
neighbours.
The Mission’s progressive and calibrated exit
strategy, which was guided by specific benchmarks,
has proved to be effective and successful. A phase in
the United Nations effort has thus come to a close,
namely, that of peacekeeping and emergency
assistance. The peacebuilding chapter has now begun.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
will have a prominent role in supporting the
Government, especially in areas such as economic
governance and building up sustainable national
capacity to resolve conflicts.
In that context, Argentina believes that a
coordinated, uniform and integrated approach to
peacebuilding and reconciliation is required in order to
address the specific needs of countries emerging from
conflict situations. The goal should be to achieve
recovery, reintegration and reconstruction on the way
to laying the foundations for sustainable development.
The new body that we have decided to set up — the
Peacebuilding Commission — will have a key role to
play in that regard. We hope that it will assist
UNIOSIL in its tasks.

15

S/PV.5334

Sierra Leone is at a crossroads. The tasks that the
country will have to accomplish in order to carry out
its programme of post-conflict peacebuilding will be as
difficult as the ones it had to complete during the
previous peacekeeping phase. It will be necessary to
address serious socio-economic problems — especially
facing up to the problem of widespread corruption,
providing education and health services to the
population and putting in place policies that ensure
sustained economic growth. It will also be necessary to
carefully follow up the preparations for the elections to
be held in 2007. We urge the international community
to renew its commitment to building on the
achievements made since UNAMSIL’s deployment, in
order that, together with the Government of Sierra
Leone, those achievements can be translated into
concrete benefits for the people of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador Daudi Mwakawago, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sierra
Leone, for the briefing he has just given us in
introduction of the Secretary-General’s twenty-seventh,
and last, report on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) (S/2005/777). I should like
Ambassador Mwakawago and all his predecessors to
know how much my delegation appreciates their
enlightened guidance of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone.
The withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone marks the end of the peacekeeping
operation in that country. We have come a long way:
from the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNOMSIL), which was established in July
1998, to the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), set up in October 1999, and now to the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL), which is soon to become operational.
Sierra Leone is without a doubt a peacekeeping success
story. It is also an exemplar of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional African organizations,
which have demonstrated how useful they are.
In that connection, the Secretary-General has
highlighted some of the innovations that have
characterized the Mission’s disengagement process and
the management of the subsequent phases. Those have
included the development of precise criteria to guide
the exit strategy, the establishment of UNIOSIL and the
regional approach taken in peacekeeping operations.
We particularly welcome that regional approach, which

16

reflects an ongoing effort to control external factors
affecting the situation in a given country.
From the perspective of the mandate given to the
Mission, we can take pleasure in saying that
UNAMSIL has done its job. However, in reading the
Secretary-General’s last two reports, we are struck by
his assessment of the political situation prevailing in
the country. The newly restored security and stability
stand in contrast to the clear threats confronting the
country’s future. Those threats emanate from the
underlying causes of the conflict that roiled the country
for over 10 years. The persistence of those threats
certainly cannot be blamed on UNAMSIL, but they
must be highlighted as representing a limit to what the
international community can do in terms of peace and
security. The situation should prompt us to rethink the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and to reassess
the exit strategies established for their draw-down. We
need to learn every possible lesson from this
experience.
We believe that peacekeeping operations should
be endowed with a clear mandate to address and
eradicate the roots of conflicts in countries where they
are deployed in order to establish solid bases for
subsequent peaceful development. We are convinced
that the creation of the Peacebuilding Commission will
make it possible to address, with equal attention, the
underlying causes of conflicts and the violence and
chaos they entail. The Peacebuilding Commission
should follow very closely the work of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone. We hope
that it will spare no effort in helping Sierra Leone to
remain on the path of peace.
From that perspective, we support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General concerning
various areas of activity in which an ongoing effort
must be made to consolidate achievements. We call on
the political class of Sierra Leone fully to shoulder its
responsibility to overcome the difficulties surrounding
the upcoming elections, which will be a real challenge
to the maintenance of peace and security throughout
the country. We urge the international community to
strengthen its support for Sierra Leone, particularly by
increasing the resources available to the country, given
the reduction in post-conflict humanitarian assistance
and the high rate of poverty throughout the country.
Efforts should be made to reduce that poverty by
enhancing the Government’s capacity to provide the

S/PV.5334

people with the basic social services necessary to an
improved quality of life.
In that regard, the consolidation of the
achievements made requires increased attention to the
implementation of the recommendations of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and to improving the
human rights situation.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to the staff of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone for their
invaluable contribution to the country’s recovery. As
the Mission draws down, my delegation, through me,
pays tribute to the troop-contributing countries for their
precious contribution to peacekeeping in Sierra Leone
and the stability of West Africa.
I take this opportunity to honour the memory of
the peacekeepers who made the ultimate sacrifice in
their commitment to peace in Sierra Leone. All of West
Africa will cherish their memory from generation to
generation.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, wish to thank Mr. Mwakawago for his briefing
and for his efforts at the head of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
We recall that five years of war in Sierra Leone
cost the lives of some 50,000 people and led to the
enlistment of 10,000 child soldiers. Today, six year’s
after UNAMSIL’s deployment, that country has
regained stability and peace. The involvement of the
United Nations and the international community has
been a success and set an example. I believe that needs
to be highlighted because we need such success stories.
Just as we recognize our success in Burundi, we should
recognize this success in Sierra Leone.
As the last UNAMSIL contingents prepare to
leave Sierra Leone, I feel that we should try to assess
the success of international and United Nations actions
in resolving the crisis. That is what I should briefly like
to do now in considering the factors for success, the
exit strategy and our efforts to combat impunity.
What were the main factors for the success of the
Mission and of the international community’s
involvement in resolving the crisis in Sierra Leone? I
believe that those factors are linked above all to the
characteristics of the Mission itself. It has a robust
mandate and adequate staffing, with some 17,500
troops by the year 2001, covering one third of the
territory of Liberia and a quarter of the territory of

Côte d’Ivoire. I pay tribute to all the troop-contributing
countries for the quality of their contingents. I note in
particular that the deployment of a Pakistani
mechanized brigade was also key in confronting the
Revolutionary United Front.
To the President of the Security Council, I affirm
quite openly my belief that the second key factor to
success was the United Kingdom’s involvement on two
fronts — with UNAMSIL in restoring peace and
stability, by force when necessary, and with the Sierra
Leonean authorities in re-establishing the country’s
security and police forces.
I now turn to UNAMSIL’s exit strategy, which I
believe should also be hailed as an example. As others
have done, I should like to stress that the definition and
implementation of an exit strategy have been and
remain essential at a time when the number of Blue
Helmets deployed has reached record levels. I believe
that the formula for progressive withdrawal, with very
clear-cut criteria, that was adopted by the Security
Council with respect to UNAMSIL is undoubtedly a
model on which we should draw when we consider the
withdrawal of other peacekeeping operations.
The third element to which I wish to refer
involves our efforts to combat impunity. The
establishment of the Special Court in Freetown and the
work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission have
played an essential role in promoting and ensuring the
restoration of peace and stability. The fight against
impunity is indeed integral to crisis settlement
strategies. That is true in Sierra Leone and elsewhere,
such as the Sudan and Côte d’Ivoire, to cite just two
examples.
I take this opportunity to reaffirm France’s
support for the Court, to which my country recently
made a financial contribution. I also welcome the role
being played by Nigeria and soon to be played by
Mongolia in ensuring the Court’s security and safety.
Like others, I assert that the international
community must continue to support Sierra Leone in
its efforts to consolidate peace and ensure
development. Indeed, the United Nations will pursue
its work in that area with the establishment in the next
few days of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone. Nor must we ignore the regional
dimension of the problem or the role played by the
United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.

17

S/PV.5334

In conclusion, I thank the United Kingdom for
the draft presidential statement before us, which we
wholeheartedly support.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity. I have the honour to speak also
on behalf of the European Union and those countries
which have aligned themselves with this statement.
As the last peacekeeping troops leave Sierra
Leone, the European Union commends the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) for its
central contribution to the peace and stability of Sierra
Leone. The efforts of the Special Representatives,
other United Nations officials and the troopcontributing countries, together with the cooperation of
the people of Sierra Leone, have ensured the success of
the Mission.
UNAMSIL has demonstrated a sure touch in its
efforts to secure, develop and enhance security. We
welcome the drawdown of the Mission, as it
demonstrates to the people of Sierra Leone that the
conflict lies behind them.
The legacy of the past six years is a peace that
can and must continue to be built upon. The Mission
has shown innovative ways of cooperating with local
actors and with the international community. The use
of defined benchmarks for managing the drawdown has
proved successful. And the willingness to work with
other United Nations regional operations, such as the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, as well as
the United Nations Office for West Africa, has been
highly beneficial.
The European Union is committed to working
with the Government of Sierra Leone to demonstrate to
the people that the benefits of peace are tangible and to
working with them to improve their lives. The
European Union is dedicated to ensuring that economic
and social development is enhanced and continues to
invest in infrastructure and institutional programmes in
order to achieve that. Improved access to rural areas
and the rehabilitation of the education and health
infrastructure in those areas are key ways to
demonstrate to all Sierra Leoneans that the country is
improving. Those aspects will therefore be the focus of
the European Union development assistance.
We look forward to the support of UNMIL in
providing security for the Special Court for Sierra

18

Leone. The regional aspect of the conflict was
important, and cooperation from the Mano River Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
will be key in building peaceful development.
The European Union notes the success of the
recent Consultative Group donors meeting in London,
was pleased to participate and hopes that it will enable
the successful implementation of the Government of
Sierra Leone’s poverty reduction strategy plan.
The European Union expects that the United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone will continue
to support the work of the Government as it faces up to
its many challenges. Reform of institutions,
improvements in infrastructure and the challenge of
tackling corruption will need continued support. The
focus on human rights is to be commended, as, in
particular, the problems faced by young people and
women are also addressed.
The European Union looks forward to credible
elections in 2007 and to a tolerant and responsible
attitude to campaigning from all parties and their
supporters. The work of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Sierra Leone in support of the electoral
process will be important. We hope that the withdrawal
of UNAMSIL marks the end of the conflict phase in
Sierra Leone, and we look forward to cooperating in
the building of a prosperous and durable peace,
particularly on the day when the Peacebuilding
Commission has been agreed by the Security Council
and the General Assembly.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Sierra Leone.
Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): This meeting marks
an important milestone in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping. I am therefore grateful to the Council
for the honour of participating in its proceedings on
behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone.
The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) has every reason to be proud of what it
has accomplished in Sierra Leone during the past six
years. The Mission has turned out to be one of the most
successful peacekeeping operations undertaken by the
United Nations in an internal conflict in the last three
decades. At the same time, notwithstanding the
difficult challenges it faced — what the Secretary-

S/PV.5334

General described as trials and tribulations — in the
early days of the operation, UNAMSIL bears testimony
to the triangular partnership that must be at the centre
of all United Nations peacekeeping: regional
organizations, troop-contributing countries and the
United Nations. As the Secretary-General observed in
his final report (S/2005/777), UNAMSIL was the first
United Nations peacekeeping operation to “re-hat” a
parallel sub-regional peacekeeping force.
In that context, allow me to pay special tribute to
our
subregional
organization,
the
Economic
Community of West African States, and its Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG), for the vital and timely
contribution they made to the safety and the security of
the people of Sierra Leone before the deployment of
UNAMSIL. ECOMOG troops exchanged their hats for
blue berets to serve under the flag of the United
Nations. Another symbol of partnership and
cooperation in United Nations peacekeeping was the
parallel contribution of the United Kingdom to the
maintenance of stability in the country. We thank them
for the role that they have played and continue to play.
As the report of the Secretary-General notes,
UNAMSIL forged an effective partnership with the
United Nations country team, countries of the
subregion, the donor community, civil society, the
Government and, of course, the people of Sierra Leone.
Without such partnership, UNAMSIL would not have
accomplished its task.
In that connection, I should add that UNAMSIL
succeeded because the people of Sierra Leone made it
possible for it to succeed. Indeed, as the report of the
Secretary-General puts it, the Government and the
people of Sierra Leone also deserve commendation for
their remarkable resilience and for making good use of
the opportunity offered by international partners to lift
their country from crisis. I am convinced that we have
demonstrated that, with some assistance, Sierra Leone
is capable of fulfilling its responsibilities.
The departure of UNAMSIL is a clear indication
that the Government of Sierra Leone has resumed full
responsibility for the security of the country. I would
like to assure the Council that the people of Sierra
Leone are determined to muster the same resilience
that carried us through those dark days of the rebel
conflict to prevent the outbreak of another so-called
fratricidal war. We wish to assure the international
community that Sierra Leoneans have pledged that

never again will Sierra Leoneans give the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States or any individual State, for that matter, cause to
bring troops into our country to end a civil conflict.
Of course, we remain concerned about the
situation in the West African subregion. However, we
hope that the Security Council and the international
community will remain engaged in the efforts towards
the maintenance of security and stability in the
subregion. We must not forget the destabilizing role
that external forces played in fomenting and sustaining
the conflict in Sierra Leone. Let me take this
opportunity to express our sincere thanks to all the
countries that contributed military, police and civilian
personnel and other forms of support to the United
Nations operations in Sierra Leone. We promise that
their efforts and sacrifice will not have been in vain.
I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his team
for the good work that they have done. I would like to
extend that appreciation to the mandate to his
predecessor, Ambassador Oluyemi Adeniji.
We look forward to the operationalization of the
new the United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra
Leone. Of course, we anxiously look forward to the
work of the new Peacebuilding Commission.
Lastly, I would like to all thank all those who
have asked the international community to continue to
support Sierra Leone. Clearly, continued support is far
less expensive in the long run than a relapse into
conflict.
The President: I now ask the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General whether he
would like to take the floor again to offer any
comments in response to the statements that the
Council has heard. I give him the floor.
Mr. Mwakawago: Since there were no questions
or queries that require a response on my part, I should
like publicly to thank you, Mr. President, and all the
members of the Council for having commended the
good work done by the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). UNAMSIL’s success is the
Council’s success. Without the Council’s support, we
would not have succeeded.
Finally, today is a historic day that saw the
adoption of the resolution on the Peacebuilding
Commission. The people of Sierra Leone are hopeful

19

S/PV.5334

issues like security sector reform, fighting
corruption, the reinforcement of governance
mechanisms including the judiciary, and equal
rights for women and girls. The Council therefore
encourages Sierra Leone’s development partners
to continue their support in all these areas, and
notes with satisfaction the outcome of the recent
Donors’ Consultative Group meeting on Sierra
Leone in London.

that they will be worthy candidates in that respect, so
that peace can be sustained in that very beautiful
country. Those who have visited Sierra Leone know
that it is a fantastic country.
The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council commends the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) for its invaluable contribution over
the last six years to Sierra Leone’s recovery from
conflict and its progress towards peace,
democracy and prosperity. The Council is
grateful to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representatives, and all the individuals from the
United Nations and from troop- and policecontributing countries who have made UNAMSIL
a success, especially those who helped
UNAMSIL recover from the crisis it faced in
May 2000. The Council also deeply appreciates
the cooperation extended by the Government and
the people of Sierra Leone to UNAMSIL and to
the members of the United Nations family
operating in the country.

“With Sierra Leone now stable and at peace,
the Security Council sees a great opportunity for
the development of a mature and vibrant political
culture. Achieving this will require tolerance,
cooperation from all sides and a shared
commitment to act responsibly and avoid
inflammatory rhetoric. To that end, Government
and political leaders should reaffirm their
commitment to the basic principles of democratic
governance. This will pave the way for fair,
transparent and peaceful elections in 2007.
“The Security Council reiterates its
appreciation for the work of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone and its vital contribution to
reconciliation and the rule of law in the country
and the subregion, and encourages all States,
particularly States in the subregion, to cooperate
fully with the Court and to provide it with the
necessary financial resources.

“The Security Council notes with
satisfaction the innovations in UNAMSIL’s
methods of operation that may prove useful best
practice in making other United Nations
peacekeeping operations more effective and
efficient, including an exit strategy based on
specific benchmarks for drawdown; an integrated
mission with a Deputy Special Representative
managing governance, developmental and
humanitarian elements; and substantial, regular
cooperation and coordination with other United
Nations peacekeeping operations and offices in
the region.
“At the request of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General has established the new United
Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone in order
to provide continued support to the Government
as it tackles the many challenges ahead, including
good
governance,
sustainable
economic
development, job creation and delivery of public
services. The Government will need the sustained
help of donors and development partners,
particularly in addressing difficult but essential

20

“The Security Council continues to
emphasize the importance of a regional approach
to the countries of West Africa. The Council
hopes that Sierra Leone’s neighbours will
intensify their cooperation, not least through the
Mano River Union and the Economic Community
of West African States, especially in the area of
peace and security, and with the continued
support of the United Nations and development
partners.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2005/63.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
