S/2017/312

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 April 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Abyei
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 28 of Security Council
resolution 2318 (2016), in which the Council requested me to continue to inform it
of progress in implementing the mandate of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and to bring to its immediate attention any serious
violation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements
for the administration and security of the Abyei Area ( S/2011/384, annex). The
present report provides an update on the situation in Abyei and on the operations of
the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism since the issuance of my
previous report (S/2016/864) on 12 October 2016, and covers the period until
14 April 2017.
2.
During the reporting period, a strategic review of the mandate of UNISFA was
undertaken pursuant to paragraph 29 of Security Council resolution 2318 (2016) and
presented on 5 April 2017 (see S/2017/293).

II. Abyei
Security
3.
The security situation in the Abyei Area is generally calm; however, in the
absence of progress in the implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement and
discussions on the final status of the territory, intercommunal tensions and the
proliferation of arms present a continued risk. During meetings of the joint security
committee with both the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya communities during the
reporting period, UNISFA received reports of the presence of armed elements in the
Abyei Area. The Mission responded by enhancing its presence in the affected areas
through supplementary patrols. There have been no reports of any Sudan Armed
Forces or Sudan People’s Liberation Army presence in the Abyei Area.
4.
During the reporting period, around 35,000 Misseriya nomads arrived in the
Abyei Area as part of their annual southwards migration, which usually occurs from
October to mid-May. The movement has proceeded without any major incident
thanks to the Mission’s proactive conflict prevention and mitigation strat egy.
UNISFA maintains corridors to permit the Misseriya and their cattle to move
through the Abyei Area, allowing the two communities to share grazing and water

17-05447 (E)

130417

*1705447*

S/2017/312

resources and, in so doing, preventing intercommunal tensions. Robust monitoring,
in particular of flashpoint areas, has been the foundation of this strategy, with
patrols during the day and night and armed elements being prevented from entering
the area.
5.
No major security incidents have taken place thus far and, while some
instances of cattle rustling have occurred, both the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities have largely returned the cattle taken and compensation has been
arranged through local peace committees. In order to ensure security, UNISFA
deployed additional troops at important locations along migration route corridors:
Noong and Alal in the central sector and Dungoup in the southern sector. In
addition, the Mission controlled Misseriya access to the south -western and southeastern parts of the Abyei Area. The Mission also maintained frequent engagement
with both communities during the migration season through joint security
committees at the sector level, as well as community-level engagement.
6.
For a second consecutive dry season, UNISFA relaxed the implementation of
the disengagement line. This flexibility has been enabled by the continued
adherence of the two communities to the agreement of 24 March 2016 at Noong,
whereby the Ngok Dinka allowed the Misseriya and their cattle access to water and
pasture in areas inhabited by the Ngok Dinka. The Mission’s success in managing
the disengagement line has encouraged the return of the Ngok Dinka, with new
settlements observed during the reporting period in the areas north of the Kiir/Bahr al-Arab River.
7.
Criminality remained largely intra-ethnic; the majority of reported incidents
were petty crime. There were also some cases of armed theft and carjacking. Over
the past year, the central sector has developed into a hub for criminal activities, with
a rise in the economic importance of the Amiet common market and in the northsouth movement of traders along the all-weather road from Diffra in the northern
sector to Amiet and further southwards to Abyei in the central sector. In response,
UNISFA troops enhanced their presence along the critica l Farouk-Diffra-AmietAbyei-Agok axis to deter criminal activity. On 19 October, armed assailants shot
and killed a Ngok Dinka man and seriously wounded a woman. On 17 November,
the Amiet market joint traditional court found that the available evidence was
insufficient to convict two Misseriya accused of the attack. The two were handed
over to the Misseriya traditional chief. UNISFA has increased its security presence
at the Amiet common market while encouraging the two communities to cooperate
with the Mission on addressing criminality.
8.
On 21 December at night, in Noong, assailants fired two rocket -propelled
grenades, injuring five people, including two women and a three -year-old child. On
9 January, UNISFA troops prevented violence by intercepting around 10 armed
Misseriya near Nainai in the central sector. In the ensuing exchange of fire, one
Misseriya was killed. The timing of these incidents suggested that the aim of these
armed elements was to influence the deliberations at the meetings of
intercommunity traditional leaders held on 30 December and 12 January.
9.
Despite enhanced security at critical road crossings by UNISFA, a World
Health Organization-Sudan vehicle was carjacked by armed assailants on 17 January
north of Diffra. Another carjacking attempt on contractors for the Inter national
Organization for Migration travelling from Diffra towards Goli in the northern sector
on 17 February resulted in the death of a contractor and the wounding of his driver.
Following the attack, UNISFA further reinforced its procedures to ensure the safety
of its staff and workers connected with the projects of UNISFA and United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in the Abyei Area by requiring force protection for
all movement north of Dokura/Rumajak in the central sector and between Abyei and
2/11

17-05447

S/2017/312

Agok in the southern sector. The completion of the perimeter wall decreased theft
within the UNISFA and the United Nations common premises compound. Only three
instances of petty theft occurred during the reporting period.
10. Given the unpredictable security situation and continuing tensions between the
communities, UNISFA has still not been able to redeploy to Abyei Sudanese
national staff who were evacuated to Khartoum and Kadugli in South Kordofan
following the killing of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief i n 2013. The security
situation also had an impact on the work of the Joint Military Observer Committee,
which has only been able to conduct separate patrols with the Sudanese monitors
deployed north of Todach in the northern sector and the South Sudanese m onitors in
areas south of Abyei in the central sector.
11. During the reporting period, UNISFA conducted 19,314 day and night area
patrols and 7,460 escorts. Given that the Abyei Police Service has not been
established, the UNISFA police component continue d its efforts to support the
maintenance of law and order, with 400 security observation and community -based
interactive patrols undertaken during the reporting period. In addition, UNISFA
facilitated 276 joint security committee meetings with community le aders in the
Abyei Area. Capacity-building of community protection committees in accordance
with paragraph 16 of Security Council resolution 2287 (2016) continued, with two
training workshops organized by UNISFA police during the reporting period for 60
community protection committee members in Agok and Abyei. The establishment of
community protection committees in northern Abyei continued to be delayed owing
to long-standing reservations of the Government of the Sudan, which has
maintained that such committees are not in line with the 20 June 2011 Agreement.
12. In line with the Mission’s mandate to confiscate and destroy weapons,
UNISFA military and police, working with the United Nations Mine Action Servi ce
(UNMAS), destroyed 16 confiscated weapons and over 1,500 rounds of small arms
ammunition at the UNISFA weapons and ammunition management facility. The
process was observed by national monitors from the Sudan and South Sudan.
During the reporting period, 294 km of priority routes were verified as safe from
explosive hazards. Non-technical survey and mine risk education activities in
various communities led to the identification and destruction of 129 items of
explosive remnants of war and 281 rounds of small arms ammunition. All UNISFA
company operating bases, comprising 379,800 m 2 , were reassessed as safe from
explosive hazards. Mine risk education messages were delivered to 246 UNISFA
military observers and national monitors. Similar messages were also d elivered to
over 32,000 men, women, boys and girls living in the Abyei Area, including
nomadic herdsmen and returnees.

Political developments
13. During the reporting period, the Sudan and South Sudan made little progress
with respect to the implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement. The Abyei Joint
Oversight Committee last met on 29 and 30 March 2015. In November 2016, the
Acting Head of Mission and Force Commander, Major-General Hassen Ebrahim
Mussa, engaged with the Office of the Special Envoy o f the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and South Sudan in Addis Ababa to convene an extraordinary meeting of
the Abyei Joint Oversight Committee. The African Union High -level
Implementation Panel scheduled a meeting of the Committee in Addis Ababa on 13
and 14 January 2017, which was never held. Meanwhile, in Abyei town on
31 October 2016, in commemoration of the third anniversary of the unilateral
referendum held in the Abyei Area, around 700 Ngok Dinka led by the Paramount

17-05447

3/11

S/2017/312

Chief demonstrated in front of UNISFA headquarters and handed over a petition
letter calling for recognition of the referendum.
14. Speaking to the media in February, traditional leaders from both the Ngok
Dinka and Misseriya communities in Abyei called for the release of the report of the
African Union investigation into the killing of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief in
May 2013. Following the killing, the African Union Peace and Security Council
tasked a committee with investigating the incident; the result was presented to the
African Union in October 2013. The report was inconclusive, however, as the
parties failed to agree on the findings of the investigation.
15. The Government of the Sudan continued to maintain approximately 120 armed
personnel at the Diffra oil complex, in violation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement and
several Security Council resolutions. For its part, the Government of South Sudan
continued to maintain a de facto “local administration” in the central and southern
Abyei Area, replacing the head of this administration in January 2017.

Intercommunal dialogue
16. UNISFA continued to facilitate dialogue between the Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities in order to prevent and mitigate conflict during the ongoing
migration season. As noted previously, however, the lack of progress in the
implementation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement has resulted in continued tensions
between the two communities, and so has the pending resolution of issues related to
the assassination of the Ngok Dinka Paramount Chief in May 2013.

Amiet common market
17. The mainstay of the strategy of UNISFA to assist both communities in their
efforts to achieve peace and a measure of economic security was to provide support
for the Amiet common market. As per the agreement by both communities at Todach
in the northern sector on 4 August 2016, the common market was to function at
Amiet only temporarily, until 31 December 2016, with the understanding that the
two sides would reconvene in December 2016 to decide on its future location. On
30 December, at a meeting facilitated by UNISFA in Todach, the two communities
could not reach an agreement on the location of the common market. The Ngok
Dinka favoured keeping the market in its present location in Amiet, whereas the
Misseriya wanted to transfer the market to Abyei town. Both communities
reconvened in Todach on 26 January, but the meeting did not commence, as the
Ngok Dinka objected to the absence of the peace committee members within the
Misseriya delegation, despite Misseriya claims that their tra ditional leaders were
fully able to represent their community.
18. Subsequently, the Misseriya traditional chiefs presented a letter to UNISFA
calling for the closure of the market at Amiet, adding that they would not be
responsible for any security consequences. UNISFA has taken precautionary
security measures and maintains a deterrent, preventive and responsive posture.
Despite these disagreements, there have been no major security incidents or
interruptions to the functioning of the Amiet common market. In February, joint
peace committee meetings in Tejalei and Leu in the southern sector resulted in an
agreement to continue trading activities at the common market until a decision is
made regarding its permanent location.
19. A number of conflict-management workshops and training sessions were
organized by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and its

4/11

17-05447

S/2017/312

implementing partner in November and December, including one that was held from
13 to 15 December in Todach, with joint participation from both communities.
Across the Abyei Area, 23 quick-impact projects are being executed by UNISFA in
close coordination with the two communities.
20. Additionally, the Mission facilitated joint peace committee meetings and
supported the joint bodies that are managing the Amiet common market. UNISFA
police mentored market guards on detention procedures, as well as on the handling
of criminal incidents and suspects. At the request of the joint peace committees and
the joint market committee, on 14 December a temporary detention facility was
handed over to the joint traditional court holding sessions at the Amiet common
market. UNISFA corrections experts conducted several visits to the Abyei, Agok and
Amiet detention centres to assess the state of infrastructure and the condition of
detainees.
21. Regarding the legal mechanisms to address criminal offences within the Abyei
Area, the Mission continued to engage authorities in the Sudan and South Sudan on
arrangements for the handover of individuals detained by the Mission in the
performance of its mandate to protect civilians and ensure security in the Abyei
Area. Proposals for the signing of memorandums of understanding on the matter
were transmitted to Khartoum and Juba in October 2016. So far, there has been no
response from either Government.
22. Besides security, UNISFA provided logistical and infrastructural support for
the common market, including solar lights and the daily provision of water until an
additional hand pump, constructed through humanitarian assistance, became
operational on 4 December.

Humanitarian situation
23. The adverse economic situation, particularly in South Sudan, population
movements, intercommunal tensions and limited or absent basic public service s
continued to result in significant humanitarian needs in the Abyei Area. United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes and non-governmental organizations
continued to provide humanitarian and recovery assistance to 160,000 vulnerable
people in the Abyei Area. These included 59,000 people from the Ngok Dinka
community, 13,000 Ngok Dinka returnees, 20,000 Ngok Dinka people displaced
within the Abyei Area, 8,000 people displaced from neighbouring Unity and Warrap
States in South Sudan, 25,000 people of the Misseriya community and 35,000
seasonal Misseriya nomads who entered the area in late 2016 and are expected to
return in mid-2017. Additionally, an estimated 11,000 people displaced by conflict
in South Sudan transited Abyei in order to reach their final de stinations in the
Sudan, with some receiving limited basic assistance.
24. In 2016, the humanitarian community shifted the focus from food distribution
to more recovery-oriented interventions through food-for-assets projects. The
community response to this shift was largely positive, with 69,310 people having
benefited from the monthly food distribution. These initiatives have helped the
community gradually transition from food aid dependency to conditional food
assistance. Meanwhile, 6,842 displaced people from neighbouring Unity State in
South Sudan continued to benefit from the general food distribution.
25. Efforts to support community livelihoods included the training of 50
community animal health workers, as well as the vaccination and treatment of ab out
200,000 livestock belonging to both the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities.
Distribution of vegetable seeds and hand tools, coupled with specific training
sessions, were targeted at 250 Ngok Dinka households engaged in the production of
17-05447

5/11

S/2017/312

cash crops. Distribution of fishing kits and training on post-harvest fish
management were targeted at 120 Ngok Dinka households engaged in fish
processing and marketing activities. Ngok Dinka and Misseriya community leaders
participated in eight workshops to improve equitable management of and access to
natural resources. Two structures for a veterinary clinic and a traditional court were
completed and handed over to the traditional authorities as a part of recovery
efforts. The operationalization of these projects, particularly the veterinary clinic,
remains a challenge, as the community lacks the capacity to equip and run the
facilities.
26. The provision of integrated primary health-care and nutrition services,
including routine immunization and essential drugs, was temporarily interrupted
because of funding challenges faced by the humanitarian community in many of the
13 health facilities and mobile clinics operating in the Abyei Area. Nutrition
screening and programming support for patients with moderate or acute ma lnutrition
continued under a targeted supplementary feeding programme in central and
southern Abyei.
27. In the northern parts of the Abyei Area, ensuring a safe water supply for both
residential communities and seasonal nomads remained a challenge. Nine n ew water
boreholes were drilled, of which two were at the Amiet common market. Sixteen
hand pumps were repaired; five existing hand pumps were upgraded to miniature
solar-powered water yards; and five water yards were repaired, benefiting 35,000
people. Other major activities included the training of water user committees in
water management and the maintenance of solar-powered water yards. Nevertheless,
vandalism and theft of solar systems were widespread because of the limited law
enforcement system.
28. Operational challenges included a lack of adequate funds for non -governmental
organizations, particularly for primary health-care activities; high implementation
costs owing to security and logistical constraints; carjacking in northern parts of
Abyei; and delays in the issuance of travel permits and restrictions on the movement
of personnel and supplies by the Government of the Sudan. The capacity to respond
to needs in the northern parts of Abyei continued to be constrained, as no
international non-governmental organizations operate in the area. The continuing
conflict in South Sudan also affected humanitarian operations in the Abyei Area,
including through high prices for supplies procured in South Sudan.

III. Status of the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism
Political developments
29. Although the Sudan and South Sudan did not make any further progress on the
resolution of the final status of the Abyei Area, relations between the two countries
appeared to be on a positive trajectory. Presidents Omar Hassan A. Al-Bashir and
Salva Kiir met on the margins of the Africa-Arab Summit held in Malabo on
23 November 2016 and reiterated their commitment with respect to the
implementation of the 27 September 2012 agreements, including the bor der security
arrangements. Additionally, both countries claimed to have prohibited the presence
of the other’s armed opposition groups in their territory. In November, the Sudan
declared that it had denied the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition leader, Riek Machar, entry into the Sudan, while in January South Sudan
claimed to have expelled the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North from its
territory. Notwithstanding these gestures, on 13 February, in a public address to
6/11

17-05447

S/2017/312

female parliamentarians, President Al-Bashir maintained that Abyei remained a part
of the Sudan. Meanwhile, both the Sudan Armed Forces and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army maintain a presence just outside the boundaries of the Abyei Area,
highlighting the continuing risk of armed conflict between the two countries.
30. UNISFA continued its intensive engagement with both Governments on the
need for the implementation of the Agreement of 20 June 2011 and the resumption
of dialogue in order to jointly address the most pressing security and humanitarian
issues in the area and to provide the necessary political support for peace and
reconciliation efforts between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities. In their
discussions with the UNISFA Acting Head of Mission and Force Commander during
the reporting period, Sudanese officials maintained that the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee remained the sole framework for discussions with the Government of
South Sudan, and expressed disappointment with the cancellation of a planned visit
of representatives of the Abyei Joint Oversight Co mmittee-Sudan to Abyei town in
October 2016 owing to security considerations following Ngok Dinka opposition.
Sudanese officials reiterated the need for free and unhindered movement throughout
Abyei and expressed the view that the Amiet common market should be relocated to
Abyei town. South Sudanese officials, in turn, reiterated their position that the
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee was irrelevant in the absence of a joint
administration in Abyei, called for the withdrawal of the Diffra oil police and
highlighted the need to ensure the “weapons-free” status of the area.

Operations
31. While there were no further meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism or the joint security committee, the Sudan and South Sudan, in separate
letters to UNISFA on 8 November and 15 November 2016, respectively, informed
the Mission that their armed personnel had vacated the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone. The request of UNISFA for ground patrols by the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism to conduct a joint verification of the withdrawal was
approved by the Sudan and South Sudan in November 2016 and February 2017,
respectively. These patrols will be conducted in April 2017, with one ground patrol
from each of the two sectors deployed at Kadugli and Gok Machar.
32. Following the previous regular meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, held in Addis Ababa on 5 June 2016, the Sudan and South Sudan made
progress towards advancing the operational capability of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. In this regard, both countries agreed to
activate the remaining two sector headquarters at Buram and Malakal. A
reconnaissance mission to Buram was conducted on 21 January. Further progress
will be determined by the outcome of the recent UNISFA strategic review.
33. The Mechanism continued routine aerial monitoring patrols over the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone despite significant operational challenges. Of 40 planned
aerial monitoring patrols during the reporting period, 18 were successfully
conducted, while 22 were cancelled. A total of 18 of these cancellations, including
the suspension of the programme for the entire month of February, were the result of
delays in receiving authorization from the South Sudanese authorities . The rest of the
cancellations during the reporting period were the result of the unavailability of
aircraft for technical reasons and unfavourable weather conditions. The earlier
restrictions on aerial monitoring imposed by the local South Sudanese milit ary
formation in Gok Machar and Aweil were removed after a coordination visit by the
chief of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, who was
accompanied by the South Sudanese senior national monitor, to Gok Machar from
28 November to 1 December 2016.
17-05447

7/11

S/2017/312

34. Patrol support teams from UNMAS remained ready to deploy in support of the
Mechanism’s ground patrols at both sector headquarters in Kadugli, the Sudan, and
Gok Machar, South Sudan. In addition, UNMAS delivered integrated ground patrol
training for 63 national monitors, military observers and elements of the Ethiopian
force protection unit to support preparedness and coordinated risk mitigation.

IV. Mission support
35. During the reporting period, the UNISFA military component stood at 4,499
(206 military observers/staff officers and 4,293 troops) against an authorized strength
of 5,326. The UNISFA police component stood at 20 police officers (7 female and 13
male) against an authorized strength of 50. The total number of civilian staff stood at
126 international and 78 national staff onboard. The Government of the Sudan has
issued 190 visas for UNISFA personnel, while visas for 14 staff members, 19 military
personnel, 1 official visitor/consultant, 46 UNMAS personnel and 2 contractors
remain pending. Three visas for the community liaison office, pending since May
2016, particularly impede the activities of UNISFA, since most activities are
increasingly community-based, necessitating the presence of staff with civil affairs
expertise. During the reporting period, the Mission completed the rotation of 1,272
troops and transportation of 59,214 kg cargo through Kadugli airport, conducting 91
rotary-wing round-trip airlifts (76 troop and 15 cargo).
36. During the ongoing dry season, UNISFA commenced the transformation of
the Noong temporary operating base into a permanent operating base, using the
Mission’s engineering resources. It is expected to be fully established before the
onset of the rainy season, which begins around June. With the Sud an having removed
the restrictions on construction material coming into the Abyei Area, as indicated in
my previous report, the Mission continues to upgrade the infrastructure and
environmental installations at all camps. The construction of a perimeter wa ll and
lighting around Mission headquarters in Abyei has been completed; this includes the
area for accommodating the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
headquarters after its eventual move from Kadugli to Abyei. Site preparation work at
the expansion site and improvement of the challenging living conditions at Mission
headquarters in Abyei are ongoing. Four contracts for the replacement of depreciated
old prefabricated accommodation units have been awarded in order to improve living
conditions in the Mission camps across the Abyei Area. With regard to
environmental and hygiene aspects, the replacement and installation of additional
wastewater treatment plants is ongoing. Construction of new septic tanks for
pre-treatment of septic waste has been completed. Establishment of a landfill for all
Mission camps in the Abyei Area for the disposal of solid waste is ongoing.

V. Financial aspects
37. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/269 of 17 June 2016, appropriated
the amount of $268.6 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017. As at 22 March 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to
the Special Account for UNISFA amounted to $28.0 million. Total outstanding
assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
$1,508.0 million. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to
31 January 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment
has been made for the period up to 31 December 2016, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

8/11

17-05447

S/2017/312

VI. Observations and recommendations
38. Abyei continues to be of high strategic and economic importance to the Sudan
and South Sudan, and any local conflict between the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities in the Abyei Area, or any direct confrontation on the border, could lead
to increased tensions, with dire consequences for the wider region. The continued
presence of UNISFA deters armed confrontation between the two countries. The
Mission has also, through the proactive implementation of its conflict prevention
and mitigation strategy and community engagement, contributed to ensuring a
relatively stable security situation in the Abyei Area, where movements as part of
the ongoing migration season have thus far been conducted without any major
security incidents.
39. In order to consolidate gains achieved by UNISFA at the local level, it is
necessary for the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan to actively engage in
discussions on addressing the most pressing security and humanitarian concerns
faced by the people of Abyei. In the absence of such regular engagement, UNISFA
and humanitarian actors continue to operate in a governance vacuum. I therefore
urge the parties to convene regular meetings of the Abyei Joint Oversight
Committee, which has not met since March 2015, to advance the implement ation of
the Agreement of 20 June 2011. This is long overdue and a necessary initial step in
taking forward the intention of the two Governments regarding joint administration
and policing in Abyei while an agreement on its final status is pending.
40. The continued presence of armed personnel at the Diffra oil complex in the
northern Abyei Area and the operation of a de facto “local administration” in the
southern Abyei Area continue to violate and to undermine the 20 June 2011
Agreement. I call upon the Government of the Sudan to withdraw its armed
personnel from Diffra and on the Government of South Sudan to accept and
participate in the joint administration arrangements and institutions established by
the 20 June 2011 Agreement. I welcome the written declarations of both
Governments regarding the withdrawal of their respective forces from the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone and the approval of verification ground patrols, which
UNISFA plans to undertake by the end of April 2017. Aerial monitoring continues
along the entire length of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone; the aerial
surveillance capacity of the Mechanism could be enhanced within existing resources
by deploying fixed-wing aircraft with advanced imaging and visibility capabilities,
as recommended by the recent strategic review.
41. The Amiet common market remains the most visible symbol of the
commitment of both the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya communities to peace and
reconciliation at the local level; disagreement over its permanent location and it s
politicization at higher levels is regrettable. I strongly urge the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan to support the efforts of UNISFA to promote harmony and
peaceful coexistence between the Misseriya and the Ngok Dinka communities, and
to refrain from any actions that could create antagonism or confrontation. As a
further step towards achieving reconciliation between the two communities, I
reiterate the need to achieve closure on the 2013 killing of the Ngok Dinka
Paramount Chief.
42. I am encouraged by the significant progress made by the Ngok Dinka and
Misseriya communities on issues affecting their people and on reconciliation. Yet,
much remains to be done to ensure the smooth implementation of the provisions of
the Agreements of 20 June 2011 and 27 September 2012 on security arrangements. I
therefore recommend the extension of the mandate of UNISFA for another six

17-05447

9/11

S/2017/312

months to help both Governments to make progress towards the goals that they have
set for themselves in those Agreements.
43. In conclusion, I would like to commend the former Acting Head of Mission
and Force Commander, Major General Hassen Ebrahim Mussa, for his tenure at the
helm of UNISFA. I encourage his successor, Major General Tesfay Gidey
Hailemichael, to innovatively take the Mission forward. I thank all United Nations
staff, including staff of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, for their
commitment to the cause of peace in the Abyei Area. The work of my Special
Envoy, Nicholas Haysom, in energizing the political process is much appreciated.
Finally, my thanks are also due to the former President of South Africa and Chair of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, Thabo Mbeki; the African
Union Commission; the Peace and Security Council of the African Union; and the
Government of Ethiopia, for their unstinting support for UNISFA and for standing
tall in support of peace in the Abyei Area.

10/11

17-05447

S/2017/312

17-05447

11/11
