asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6900

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6900th meeting
Tuesday, 15 January 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Khar/Mr. Masood Khan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Pakistan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Squeff
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Aliyev
Mr. Cui Tiankai
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. Amrani
Mr. Kim Sook
Mr. Zmeevsky
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Esaw
Baroness Warsi
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
Letter dated 1 January 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Pakistan to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/3)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-20590 (E)

*1320590*

S/PV.6900

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
Letter dated 1 January 2013 from the
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2013/3)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General and ministers and other high-level
representatives of the Security Council members
participating in today’s meeting. Their presence is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter to
be addressed today.
Under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Afghanistan, Armenia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Botswana,
Canada, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Malaysia, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/3, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 January 2013 from the Permanent Representative
of Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I hope that this open debate will serve to promote
a holistic view of the continuing threats and challenges
posed by international terrorism and of the best ways
to address that menace collectively through a coherent
and comprehensive approach. It is an issue of common
concern to the international community at large. It is

2

through solidarity, understanding, cooperation and
collective action that we can respond more effectively to
the threat. That objective, I am sure, will be reinforced
by our discussion today.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to welcome
Her Excellency Foreign Minister Khar back to the
United Nations. I thank Pakistan for convening this
important debate. As this is my first time to address
the Council this year, I would like to warmly welcome
all the members of the Security Council and to affirm
that I count on their leadership. At the same time, I
would like to warmly welcome the new members of the
Council — the representatives of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda.
In the light of recent terrorist attacks in Pakistan, I
want to repeat my heartfelt condolences to the victims
and to reiterate the United Nations strong support for,
and solidarity with, the Government’s efforts to combat
terrorism and defend the country’s institutions and
freedoms.
Meeting as the New Year begins, we are challenged
to look back on what we have accomplished in
countering terrorism and to look ahead regarding how
to overcome this deadly threat.
The past year saw solid progress. In June, the General
Assembly recommitted to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Through a consensus
resolution (General Assembly resolution 66/282), the
Assembly strengthened our resolve to support victims
of terrorism everywhere. It reaffirmed our commitment
to a comprehensive approach to terrorism, grounded in
respect for human rights and the rule of law.
No counter-terrorism policy can be effective
without addressing conditions that are conducive to the
spread of terrorism. That is the first pillar of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Today, I
would like to highlight three aspects of that pillar.
The first aspect is the critical links between
development and security. Nothing can ever justify
terrorism. No grievance, no goal, no cause can excuse
terrorist acts. At the same time, we must remove the
conditions that feed the problem. Terrorism festers
where conflicts are endemic and where human rights,
human dignity and human life are not protected and
impunity prevails.

13-20590

S/PV.6900

Second is the importance of dialogue and
understanding. We have to drown out shrill appeals
to intolerance and extremism with sound calls for
compassion and moderation.
Third is the increasing use of information
technology to spread hatred. Terrorists and extremists
are exploiting social media networks to radicalize
people. This is yet another arena where we have to
replace the terrorist narrative with messages of peace,
development and human welfare. Progress in all
these areas will demand the steady efforts of States,
individually and collectively.
I welcome three upcoming international
conferences. In April, a new project on human rights
training for counter-terrorism law enforcement officials
will hold its first conference in Amman. The CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) working
group on human rights while countering terrorism is
organizing that event. In two weeks, Governments will
gather in Bogota for the International Conference on
National and Regional Counter-Terrorism Strategies,
organized by the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre of the CTITF. This summer, the CTITF and
the Government of Switzerland will host a conference
of counter-terrorism focal points aimed at addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
Attention to the conditions that are conducive to
terrorism does not in any way diminish the importance
of other counter-terrorism priorities. The financing
of terrorism remains a key threat, and States requires
capacity-building in response. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s special meeting on the subject in
November 2012, chaired by Ambassador Puri of India,
was an important step.
In our efforts to eliminate terrorism, I urge
humanitarian, security and political actors to engage
in an open and sustained policy dialogue to ensure
that efforts to prevent acts of terrorism do not ever
impede the timely and principled delivery of assistance
of a strictly humanitarian nature to civilians. This is
all the more important as we cope with increasing
humanitarian emergencies around the world. This year,
we face challenges in Mali and the broader Sahel region,
where terrorism feeds off of extreme destitution and
undermines development through violence, intolerance
and human rights abuses. I welcome the Security
Council’s resolve to tackle the challenges in that region
head on. I especially appreciate the Council’s sensitive

13-20590

approach to underlying factors that have led to this dire
security situation.
There were far too many victims of terrorism over
the past year, but none was more compelling in her
struggle than Malala Yousafzai, the young Pakistani
teen who was shot, along with her schoolmates, by
extremists. The Government and people of Pakistan
were joined by others around the world in rallying
behind Malala and offering their best wishes for her
recovery. I was deeply moved by her brave efforts
to champion the fundamental right to education — a
value enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, as well as in the teachings of Islam.
I am proud to count myself among her supporters
and well-wishers. Malala and her schoolmates have
shown tremendous courage. Their grace and integrity
challenge the world to respond to the terrorist threat
with the comprehensive and broad-based approach that
is essential to success.
I count on all members of the Council — and all
members of the international community — to unite in
advancing this important work.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his very comprehensive briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan.
Let me begin by thanking all Council members
for supporting Pakistan in putting the theme of “A
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism” on the
Council’s agenda for an open debate culminating in the
adoption of a presidential statement. In this regard, we
are also particularly thankful to the Secretary General
for his constant help and guidance.
In choosing the theme for this debate, we knew that
it was a difficult subject but certainly one that needed
the Council’s attention and pronouncement because,
as the threat of terrorism continues to evolve, so must
our strategies to deal with it. The struggle against this
threat is not for today or tomorrow or for the next week
or even for a year. It is a long haul. We all have to brace
for it. We all have to continue to prepare for it.
Pakistan’s initiative for this debate is rooted in our
shared objective of attaining global peace, security,
stability and development. As a threat to international
peace and security, terrorism has a direct bearing
on all of our countries and regions, as well as on all
3

S/PV.6900

individuals and societies. The past decade has shown
that terrorism knows no geographical boundaries.
In the past decade, one lesson we have all learned
is that a lopsided or unidimensional approach will not
work as we try to defeat the hydra-headed monster of
terrorism. This monster has tentacles all around the
world. It is truly a global threat. Our strategies and
responses must therefore also be global in nature.
The Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole have already done an impressive body of work
by developing the legal and normative framework for
countering terrorism and by creating mechanisms
for implementation. So what is it that we all wish to
accomplish under this new initiative?
After fighting terrorism for the past 10 years, we
have the benefit of the hindsight and an unprecedented
opportunity to deal both with the symptoms and the
causes of terrorism. We all are deeply aware of the
unintended consequences of political decisions that can
fuel the scourge of terrorism. Short-sighted methods
of dealing with terrorism can offer ideological fodder
to the causes of terrorists. What we are looking for,
therefore, is a comprehensive and interlocking approach
that is much more effective than our present effort and
that is geared towards winning not only the battles but
also the war.
We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and
for whatever purpose. All acts of terrorism are criminal
and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivations. In the
past decade, we have collaborated, as the international
community, to impede, impair, isolate and incapacitate
the terrorist threat. We must attack and dismantle
terrorist networks because they defy the writ of the
State and kill innocent civilians, and we must persevere
in our efforts to deter and defeat terrorists militarily.
And yet our success has been at best only
partial. It is conventional wisdom and a compelling
reality that terrorism will not be defeated by law
enforcement measures, intelligence operations or
military and security strategies alone. That is why
we need a comprehensive approach. If we are to find
sustainable solutions, we need to intensify our efforts
to resolve long-festering conflicts and crises that spawn
extremism.
Terrorists’ misleading, distorted and malicious
narrative, and their demented ideology that justifies
the killing of innocent people must be quashed by the
4

international community and the Security Council. It
is our responsibility to counter terrorists’ propaganda.
Our stories about human dignity and values should
be louder than their criminal sagas. We must move
in concert to decrease the ideological space in which
terrorists operate freely.
Development and security are interrelated.
Development helps to meet basic human needs, build
community resilience, and prevent terrorism. Job
creation for young people and their participation
in socioeconomic development create an enabling
environment for the success of counterterrorism
policies. Special emphasis needs to be laid on creating
opportunities for people in regions scarred by terrorism
to be gainfully employed so that terrorists can no longer
lure them to their side.
We in Pakistan have seen that nothing works better
as an effort of the international community in this regard
than allowing preferential market access to products
produced within the regions wracked by terrorism. An
even more important track — perhaps — is dialogue.
All those who have chosen the path of terrorism but are
willing to renounce violence should be brought back
into national and societal mainstreams. Reconciliation
must be promoted. Fissures must be bridged.
We also have to foster a culture of the promotion
of the rule of law, the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and prevalence of good
governance and tolerance.
I would just like to add a few more points to
emphasize why counter-terrorism needs to be the focus
of the Council.
First, terrorism continues to mutate every day
into newer and different forms. Terrorists use new
information and communication technologies and
the Internet for recruitment and incitement, as well
for planning and financing their activities. Counterterrorism efforts need to adapt to those challenges
and to develop quick-response strategies for real-time
response.
Secondly, we should address the root causes of
terrorism. Deprivation, marginalization, exclusion
and stereotyping often create conditions for a drift to
terrorism. That drift must be stemmed.
Thirdly, our collective and national measures to
countering all forms of the financing of terrorism,
including through the proceeds of organized crime and

13-20590

S/PV.6900

illicit narcotics, should be made much more effective
than they are today.
Fourthly, terrorism and extremism cannot, and
should not, be associated with any religion, race, region,
value system or society. Attributing the encouragement,
incitement or inspiration of terrorist acts to any religious
tradition or doctrine is unacceptable. An honest
dialogue among different religions and civilizations is
therefore a continuing political imperative.
Regional and subregional efforts are extremely
important in the fight against terrorism. We need
regional cooperation to impart education, bolster
criminal justice systems, enhance connectivity, secure
borders and tighten financial controls.Besides, regional
cooperation is necessary to guarantee lasting peace and
security.
Pakistan and Afghanistan have taken steps
towards a strategic partnership to jointly fight
terrorism — a multipronged approach to countering
terrorism. We are supporting an Afghan-led and
Afghan-driven reconciliation process and efforts
aimed at creating a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
We believe that peace and stability in Afghanistan will
have a direct, salutary impact on Pakistan.
Terrorism remains a serious threat to Pakistan.
We have been one of the biggest victims of terrorism.
We can therefore relate to, feel and share the pain and
suffering caused by terrorism anywhere in the world.
Pakistan’s comprehensive approach to countering
terrorism is based on three d’s, namely, deterrence,
development and dialogue. The entire nation, the
Government, the Parliament, the judiciary and civil
society are determined to fight the scourge of terrorism
and extremism.
Under the leadership of President Asif Ali Zardari,
we have pursued a multifaceted policy to deal with the
threat of terrorism in a holistic and sustainable manner.
Pakistan has led from the front in the international
community’s fight against terrorism. Much of the
success in the global fight against terrorism has been
made possible with Pakistan’s support and active
cooperation. However, that success has come with
a heavy cost for Pakistan and for Pakistanis; but that
has not deterred our resolve. Pakistan’s community
resilience has been second to none.
The Pakistani armed forces and law enforcement
officials have defended Pakistan and the rest of the
13-20590

world against the terrorist threat, at great cost. Some
150,000 troops are currently deployed on the PakistanAfghanistan border to detect and degrade those
ubiquitous terrorists who are enemies of our people.
Seven thousand brave Pakistani soldiers, police and
para-military forces and more than 37,000 innocent
civilians, including men, women and children, have
fallen victim to the blight of terrorism. Thousands more
have been injured and disabled.
Pakistan’s most popular leader, Shaheed Mohtarma
Benazir Bhutto, was assassinated by terrorists in 2007.
Recently, Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa leader and senior
Minister Bashir Bilour, who spoke courageously against
terrorism, was killed in a suicide bombing attack. Even
the young, innocent teenage girl Malala Yousafzai,
whom the Secretary-General referred to, could not
escape the bullet of a terrorist. She survived, and we
hope that her life will be a testimony to the resilience
of the Pakistani people, including Pakistan’s women.
Terrorists gain strength from various sources of
financing. We should continue to refine measures to
prevent and suppress their sources of funding coming
from the abuse of charitable non-profit organizations,
as well as from the proceeds from organized crime and
illicit narcotics. Pakistan recently hosted a successful
regional conference on counter-narcotics. We have also
launched a thorough public-awareness campaign about
the atrocities committed by terrorists.
The success of a counter-terrorist offensive cannot
be measured only by the defeat of terrorists. After
a successful operation in Swat and Malakand, for
instance, we first had to absorb and then rehabilitate
no fewer than 2.2 million displaced persons, through a
massive national effort.
We also are focusing on the well-being and
appropriate rehabilitation of victims of terrorism. We
have invested energy and resources in deradicalization
so that misguided youth can be reintegrated into society.
We have established one such deradicalization centre at
Saboon for that purpose, and we wish to establish many
more.
The capacity-building needs of partner countries
must be addressed with seriousness. The reluctance to
share critical equipment and intelligence amounts to
weakening those pitted against terrorists.
Terrorism undermines global stability and
prosperity. It has undermined Pakistan’s stability and
economic prospects. That is why we have asked our
5

S/PV.6900

partners in the international community to enhance
our market access for the products on which we have
comparative and competitive advantages.
We believe in balancing hardcore national strategies
with socioeconomic and community-driven plans.
The Government of Pakistan is also investing in the
development of affected areas, including in education,
health, tourism, sports, the construction of roads, dams,
canals and hydroelectric projects.
The United Nations and its subsidiary bodies
have an important role in the implementation of its
resolutions, the development of discourse on counterterrorism and the dissemination of best practices among
nation-States. The United Nations should continue to
play a visible and effective role in leading counterterrorism efforts. In that regard, it is critical that we
maximize transparency, efficiency, coordination and
synergy within the United Nations system.
Let me conclude by emphasizing that terrorism
threatens us all. Joining forces and strengthening
cooperation are key to success at the national and
international levels. States need to continue to work
more closely in the implementation of their counterterrorism strategies. Terrorism can be defeated only
by comprehensive and collective endeavours on the
part of the international community in a cooperative
framework. Pakistan will continue to play its role in
that collective undertaking.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time that Luxembourg is taking the
floor in a public meeting of the Security Council, allow
me, Madam President, to congratulate your country,
Pakistan, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of January 2013. I also thank you
for having organized this open debate on the theme of a
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.
Today is also the first time in its history that
Luxembourg has taken the floor in a public meeting
as an elected member of the Security Council. We
commit ourselves, in the course of the next two years,
to contributing actively to the work of the Security
Council in the exercise of the primary responsibility
conferred upon it by States Members under the Charter

6

of the United Nations, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Terrorism is one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. The Secretary-General
aptly illustrated that fact in his presentation, for which
I thank him. The threat is spreading, as the example of
the Sahel demonstrates. Very recently, unfortunately,
Pakistan was again the victim of deadly terrorist
attacks. I would like, through you, Madam President,
to extend to Pakistan the heartfelt condolences of my
country. Luxembourg wishes to express its solidarity
with all those who suffer because of terrorism, and to
reaffirm the importance of respecting the rights of the
victims of terrorism.
Luxembourg strongly condemns terrorism. We
consider terrorist acts as unjustifiable criminal acts that
must be prosecuted and punished regardless of their
perpetrators. To counter this scourge, Luxembourg
commits itself at the international level, at the European
level and at the national level. European efforts will
be outlined in the statement to be made by the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union, which I
wholeheartedly endorse.
As for United Nations efforts, it is commendable
that the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy has expanded the framework of the fight
against global terrorism to include not only repressive
and security measures but also measures to ensure
respect for human rights and to address the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. That Strategy
provides a comprehensive approach allowing for
more effective responses to the threat of terrorism, by
combining security, the rule of law, development goals
and the protection of human rights, as the President just
now said.
Indeed, in order to prevent terrorism, we must
strengthen and make better use of United Nations
capacities in areas such as conflict prevention, the
primacy of law, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and development. Security and development are truly
complementary. The long-term goal of any strategy
in the fight against terrorism is to save lives and
safeguard the well-being of the population. Conversely,
development can help counter the appeal of terrorism,
especially if it promotes youth employment, which is
one of the priority areas of Luxembourg’s development
cooperation policy.

13-20590

S/PV.6900

I would like to emphasize that the fight against
terrorism must be guided by fundamental democratic
values, human rights and good governance. All measures
adopted to prevent and fight terrorism must respect
the principle of the primacy of law, and they must be
taken in accordance with international law, including
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law.
Indeed, experience has shown that serious violations of
human rights may create conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism. In the same vein, counter-terrorism
strategies must pay due attention to the promotion of
tolerance, to dialogue and to respect for diversity.
UNESCO has a major role to play in that regard, as has
the Alliance of Civilizations, which Luxembourg has
actively supported since its creation in 2005.
Luxembourg fully supports the work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001), and 1540 (2004),
which are at the heart of the United Nations response
to terrorism. Sanctions are an important tool in the
international fight against terrorism. We recall the
importance of prompt and effective implementation of
applicable sanctions measures.
At the same time, the protection of human rights
and respect for the primacy of law are of crucial
importance if we want to achieve the ultimate goal
of preventing and countering acts of terrorism. We
welcome the measures adopted by the Security Council
in recent years to ensure the application of clear, fair
and transparent procedures in the work of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee. We extend our full support to the
Office of the Ombudsperson, which was established in
December 2009 and whose mandate has just recently
been renewed for a period of 30 months, until June
2015. It is important to work for steady improvement of
procedures within the Council.
I would not want to conclude without saying a word
about the struggle against the financing of terrorism.
As an international financial centre, Luxembourg is
conscious of its special responsibilities in the matter.
My country has adopted a modern and coherent
arsenal of legislative and regulatory measures in the
fight against money laundering and the financing
of terrorism. Those measures are in line with the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force. Furthermore, Luxembourg is contributing to
strengthening the capacity of developing countries to
counter the financing of terrorism. For example, we
have assisted Senegal by funding a training project

13-20590

developed by its Financial Intelligence Processing Unit,
in cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.
The draft presidential statement prepared for this
open debate is commendable for including all the
ingredients of the comprehensive approach to the fight
against terrorism that I have just set out. Luxembourg
therefore fully endorses it. If together we succeed in
translating its words into action I have no doubt that
we will make decisive progress in the fight against
terrorism.
Baroness Warsi (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin, Madam President, by congratulating you and the
Government of Pakistan on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. I am
grateful to you for convening this important debate
on taking a comprehensive approach to countering
terrorism. Allow me also to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his introductory remarks and briefing this
morning.
Pakistan is on the front line of terrorism and is
making enormous sacrifices. Thirty thousand Pakistani
civilians have died in terrorist attacks since 9/11. In
Britain, we understand the terrible losses terrorism has
inflicted on the Pakistani people. We feel them deeply,
too. The people of Pakistan will always have our
sympathy, our understanding and our steadfast support
in addressing those problems and in confronting
terrorism. As Prime Minister David Cameron has said,
Pakistan’s enemy is our enemy.
Terrorism remains one of the most pressing
and most challenging of the threats facing our
world today. A united international response is the
only way by which the scourge of terrorism can be
defeated — a comprehensive approach to terrorism.
The world has changed since the 9/11 attacks and other
terrorist atrocities such as the Bali bombing and the 7/7
attacks in London. Globalization has made the world
increasingly interconnected, its boundaries less clearly
defined.
Those changes have brought many benefits,
but they have also brought significant challenges
that require a collective global response if we are to
overcome them. The same applies without doubt to the
terrorist threat we face today. It is more diverse and
more fragmented but also more determined than ever
to challenge the shared values on which the United
Nations was founded. The United Kingdom therefore

7

S/PV.6900

welcomes the call for a more comprehensive approach
to countering terrorism — comprehensive in terms of
the number of countries working together to ensure its
defeat and comprehensive in terms of the range of tools
we deploy in our struggle against it.
When a terrorist threat is faced, a military response
is sometimes unavoidable. But we must also recognize
the link between instability and terrorism and the need
to address the grievances and poverty that terrorists seek
to exploit, to radicalize and to recruit from. In Yemen,
for example, we need to expand access to justice, jobs
and basic services in order to address those grievances.
And in Somalia the work of our Department for
International Development to support police training,
to pilot community safety committees and to secure
access to health care and humanitarian assistance is
playing a crucial role in countering terrorist threats.
The United Kingdom is keen to continue its support for
the new Government of Somalia in its efforts to secure
lasting peace and security in East Africa, building on
the success of the London Somalia Conference last year.
Therefore, our broader counter-terrorism effort
must continue to include work to bring countries out of
poverty and to build stability. That requires us to take
a truly holistic and comprehensive approach, bringing
together diplomatic, development and defence work in
countering terrorism.
We must not forget that financing is the lifeblood
of terrorist networks. Cutting off that financing is
core to countering terrorism. We therefore welcome
the work of the United Nations and other international
bodies, including the Financial Action Task Force, in
setting international standards for combating terrorist
financing and promoting their effective implementation.
Terrorists are also quick to exploit the opportunities
presented by technology. In the field of cybersecurity
the United Kingdom is playing a key role in shaping
an international cyberstrategy, including hosting the
2011 London Conference on Cyberspace. We welcome
international initiatives, particularly in the United
Nations, aimed at reducing the threat we face from
cybercrime.
The United Kingdom is also working closely with
our international partners to tackle other transnational
threats such as drug and human trafficking. In
particular, the United Kingdom welcomes and has
adopted the United Nations Protocol to Prevent,
Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, which

8

supplements the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy emphasizes the importance of conducting
counter-terrorism activity in conformity with
international law. The United Kingdom strongly
endorses that position. Compliance with international
human rights obligations is vital to the sustainability
of all our counter-terrorism work. We need to ensure
that our collective capacity to arrest, prosecute and
detain terrorists is in accordance with the human
rights standards that United Nations Members have
signed up to.
The United Kingdom is active also across the
globe in providing security and justice assistance to
international partners. In doing so, we consider it to
be of critical importance that this work be consistent
with our values. The United Kingdom has therefore
developed specific guidance, the overseas security and
justice assistance guidance, to ensure that all of our
overseas counter-terrorism activity is in line with our
fundamental human rights standards. All proposals for
security and justice assistance overseas are now subject
to that guidance.
The United Nations is uniquely placed to lead and
coordinate the universal struggle against terrorism.
United Nations resolutions provide the framework for
international activity to counter terrorism, and United
Nations bodies here in New York and around the world
are working hard in different ways to help mitigate the
terrorist threat that we all face. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts of all these entities in helping to
create the legal framework for countering terrorism by
addressing the conditions that can give rise to violent
extremism and through practical measures to help
prevent terrorist attacks.
But with so many international bodies involved
in that effort, 31 separate entities in all, there is a risk
that activity is not as coordinated as it could be. We
therefore continue to support the Secretary-General’s
call for the appointment of a United Nations counterterrorism coordinator, which we believe could increase
the impact of the United Nations counter-terrorism
effort and help to promote a truly comprehensive
approach. We would need the right mandate, and we
would need to think carefully about how best to use the
available resources, but we remain convinced that more
effective coordination within and between international

13-20590

S/PV.6900

organizations is crucial to our success in tackling the
global terrorist threat.
It is also important that the United Nations continue
to strive to work as effectively and in as coordinated
a manner as possible with other multinational
organizations working on counter-terrorism. We
welcome the regular European Union-United Nations
counter-terrorism dialogue and look forward to
increased operational cooperation as a result. Similarly,
we welcome the important contribution that the United
Nations makes to the work of the Global CounterTerrorism Forum.
Madam President, I should like to thank you once
again for using the occasion of your presidency of the
Security Council to shine the spotlight on this important
issue. The United Kingdom remains determined to
work with Security Council colleagues, the wider
United Nations membership and the key United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies to advance our collective
comprehensive counter-terrorism efforts.
The President: I thank Baroness Swarsi for her
comprehensive statement and for her support.
Mr. Cui Tiankai (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China expresses its appreciation to Pakistan for having
proposed this open debate on counter-terrorism. I thank
you, Madam President, for having travelled to New
York to preside over this debate. I also thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.
Pakistan is at the forefront of the international
struggle against terrorism. The tremendous efforts
and enormous sacrifices it has made in that regard are
recognized by the whole world. On 10 January, several
blasts took place in the city of Quetta, in the Pakistani
province of Baluchistan, causing heavy casualties.
China strongly condemns those attacks. We wish to
express our deep condolences and sincere sympathy to
the wounded and to the families of the victims. China
rejects terrorism in all its forms and will continue to
support the Government and people of Pakistan in
their efforts to safeguard national stability and combat
terrorism.
The convening of this meeting is a strong testament
to Pakistan’s responsible attitude towards the issue
of counter-terrorism. China fully appreciates this
effort. I am confident that our meeting today will help
strengthen international consensus and contribute to
international cooperation on counter-terrorism.

13-20590

In the wake of the events of 11 September, the
Security Council swiftly adopted resolution 1373
(2001), which led to the establishment of the CounterTerrorism Committee. That reflects the international
community’s firm resolve to combat terrorism. In the
ensuing years, some progress has been made, and the
threat of terrorism on the whole is abating. On the
other hand, the situation today remains quite serious.
Terrorist activities are rampant in certain parts of the
world, and the turbulence in certain other regions
provides space for terrorist infiltration.
We have seen new developments concerning
terrorist organizations. The average age of terrorist
operatives has decreased, the methods employed are
becoming more varied, and some organizations are
joining together to form terrorist networks. In a word,
the breeding ground for terrorism is far from having
been eliminated, and international counter-terrorism
cooperation remains a long and uphill battle.
Today’s open debate offers a valuable opportunity
to explore effective and comprehensive ways to combat
terrorism. I wish to set out the following positions of
my Government on international counter-terrorism
cooperation.
First, we need to fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned. In
combating terrorism, it is important to adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations; respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of countries; fully listen to their
views and opinions; and carry out international
cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit.
Without global support, the fight against terrorism
cannot be sustained. Therefore, the international
community should provide more assistance to those
developing countries that suffer from a lack of capacity,
while respecting the wishes of such countries.
Secondly, we need to leverage the role of the United
Nations and its Security Council as the main channel
of cooperation. Terrorism is a threat to global peace
and security. China supports the important role of the
United Nations and its Security Council in coordinating
national efforts and shaping a global response. It is
important for countries to strictly abide by the relevant
Security Council resolutions and fully implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We welcome the establishment of the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, and we hope that there will
be better coordination and greater synergy among
9

S/PV.6900

the various counter-terrorism agencies of the United
Nations.
Thirdly, we need to adopt a comprehensive approach
in addressing the root causes as well as the symptoms
of this scourge. Terrorism is the result of a complex
array of political, economic and social factors; it cannot
be resolved by military means alone. Counter-terrorism
efforts must be combined with economic growth
and the proper settlement of regional conflict. There
should also be more dialogue and exchanges between
different civilizations, religions and ethnic groups, so
as to promote mutual understanding, tolerance and
harmonious coexistence. A comprehensive approach
involving political, economic and diplomatic means
should be employed in order to eliminate the root
causes of terrorist activities.
Fourthly, we need to reject double standards.
Terrorism is the arch-enemy of all humankind.
Terrorist activities, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed, under whatever pretext,
should be condemned and combated. There should not
be different standards for different attacks. The fight
against terrorism should not be determined by ideology,
nor should it be associated with specific countries,
Governments, ethnicities or religious beliefs. On this
issue, the international community should build greater
consensus and speak in one voice.
China has been suffering from terrorism. For years,
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement and associated
groups have carried out numerous violent terrorist
attacks against China, causing heavy casualties and
economic losses in my country. Definitive evidence
abounds. Such attacks are grave threats not only to
China’s national security, but also to the peace and
stability of our region. The international community
should join hands in a united effort against it.
China has consistently played an active role
in international exchanges on counter-terrorism
cooperation. My Government has signed 12 relevant
international conventions within the United Nations
framework and faithfully implemented resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001). Pursuant to paragraph
6 of resolution 1373 (2001), China has submitted
seven reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
documenting China’s implementation of the resolution
and the latest progress in its counter-terrorism
endeavours.

10

China has also taken an active part in international
cooperation against terrorism financing. We have
signed cooperation memorandums with 20 foreign
financial intelligence agencies and joined the Financial
Action Task Force, the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money-Laundering and Financing of Terrorism, and
the Asia/Pacific Group on Money-Laundering. We
have also provided, as our ability permits, material
assistance and training to support the counterterrorism
efforts of other developing countries.
The world has made considerable progress in the
fight against terrorism. However, there is still a long
way to go. The international community should strive
tirelessly and take a comprehensive approach in order to
wipe out terrorist threats. China pledges its continued
efforts to that end.
Mr. Amrani (Morocco): I would like first
to express our deep appreciation to Pakistan for
convening a special debate under its presidency of
the Security Council on the important subject of a
comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism. The
Kingdom of Morocco shares Pakistan’s commitment to
strengthening the international fight against terrorism
and welcomes the concept paper prepared by the
Pakistani delegation for our debate (S/2013/3, annex). I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing, and to commend his commitment to
reinforcing the United Nations leadership in combating
terrorism and in mobilizing resources and expertise to
strengthen the capacity of Members States.
Over the past few years, the international
community has steadily built stronger consensus,
efficient strategies and a robust architecture with the
aim of better responding to terrorism. Those major
efforts have disrupted terrorist structures, foiled a
number of terrorist plots and weakened the central
command of major terrorist groups. However, the
trends and methods of international terrorism continue
to evolve, and terrorist groups are constantly adapting
their modus operandi. Terrorist groups have developed
a more regional agenda, with an even stronger nexus
between terrorists and transnational organized crime
networks and a more intensive use of information and
communication technology.
Terrorism is a highly complex and multidimensional
phenomenon that we must address through renewed
consensus and effective cooperation. If it is to be
effective, our collective response to terrorism should
rely on a comprehensive approach and dedicated
13-20590

S/PV.6900

strategies at the national, regional and international
levels.

Counterterrorism Practice in the Criminal Justice
Sector, adopted last year.

The United Nations, as the appropriate and
legitimate multilateral framework, has developed a
robust counter-terrorism architecture. Over the past
decade, the Security Council has shown remarkable
determination in countering terrorism by adopting a
significant number of resolutions, and it continues to
strengthen the work of its counter-terrorism committees.
As Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Morocco is committed to working with all Member
States Members to strengthen the action taken by the
CTC to consolidate a strategic, transparent approach
and to further strengthen facilitation and coordination
of the provision of technical assistance that enhances
Member States’ capacities to counter terrorism.

Morocco has established a comprehensive and
multidimensional counter-terrorism approach, rooted
in its early commitment to contributing actively to
the preservation of peace and security at all levels.
The strategy is guided by Morocco’s attachment to
the values of tolerance, human rights, fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law. It also converges with
the United Nations Strategy and complies with the
Charter of the United Nations, relevant United Nations
resolutions and other international legal instruments to
which Morocco is party.

We have today the tools. We have the instruments.
I believe that the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted by the General Assembly in
2006, represents the most comprehensive and effective
decision taken by the international community to
eliminate the dangerous threat and to improve United
Nations action. We also commend the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force for its
consistent efforts to coordinate international support.
Despite all those positive developments, terrorism
remains a prominent threat to international peace and
security. The United Nations must intensify its efforts,
adapt its responses to the new patterns of terrorism, and
diversify its partnership with regional and subregional
organizations. In that context, we reiterate, as other
delegations have reiterated this morning, our readiness
to pursue discussions on all proposals seeking to further
enhance the coherence, coordination and effectiveness
of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, including
the proposal of the Secretary-General to appoint a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator. Likewise, the
United Nations should explore better ways to interact
with other multilateral initiatives actively involved in
the global fight against terrorism.
In that regard, allow me to recall the important
work done by the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism in seeking to improve national and
international capacities for prevention, detection and
response to a nuclear terrorist event. I recall in particular
its most recent meeting in Rabat. We would also like
to highlight the early and important achievements of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, in particular the
Rabat Memorandum on Good Practices for Effective
13-20590

The proactive Moroccan approach has been
successfully translated into firm and preventive law
enforcement measures with a dedicated counterterrorism justice system, as well as into national
initiatives aimed at addressing the various social,
economic and cultural factors involved.
Our effective approach is rooted in a series of
essential building blocks, in particular the total
rejection by all Moroccan citizens of terrorism and
violence as means to achieve political objectives. Our
firm commitment to pursuing irreversible democratic
reforms, with human development as a shared and
important priority, today provides Morocco with the
best safeguard against the spread of violent extremism.
Morocco has devoted equal attention and
commitment to preventing the spread of terrorism and
extremism at the regional level. For years, Morocco
has persistently warned the international community
about the deteriorating situation in the Sahel region,
which continues to face complex multidimensional
and interconnected challenges. The Sahel has emerged
today as the centre stage of alarming activities involving
terrorist and extremist groups that threaten the stability
and security of the States of the Sahel, West Africa,
the Maghreb and beyond. A year ago, the State of Mali
saw the northern part of its territory progressively
fall to armed extremist terrorist groups. Two thirds of
its territory is now in the hands of terrorist elements
whose confidence is ever-increasing, given the slow
response of the international community to dislodge
them. That state of mind was reflected in their actions
last week, when they broke the de facto six-month
ceasefire in place, thereby defying the decisions taken
by the Security Council. In the wake of those alarming
developments, Morocco supports the recent call of the
Government of Mali for outside assistance to combat
11

S/PV.6900

the terrorist elements and the response that is now
being provided by bilateral partners.
At the regional level, let me reiterate our call for
a sustainable framework for dialogue, cooperation and
solidarity — one that encompasses all States of the
Sahel and the Maghreb in order to address in a holistic
and effective manner the critical situation in the Sahel
region. We need further joint responsibility, inclusive
cooperation and constructive partnership to face those
challenges.
In conclusion, terrorism emanates from a complex
set of interrelated political, economic and social factors.
In combating it, we should not lose sight of the need to
address the underlying causes by promoting political
reforms and human development, eliminating social
injustice and resolving regional conflicts. To provide
sustainable solutions, terrorism must be addressed in
a holistic manner that does not rely solely on military
and law-enforcement measures, but also emphasizes
the human dimension of the cooperation.
We thereby firmly believe that the United Nations
should remain the central framework to effectively take
forward our fight against terrorism. We are equally
convinced that national counter-terrorism strategies
should include systematic and efficient regional and
subregional cooperation.
In keeping with its values and principles, Morocco
intends to remain an active and fully committed partner
of the United Nations and the entire international
community in the global fight against the scourge of
terrorism
Our commitment could not be better expressed
than by the words of His Majesty Mohammed VI, King
of Morocco:
“With regard to the fight against terrorism, Morocco
will continue to implement a comprehensive,
multidimensional strategy, in which security,
democratic reforms and development efforts
support and complement one another. Under
that strategy, cultural creativity and enlightened
thinking will also be encouraged, together with a
firm commitment to the rule of law and to equality
before the law and the nation’s legal system”.
Mr. Zmeevsky (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): First of all, allow me to express my
appreciation to the Pakistani presidency for the
initiative to hold this Council meeting on the

12

strengthening of a comprehensive approach to counterterrorism. The Russian Federation supports that
approach through national measures and in advancing
international counter-terrorism cooperation under the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and the
Security Council.
We consider today’s meeting a practical
manifestation of that general course and the logical
continuation of the special meetings on counterterrorism held by the Council last year (see S/PV.6765
and S/PV.6890).
Unfortunately, the terrorist threat has not declined.
A few days ago, a number of savage terrorist acts in
Pakistan caused many casualties. We express our
condolences to the bereaved family members and loved
ones, our solidarity with them and our wishes for the
victims’ speedy recovery.
Terrorism is quickly adapting to new realities
and adopting a new dimension and gravity. Reports
on terrorist acts issue more frequently from regions
previously untouched by such acts. We are facing an
exceptionally dangerous global challenge to today’s
world order and civilization that is hard to predict and
threatens international peace and security.
New grave problems in counter-terrorism security
are building, spurred by conflict situations in North
Africa, the Middle East and the Horn of Africa. That has
resulted in increased terrorist group activities, including
mobile cross-border displacement, rapid weapon
acquisition — mostly from Libyan arsenals — and the
establishment of new sources of financing. Terrorism
is integrating more tightly with organized crime,
including in West Africa and the Sahel region. It is no
coincidence that criminal challenges in that region at
the start of the past year became the subject of an open
meeting of the Council (see S/PV.6765).
The activity of Al-Qaida and the Taliban in the
Afghanistan-Pakistan region continues to generate
transnational terrorist threats, along with the illegal
production and trafficking of narcotics.
Terrorism is a non-traditional adversary. Terrorist
organizations, unlike States, have no international
obligations, bear no responsibility to society and
operate under other references and moral practices.
Assisted by modern information technologies and the
Internet, terrorists have actively spread their ideology
in order to recruit, organize and train rebels.

13-20590

S/PV.6900

A very dangerous trend is the determined spread
of terrorist ideology and violent extremism often seen
in anonymous inputs to social networks, under slogans
of democracy and reform calling for the organization
of street protests. We must be concerned about media
broadcasts depicting crowds of dissatisfied people
determined to protest under Al-Qaida flags and
portraits of Osama Bin Laden.
Equally, we are concerned about attempts made by
supporters of Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations
to infiltrate Governments and civic organizations.
Against that backdrop, a growing destructive wave
of radicalism is provoking dangerous interreligious
tensions in various regions, resulting in favourable
conditions for attracting new adherents — especially
young people — to such movements.
One extremely alarming trend is the integration
of terrorism into today’s regional and other armed
conflicts, as seen, for example, in Mali. Under the flag
of separatism, terrorists directly threaten the territorial
integrity of States, thus undermining the foundations of
international peace and security.
It is encouraging that in neutralizing the
terrorist threat in that country, the international
community — as was particularly evident in yesterday’s
Council consultations — is using common approaches.
At the same time, we cannot but be concerned by the
lack of a common Council position with respect to
condemning the terrorist acts and threats in Syria,
particularly in view of the growing influence among
the opposition of terrorist organizations linked to
Al-Qaida.
The transnational nature of today’s terrorist threats
requires the entire international community to pool its
efforts to ensure effective cooperation in countering
that dangerous challenge. A good effort has been
made in that context, namely, the establishment of a
global collective response to terrorist challenges that
includes a solid treaty base, participation in which we
must expand. On that basis, an extensive institutional
cooperation model has been established under the
central coordinating role of the United Nations.
Regional, subregional and bilateral counterterrorism efforts are developing dynamically. The
scope and results of that work have, in turn, improved
effective law enforcement cooperation under
international, regional and bilateral formats. As a
result, the potential of terrorist organizations has been

13-20590

significantly hampered through obstacles to the spread
of their work and depriving them of important financial
and logistical support channels.
Nevertheless, the challenges in providing a timely
and appropriate response to the changing terrorist threat
remains a priority issue of the United Nations and the
Security Council. We support strengthened cooperation
among the General Assembly, without prejudice to the
independent, active role of the Council in that area.
We attach vital importance to the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism;
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities; and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011).
We note that with the December 2012 agreement
of the Council on two resolutions on Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, the Council has maintained its focus on
the existing sanctions mechanisms in order to counter
credible terrorist threats emanating from those
organizations. Measures ensuring the transparency of
those sanctions and allowing them freedom to operate
should promote their effectiveness and increase their
support for the quality of their work combating the
Taliban and Al-Qaida.
It is an international imperative that we prevent
any kind of assistance to terrorists, whether military,
technical or financial. States that disregard this
obligation will eventually find that it backfires on them
and will pay with their citizens’ lives for pandering to
terrorism. One of the urgent tasks we face is ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 2017 (2011),
adopted on Russia’s initiative, which calls for a cluster
of measures aimed at combating the uncontrolled
proliferation of arms in Libya, particularly manportable air-defence systems, This area has become an
extremely dangerous source of support for terrorist and
criminal organizations, not just in the Sahara-Sahel
region but far beyond its boundaries.
Also still relevant is the goal laid out in resolution
1624 (2005) of countering the ideology of terrorism
by creating an atmosphere of total repudiation within
the global community. It is essential that the struggle
for people’s minds and hearts be conducted on the
basis of a deepened intercultural dialogue and mutual
understanding among civilizations and religions that

13

S/PV.6900

firmly suppresses incitement to terrorism in all its forms.
We must therefore establish effective cooperation with
civil society in order to neutralize manifestations of
violent extremism and terrorism at the earliest stages.
The goal of universal implementation of the
General Assembly’s approved Global CounterTerrorism Strategy is more important than ever. It is
a harmonious combination of hard and soft counterterrorism approaches, the goals of various high-profile
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
The results of the third review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy held in June last year present
additional possibilities for building on the work of
improving complex approaches to combating terrorism.
In the context of the theme of today’s meeting, and
bearing in mind the rapidly changing character of the
global terrorist threat, it is especially important that
the international community establish measures not
only to respond quickly to crisis situations but also to
prevent them altogether. We attach vital importance
to the issues of preventing terror, suppressing the
production of ideologies of extremism and violence,
including by combating incitement to terrorism,
as well as preventing the use of media spaces or the
global Internet for terrorist purposes. It is vital that we
develop consolidated responses to new terrorist threats,
including in cyberspace. Practical efforts to comply
with Security Council requests on banning terrorism
propaganda sites, such as Kavkazcenter.com, the
Swedish-based information mouthpiece of the terrorist
organization Imarat Kavkaz, should also include
the development of a global agreement as a basis for
combating the use of cyberspace for terrorist and
other criminal purposes, through organizing practical
cooperation and confidence-building in this area.
The terrorism of mass destruction increases the
threat to international peace and security, and steps
to prevent nuclear terrorism are particularly relevant.
It is essential to broaden States’ participation in major
United Nations and International Atomic Energy
Agency conventions, in the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism and in implementing the decisions
of the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit. The Committee
established pursuant to 1540 (2004) should play an
important role in achieving these goals.
Russia intends to continue to actively support
counter-terrorism efforts under United Nations
auspices, including through our own expert experience
and practice. In October, we received a mission
14

from the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate to evaluate our country’s implementation of
individual provisions of the Security Council’s baseline
anti-terrorism resolutions, 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). The results of the visit demonstrated Russia’s
commitment to the work of increasing international
cooperation in this area under United Nations auspices
and affirmed our contribution, as a permanent member
of the Council, to the development and advancement of
international standards in the field.
We see socioeconomic prevention as one of the
most important anti-terrorism priorities today and
impossible without vigorous targeted measures aimed
at caring for people and ensuring and protecting their
rights, including the right to a dignified and secure
existence and decent compensation for honest labour.
People must be able to see an alternative to terrorism
and other criminality and have the opportunity to
make a conscious choice for development and creation.
Contributions to achieving socioeconomic development
projects could be made not only by States but also by
United Nations anti-terrorism bodies and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
together with specialized economic organizations such
as the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the Food and Agriculture Organization, the Economic
Commission for Europe and regional bodies such as
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Commonwealth
of Independent States. This type of synergy would
open a new chapter in international donorship, uniting
cooperative development with the fight against
terrorism and other criminality.
We believe it is particularly important to involve
the business community in such efforts. In dealing
with the challenges of preventing terrorism, this would
help to weaken the socioeconomic basis of criminality,
which as a rule puts down deep roots precisely in those
places where poverty and unemployment prevail and
the conditions for normal life are lacking. Partnerships
with business are also useful for developing effective
measures for ensuring the rights of victims of terrorism,
including
compensation
through
transnational
insurance and reinsurance models for major acts of
terrorism.
Russia was the initiator of an international project
partnering States with businesses in the fight against
terrorism. At the proposal of the Russian presidency

13-20590

S/PV.6900

of the Group of Eight, a major conference was held
in Moscow in 2006 to lay the foundations for such
cooperation and seeing fulfilment in the form of
numerous projects both in Russia itself and at the
international level. In our view, it is currently important
to support the decision, taken on Russia’s initiative in
April 2012, of the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice to begin work on establishing the
foundations of international cooperation in providing
security in the area of tourism from terrorist and other
criminal threats. As part of a public-private partnership,
a project is being developed under the auspices of the
United Nations and the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute to prevent the
flow of precious metals into the hands of terrorists and
other criminals.
It is essential that efforts be continued to trace
and cut off financial sources supporting terrorism. On
Russia’s initiative, the Financial Action Task Force is
working on such relevant issues as exposing financial
flows from the illegal production and trade of Afghan
narcotics, a significant part of which goes to financing
terrorism. Needless to say, finding solutions to these
new challenges should in no way be seen as undermining
the law-enforcement components of counter-terrorism,
including information exchange, the conduct of joint
anti-terrorist workshops and operations, cooperation on
the criminal prosecution of terrorists and their resulting
punishment, the suppression of financing, delivery of
arms and other forms of support, as well as cooperation
with training qualified staff and improving national
legislation.
These challenges can be met only on the basis
of a firm commitment to the principles laid down in
the United Nations Charter and the decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Above
all, we are talking about respecting States’ sovereignty,
non-interference in their internal affairs, observing
human rights and fundamental freedoms, condemning
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, wherever
and by whomever terrorist acts may be committed,
and refraining from supporting such criminal activity
in any way. It is categorically unacceptable to depart
in any way from the international community’s
principled and consolidated position unconditionally
condemning and actively combating terrorism. Political
unscrupulousness in that regard will lead to an objective
increase in the risks of terrorism.

13-20590

Combating international terrorism remains a
priority of Russia’s foreign policy. We support the
draft presidential statement to be delivered as a result
of today’s meeting, emphasizing the importance
of strengthening the comprehensive approach to
international anti-terrorist cooperation under United
Nations auspices. We wish to continue the dialogue
and constructive cooperation in this area with all
States Members of the United Nations, with the aim of
increasing confidence in and unswerving compliance
with international law.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Thank you,
Madam, for having convened this very important
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and participation today.
I would like to express once again our deepest
condolences for the horrific attacks in Pakistan last
week that killed more than 100 people. The United
States stands with the Pakistani people in strongly
condemning these senseless and inhumane acts, which
unfortunately remind us that the scourge of terrorism
remains with us all. We therefore very much appreciate
Pakistan’s drawing the Council’s attention back to this
critical issue.
Reflecting on the past decade, the Security
Council’s sustained commitment to counter-terrorism
has been significant. We have continued to promote a
holistic approach to combating terrorism, strengthening
counter-terrorism efforts at the national, regional and
international levels.
We cannot grow complacent. Even as core
Al-Qaida has experienced major setbacks, it survives
and continues to threaten us all. Moreover, its affiliates
and other violent extremist groups pose grave dangers.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is a significant
international threat. Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM) and Al-Shabaab continue to sow instability
and exploit safe havens in Mali, the Sahel and the Horn
of Africa, destabilizing societies and obstructing the
delivery of vital humanitarian relief to millions in need.
Elements of Boko Haram in Nigeria have launched
multiple deadly attacks, including against the United
Nations, and transnational terrorist groups remain
active in North Africa, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Syria and elsewhere.
The resilience of terrorist networks underscores
the fact that long-term diplomatic and economic
initiatives, as well as international cooperation, are as

15

S/PV.6900

always indispensible. While we have made progress
together, terrorist groups continue to adapt, evolving
into criminal entrepreneurs and engaging in trafficking
and other illicit activities to finance their operations.
AQIM, for example, has increasingly used kidnapping
for ransom to support its organization and finance
terrorist attacks. Kidnapping for ransom is not only
horrific for the victims and their families, but represents
a serious threat to international peace and security that
will likely continue to pose a significant challenge in
the years ahead. The international community must do
much more to combat this scourge.
With the terrorist threat ever more diffuse, the
need for a strategic and comprehensive approach to
counter-terrorism has never been greater. The United
States recognizes that force, while necessary, is not
nearly sufficient to counter the threat effectively over
the long term. We must also prioritize building State
capacity, strengthening good governance and civilian
institutions, promoting economic development and job
creation, countering extremism and reducing the appeal
of violence and the pipeline of terrorist recruits so that
Member States and their citizens are better equipped to
tackle threats within their borders and regions.
At the same time, the United States has intensified
our capacity-building assistance to help countries
secure their borders, thwart attacks, prosecute terrorists
and those who abet them, and neutralize extremism
and its root causes. We have trained more than 9,800
law enforcement officials from over 50 countries in
the past year alone. United States legal advisers are
working with host country Governments worldwide
to build justice sector capacity to deal with terrorism.
Our trans-Sahara counter-terrorism partnership
has provided several countries in the Sahel and the
Maghreb with training and support to tighten border
security, promote economic assistance, disrupt terrorist
networks and prevent attacks. By uniting civilian,
criminal justice and military experts, this programme
pursues a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism.
In addition, we established the Center for Strategic
Counterterrorism Communications to confront and
rebut Al-Qaida and extremist propaganda online.
The United States values its partnership with
the United Nations on counter-terrorism, and our
cooperation has produced results. For example, since
effective prison management and good correctional
practices can reduce the risk of radicalization, the
United States has worked with the United Nations

16

Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute to
develop the Rome good practices on the rehabilitation
and reintegration of violent extremist offenders. We
look forward to close cooperation between the United
Nations and the new Hedayah International Center of
Excellence for Countering Violent Extremism in Abu
Dhabi, which will assist experts to develop tools for
countering extremist ideology and blunting the spread
of radicalism. Strengthening cooperation at the United
Nations and other multilateral organizations and
ensuring that the necessary architecture is in place to
address terrorism in the twenty-first century remains
central to our approach.
The United Nations has worked actively to build
consensus around the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and deliver technical assistance to strengthen
capacities worldwide. The United Nations has a critical
role to play as a forum for advancing collective action
against terrorism. The United States welcomes the
Secretary-General’s initiative to appoint a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator and unify the
United Nations counter-terrorism architecture so that
expertise and resources can be deployed as efficiently
as possible.
We hope for even deeper cooperation between
the United Nations and the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum in the coming year as the Forum promotes the
implementation of its framework documents on the
rule of law, prisons and preventing kidnapping for
ransom. We look forward to working in the Security
Council and with Member States to further strengthen
implementation of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime.
A key lesson of the past decade is the significant
value that civil society can add to counter-terrorism
efforts. Victims and victims associations, for example,
have played important roles in preventing terrorism.
We encourage all relevant United Nations actors to
intensify engagement with and support for civil society
on counter-terrorism objectives and combating violent
extremism.
No single country, no one organization and no
particular tactic or tool alone can neutralize the threat
of terrorism. Only a comprehensive approach, bolstered
by our shared determination, our continued cooperation
and expanding partnerships can ultimately end the
threat of global terrorism.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, Argentina wishes to express its sincere

13-20590

S/PV.6900

condolences to the people and Government of Pakistan
and to the families of victims of the recent terrorist
attacks in that country.
I congratulate Pakistan on having assumed this
month’s presidency of the Security Council and on the
effectiveness and transparency with which the Pakistani
delegation has been guiding our work. I further wish
to thank you, Madam, for having convened this very
important and timely debate on one of the greatest
threats to international peace and security. We are
pleased in particular that you are presiding over this
meeting.
Terrorism is a threat to life, human dignity, peaceful
and civilized coexistence, and international peace and
security. We believe that a comprehensive approach
to the problem is not only the most appropriate but in
fact the only approach with the potential to succeed. In
that regard, the approach proposed by the presidency
to addressing the issue of terrorism could not be more
timely.
Argentina is convinced that the United Nations
has a priority role to play in multilateral action. In that
respect, we consider the Assembly and the Security
Council and their relevant subsidiary bodies to be the
most appropriate forums for effective action to prevent
and eradicate terrorism. These are the bodies where we
are able to take the best decisions, and whose critical
effectiveness and legitimacy encourage joint action.
In this connection, we believe that the Council should
continue to work to ensure that these bodies are more
effective and transparent, and that they be endowed with
an appropriate mechanism to review the measures they
take. In all cases, such bodies should resolve problems
without creating consquences for the population in
general.
In September 2005, the former President of my
country, Mr. Néstor Kirchner, stated forcefully at
the Security Council summit that new threats to
international peace and security, such as terrorism,
“make us understand at last the true meaning of
solidarity among nations” (S/PV.5261, p. 6). In the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, a comprehensive approach to this
matter strengthens our work in those areas where
there is the greatest deficit, principally with regard to
conditions that lead to the spread of terrorism and its
financing, such as ensuring respect for human rights
and the rule of law as the bases for our fight against
terrorism.
13-20590

Neither religious nor ethnic differences nor
economic circumstances can justify terrorist acts.
On the other hand, tolerance and the rule of law,
with full social inclusion and dignified work, foster
an environment that counters the spread of terrorism
and fights this scourge, as recognized in the draft
presidential statement to be adopted by the Council.
Argentina’s tragic experience of State terrorism,
which led to massive and systematic violations of
human rights, has led us to strengthen State policies
in various areas of human rights, in particular with
regard to memory, truth, justice and redress. In this
framework, we galvanized international support for
the progressive development of the right to truth with
the recent creation of a Special Rapporteur in the
Human Rights Council, and promoted the adoption of
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
Moreover, my country has suffered directly from
international terrorism as the victim of two serious
bombings in Buenos Aires in 1992 against the embassy
of Israel and in 1994 against the headquarters of the
Argentine-Israeli Mutual Association, which is one of
the most important social organizations in Argentina.
Those acts killed more than 100 people, whose memory
is honoured by the Argentine people. A number of
victims and their families survive. Together with the
Government, they must walk the path towards truth,
justice and redress. That experience has reaffirmed
our conviction that terrorism must be fought in
the framework of the rule of law and respect for
fundamental freedoms. The struggle should be carried
out in full respect for the law, including respect for due
process and human rights.
Terrorism, as one of the so-called new threats,
is an illicit act with the capacity to affect domestic
security and undermine public institutions. Actions
to counteract it must correspond to the genuine risk
faced by each country as it identifies threats in order to
prioritize prevention. In Argentina, we have conferred
upon the Ministry of National Security the leader role
in coordinating inter-agency policy among the various
agencies that are competent in this field. For its part,
the Secretariat for Intelligence directs and coordinates
the national intelligence system through its practical
relationship with national intelligence bodies and
forums.
In that regard, we believe that the Security Council
must commit its efforts, thorugh its relevant bodies,
17

S/PV.6900

to promoting international cooperation in this area.
This includes judicial cooperation, both with regard
to extradiction and mutual assistance and in the fight
against the financing of terrorism. To this end, we
urge Member States to incorporate and apply in their
internal legislation international legal instruments and
United Nations resolutions relating to terrorism, so as
to ensure that those who are accused of such crimes
cannot exploit legal vacuums in order to evade justice.
Within the multilateral and regional systems, we
must work on speedy and effective mechanisms to freeze
terrorist funds, taking into account the importance
of dismantling the economic structures that support
such organizations. In our case, we drafted a law for
the effective implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001) with regard to the procedure for the
official freezing of funds related to this crime. It has
been implemented by the competent body on fugitives
associated with State terrorism and who are being
investigated for crimes against humanity.
Before ending, I would stress that the leadership
is in the hands of the Organization, but its work is
complemented, as required by the Charter of the
United Nations, by subregional and regional efforts
and by specialized agencies cooperating on matters
of global intererst. One example of this is port and
aeroport security and border controls, in which we must
all continue to cooperate because they are additional,
critical elements in our joint action against international
terrorism.
In conclusion, I affirm that the Argentine Republic
supports the draft presidential statement to be read out
by the President on behalf of the Security Council.
Mr. Esaw (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
allow me to convey the condolences and solidarity of
our country following the terrorist acts that recently
struck the people of Pakistan. I would also like to
commend your country for organizing today’s debate
on the question of a comprehensive approach to counterterrorism and to welcome the presence in New York of
Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan, to preside over this meeting. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General, not only for his briefing
on the topic under discussion, but also for all his efforts
and for the ongoing United Nations initiatives to curb
terrorism.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic

18

Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
In recent years, terrorism has become one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
Indeed, the killings, kidnappings, hostage-taking and
murders committed and called for by terrorists are
serious violations of the rights to life and to live in a
peaceful environment. Terrorism threatens the very
survival of States. Consequently, this scourge remains
the focus of the attention of the international community
and especially of the Security Council. Today’s debate
is a perfect illustration of that.
Unfortunately, the tireless efforts to deal with it
are far from achieving the expected results because
terrorists take advantage of cutting-edge technologies
and financial resources derived from criminal acts
of all kinds, such as illicit trafficking in drugs and
the payment of ransoms, in order to reorganize. In
addition, the propensity of terrorists often to operate
through business enterprises, associations and
non-governmental organizations, which comprise their
support networks, further complicates the fight against
terrorism. As a result, the threats become more complex
and require our States to devote significant resources to
the fight against terrorism at a time when they must
also face many challenges that are urgent in many ways
because they are related to the fight against poverty and
the achievement of sustainable development goals.
Given its various manifestations and mutations, it
is important to define the phenomenon of terrorism in
order to better fight it. It is therefore necessary to better
understand the reasons and motives that drive actors
to turn to terrorism. As we know, it more generally
feeds off of situations of social vulnerability and the
frustrations of individuals, especially young people,
who are willing to offer their services for sordid causes
in order to survive. Development and security thus
interact on the levels of both causes of terrorism and its
consequences.
It is also important to remember that religious
fundamentalism and sectarianism act as leavening
agents for terrorism. Based on beliefs, dogmas and
membership in a community, criminal groups use that
form of expression, intolerant and uncompromising, as
a means to assert their opinions.
Another motive may be related to the
internationalization of economies and societies,
which has made the process of change more global

13-20590

S/PV.6900

and complex, creating a situation in which the State
finds itself competing with and sometimes defeated
by private interests dominated more by the pursuit of
profit than by other values related to human dignity.
Unfortunately, the economic and financial crises
of recent years, which no nation was able to stave off,
have further widened the gap between rich and poor
and have led to frustration, despair and even to losing
the reason to live. It is that vulnerability that terrorist
organizations and groups exploit when they recruit
desperate people to carry out their demands through
terrorist acts, behind which they hide and for which
they claim responsibility so that they can bask in the
prestige of being fighters for justice.
The spectrum of factors leading to the spread of
terrorism is therefore broad. However, my delegation
believes that even if poverty, discrimination and
prejudice are factors that feed terrorism, no justification
can prevail in the commission of criminal acts when
there are frameworks for dialogue, negotiation and a
search for compromise in which the various actors can
assert their claims or views.
Given the scale of the terrorist acts that undermine
societies and bring about disastrous consequences for
States and entire regions — as is the case for the Sahel
region, including Mali, and in Somalia — the international
community must remain constantly mobilized. We
therefore welcome the counter-terrorism efforts
in the United Nations framework, particularly the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which represents the willingness of Member States to
develop a common strategic approach to fight terrorism
effectively and sustainably. In that regard, my country
welcomes the recent review of the Strategy, which
allows for continuous updating of the various aspects
that need to be addressed in the light of the changing
nature of terrorism,
The commitment of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to allow States to
have the capacity needed to deal with this scourge must
also be welcomed. In addition, Togo fully supports the
work of the Security Council committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
1373 (2001), and 1540 (2004), which are also at the
heart of the United Nations response to terrorism.
My country has always made the fight against
terrorism one of the top priorities of its actions. It has

13-20590

also adopted the framework made up by the various
legal instruments adopted under the auspices of the
United Nations and regional organizations such as the
African Union, which aim to improve the effectiveness
of States’ responses and those of the international
community with regard to the numerous manifestations
of terrorism.
Although there are a number of anti-terrorist legal
instruments in force for the purpose of strengthening
international anti-terrorist mechanisms, a general
convention on international terrorism should be
adopted to fill the gaps in existing treaties and to
strengthen international efforts designed to bring the
perpetrators of terrorist acts to justice. In that regard,
we believe that the consideration by States Members
of the United Nations of certain provisions of existing
regional legal texts, such as the Organization of African
Unity Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, of 14 July 1999, and its Protocol of 8 July
2004, could help to overcome the difficulties related to
the conclusion of an international convention.
Because of the impact of poverty, inequality and
intolerance of all sorts in the spread of terrorism, we
believe that the security and legal dimensions of the
fight against terrorism cannot be effective unless they
are also considered in the light of efforts related to
good governance, economic development, the creation
of viable democratic institutions, the strengthening of
the dialogue among civilizations, respect for cultural
differences and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Furthermore, the fight against terrorism should also
take human rights into account and promote their
effective implementation.
In other words, all measures taken to prevent and
fight against terrorism must respect the principle of the
rule of law and operate in accordance with international
law, including humanitarian law, international human
rights law and refugee law. In that regard, the United
Nations could commit to working towards model
legislation on terrorism-related offences, as specified
in the relevant conventions and protocols, as it had to
do when it acted in the areas of money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism.
A comprehensive approach to the fight against
terrorism cannot be effective unless it takes place in the
context of sustained international cooperation. Synergy
of action, the sharing of information between the
different institutions involved in the fight and technical
and financial assistance are essential to achieve, in the
19

S/PV.6900

short and medium terms, the eradication of the constant
threat hanging over all countries and all peoples.
Togo believes that it is through combined actions
at the bilateral, regional and international levels that
States, especially the less affluent, may expect to
fight effectively against terrorism. To that end, the
central coordinating role of the United Nations must be
reaffirmed and supported by all States.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Pakistani presidency of the Security
Council for its timely initiative in holding this important
debate on a comprehensive approach to counterterrorism. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful briefing and express our appreciation to the
Secretariat and the relevant United Nations entities for
their contribution to counter-terrorism activities.
Azerbaijan knows about the scourge of terrorism,
and not from hearsay. My country has repeatedly
been a target of terrorist attacks. The activity of wellknown State-sponsored international terrorist groups,
the ideology of which is based on historical, racial and
religious prejudice and hatred, is a serious threat to
Azerbaijan’s national security and to the security of our
region as a whole.
It was not a coincidence that Azerbaijan decided to
focus on the issue of combating terrorism as a central
theme of its presidency of the Security Council last
year. On 4 May 2012, Azerbaijan organized a highlevel meeting of the Security Council on strengthening
international cooperation in the implementation of
counter-terrorism obligations (see S/PV.6765). As an
important outcome of that, a presidential statement
was adopted (S/PRST/2012/17). In his address to the
Security Council, the President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan, Mr. Ilham Aliyev, underlined
“We must all join our efforts to combat
terrorism. The nature of terrorism today and
its increasing connection with other threats to
international peace and security require close
international cooperation among States, including
through the establishment of a more coordinated,
coherent and systematic United Nations approach”
(S/PV.6765, p. 23).
The President of Azerbaijan also outlined the
concrete threats and challenges faced by my country
and provided a comprehensive analysis and assessment
in that regard.

20

My
Government
has
continually
taken
comprehensive measures to fully implement its
respective international obligations and to contribute
to the global fight against this scourge. We strongly
support and actively work for more strengthened
international cooperation to that end.
It is pertinent to mention that, in furtherance of our
efforts, on 18 and 19 March, Azerbaijan will host an
international conference on strengthening cooperation
in preventing terrorism, co-organized by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
The conference will bring together Heads of State
and Government, ministers, heads of international
organizations, prominent persons and members of
civil society and academia. Its objectives include
initiating an in-depth and forward-looking exchange
of views on challenges to and opportunities for
countering terrorism, reviewing the ways of promoting
international cooperation and, most importantly,
generating concrete ideas and project proposals for
providing technical assistance to national authorities
with a view to strengthening their capacities.
With its changing nature and character, terrorism
poses a serious threat to international peace and security
and to the political independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and social and economic development of
all States. Today, when our world continues to suffer
from terrorism and terrorist acts, in their frequency
and magnitude, claim the lives of innocent people
and undermine peace and security, a comprehensive
approach to combating this scourge through concerted
and coordinated international actions remains vital.
The international community, including through
United Nations efforts, has achieved tangible results in
countering terrorism. At the same time, a number of
critical areas continue to require our constant attention.
I would like to emphasize some of them.
Conflict-affected territories, especially those
under foreign military occupation, often provide fertile
ground for terrorists and other non-State actors, who
use terrorism as a means of achieving their illegal
goals. The accumulation of armaments and ammunition
in those territories beyond international control and the
risk of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and related materials to non-State actors pose a serious
threat to regional and international peace and security.

13-20590

S/PV.6900

While recognizing the significance of addressing
all conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, in
line with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, we stress the need to intensify conflictresolution efforts on the basis of the generally accepted
norms and principles of international law, particularly
those relating to respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and inviolability of the internationally
recognized borders of States.
The full implementation of international legal
obligations by all States is fundamentally important.
However, it is not sufficient to simply mention that
objective. A large number of States encounter capacity
gaps in implementing their respective obligations.
Addressing that perennial problem should remain at
the core of international counter-terrorism efforts. We
appreciate the role of the relevant United Nations entities
in facilitating technical assistance to Member States.
At the same time, in order to respond effectively and
in a timely manner to the various security challenges
posed by terrorism, it is essential that Member States
themselves strengthen their cooperation through
bilateral and multilateral mechanisms on the issue of
capacity-building assistance.
The war on terrorism cannot and must not be used
to target any religion or culture. That principle must be
part and parcel of any counter-terrorism strategy. All
States should be united in supporting various initiatives
on intercultural and interreligious dialogue, such as the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the culture
of peace initiative. Strengthening cooperation within
those initiatives will serve to prevent misconceptions,
defamatory manifestations and deliberate labelling of
religions and contribute to the efficiency of counterterrorism efforts.
As a responsible member of the Group of Friends
of the Alliance of Civilizations, Azerbaijan is actively
engaged in promoting interreligious and intercultural
dialogue. We therefore recently organized a number
of high-profile and action-oriented events, including
the World Summit of Religious Leaders and the World
Forum on Intercultural Dialogue.
In conclusion, we welcome the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later in today’s meeting. It is
aimed at developing counter-terrorism cooperation
under the auspices of the United Nations. Azerbaijan
will continue to contribute to that work through
international cooperation based on strict adherence to
the norms and principles of international law.
13-20590

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Let me join others in
thanking Her Excellency Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, for organizing
this important debate and for her commendable
statement. I also welcome the statement made by the
Secretary-General.
Rwanda reiterates its strong condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as it
constitutes one of the most serious threats to international
peace, security and development. Terrorism violates
not only the Charter of the United Nations but also
the principles and values of the Constitutive Act of the
African Union.
My Government has ratified the 14 universal
instruments against international terrorism, as
elaborated within the framework of the United Nations
system, relating to specific terrorist activities and has
also embraced the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, together with its plan of action. My
country has also ratified the 1999 Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism of the former
Organization of African Unity.
My delegation commends and encourages the
efforts and activities undertaken by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its relevant bodies
and agencies in the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to address the
threats to international peace and security caused by
extremism, violence and terrorism.
We also commend the African Union, which, in
an effort to translate the commitment of its members
into concrete actions, established in 2004 the African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism,
headquartered in Algiers. The main objective of the
Centre is to strengthen cooperation among African
countries, to prevent and combat terrorism and to assist
in the full implementation of international conventions
relating to terrorism. In that respect, Rwanda expresses
its continued engagement with international and
regional partners, both bilateral and multilateral, in
order to contribute to an enhanced coordination of
international efforts to prevent and combat terrorism.
Rwanda firmly believes that effective and
prevention-focused counter-terrorism measures require
adequate national legal and institutional frameworks,
including a strong criminal justice element that is rooted
in the core principles of the rule of law, due process
and respect for human rights. In that respect, Rwanda

21

S/PV.6900

has implemented, through a legal and institutional
framework, the recommendations of resolution 1373
(2001), including the establishment of a national
counter-terrorism committee with a national focal
point, comprising members of the different national
security organs, and a functional counter-terrorism unit
within the Rwanda National Police.
Our country has also adopted legislation on the
prevention and penalization of money laundering and
the financing of terrorism. That led to the establishment
of the Financial Investigation Unit, as part of the
Rwanda National Police, which operates within the
National Bank of Rwanda. Rwanda is also a member
of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money
Laundering Group and the East African Police Chiefs
Cooperation Organization. Both those organizations
were inspired by the Organization of African Unity’s
1999 Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism and are in line with the spirit of resolution
1373 (2001).
In a Security Council open debate on counterterrorism such as today’s, it is important for Rwanda
to condemn acts of terrorism around the world. We are
particularly concerned about the scourge of terrorism
in Africa, which could spread across the continent if we
do not combat it. We condemn Al- Shaabab in Somalia,
Ansar Dine and other Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghrebaffiliated organizations in Mali and North Africa, Boko
Haram in Nigeria and other terrorist organizations on
the continent.
Terrorists are the enemy of peace and stability.
Unfortunately, the conflicts and situations of
statelessness in a number of countries in Africa
provide a fresh breeding ground for terrorism. It
is not a coincidence that terrorists regularly attack
peacekeepers and threaten countries that contribute
them. Therefore, resolving conflicts on the continent
is an absolute priority, not only to bring peace and
stability for the present but also to serve as a preventive
measure against widespread terrorism on the continent.
Another preventive measure against terrorism is of
course to address the root causes. Rwanda believes that
there can be no justification whatsoever for terrorism.
Nonetheless, we all know that poverty, unemployment,
bad governance and injustice feed terrorism around
the world. In that regard, terrorism in the Arab world
is also a reminder that there is an urgent need for the
international community to find a lasting solution to

22

the longest conflict on the Council’s agenda, namely,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
While regional and international efforts are making
progress in the combat against terrorism and in the
resolution of regional conflicts, attention should also
be paid to terrorist organizations that change names
and acronyms upon being classified as terrorists. They
later masquerade as political organizations, yet have
all the characteristics of terrorists. A case in point is
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda,
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
They are the product of the Armée pour la libération
du Rwanda, which, upon being blacklisted as a terrorist
movement, changed its name and acronym but retained
all its terrorist characteristics.
I will conclude by expressing our sympathy to
Pakistan, which, as Minister Hina Rabbani Khar said,
is “one of the biggest victims of terrorism”. In that
connection, we particularly pay a symbolic tribute
to Malala Yousafzai for her extraordinary courage. I
also wish to pay tribute to those who continue to work
tirelessly for the well-being of the victims and who
speak out against terrorism, extremism and violence.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the delegation of Pakistan for having
convened this open debate. Our thanks also go to
Pakistan’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Hina
Rabbani Khar, for presiding over it. We are also
grateful for the concept note that has been distributed
in the annex to document S/2013/3. We appreciate the
presence of the Secretary-General and thank him for
his presentation.
From a national perspective, it could be maintained
that terrorism is not an endemic evil in my country
or, in more general terms, our Latin American region.
However, from a broader perspective, we find in
that phenomenon one of the greatest challenges that
humanity faces. That is why we categorically reject
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
its origin. There is simply no pretext to inflict on
innocent persons the horrors, suffering and costs of
that scourge. We believe that a terrorist act, wherever it
occurs, such as the one that took place in your country,
Mr. President, a few days ago, harms and causes
offense to all the planet’s inhabitants. That is also why
we must take preventive actions and develop decisive
and collective responses in the context of international
cooperation.

13-20590

S/PV.6900

The United Nations plays a fundamental role in
that area. Besides the body of international conventions
and their protocols designed to combat terrorism,
since 2006 we have depended on the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which we generally
update every two years. Furthermore, the Council has
placed itself at the forefront of mobilizing international
cooperation against terrorism. It is unnecessary to list
the numerous resolutions that refer directly or indirectly
to this matter, or to the bodies established to that end.
As the Strategy expressly notes, the fight against
terrorism is not limited to the realm of espionage,
defence and security. It is equally or maybe even more
important to address the causes conducive to the spread
of terrorism, that motivate individuals or groups to use
indiscriminate violence against innocent persons, or at
least incite the use of violence and xenophobia. This
encompasses a broad thematic agenda, ranging from
the promotion of economic and social development
to the strengthening of the institutions of democratic
governance and the rule of law. It also entails addressing
the sources of strong tension that reflect a background
of ethnic, religious or ideological differences in the
context of mobilizing the classical instruments of
conflict prevention. This requires assigning a special
role to the virtue of tolerance in the values that we wish
to instil in each of our societies and at the international
level. At the same time, we must take care to avoid
using counter-terrorism measures as a pretext to violate
the basic human rights of our respective populations.
Given the multidimensional character of
this phenomenon, it is difficult to speak about
a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism
without mentioning the need to adopt the longoverdue comprehensive convention on terrorism as
soon as possible. In weighing the added value of a
comprehensive convention that would supplement
existing instruments to counter international terrorism,
we find merit, among other aspects, in the following.
First, a comprehensive convention would contribute
to preventing impunity for those who commit acts of
terrorism, which are currently one of the major threats
to international peace and security; secondly, it would
facilitate cooperation and mutual legal assistance
among States to bring to justice those responsible
for such acts; thirdly, it would offer a definition for
terrorism, allowing for the universal criminalization
of such despicable activity; and fourthly, it would fill
existing gaps in the work of the Security Council, and

13-20590

in particular of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), and the measures applied by the
sanctions committees.
Furthermore, we are concerned about the specific
issue of the link between organized transnational crime
and terrorism. This topic is briefly touched upon both
in the concept note circulated by the delegation of
Pakistan and in the draft presidential statement whose
text we will approve this morning. The common aspect
shared by some of the criminal cartels that operate in
our own region with terrorist groups is the absolute
disdain with which they treat human life. There is
already abundant evidence that terrorist groups accede
to criminal activities to finance their violent actions,
but we can also foresee the day when criminal cartels
accede to terrorist activities as part of their strategy of
accumulating illicit wealth.
The need for a comprehensive and holistic approach
to address this complex phenomenon, as suggested in
the concept note, leads us to one final reflection on the
imperative of achieving a greater level of coherence
among the different efforts being undertaken by the
United Nations to meet the challenge of terrorism.
The creation of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force in 2005 marked a step in the right direction,
but one can question whether the goal of coherence is
benefitted by the arguably excessive decentralization of
the efforts of the Security Council to combat terrorism
in its diverse subsidiary bodies, including those
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 1540 (2004).
We entertain the same doubts regarding the
level of coordination between the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the various
departments of the Secretariat that service the work
of the General Assembly. This is neither the place nor
the time to make specific proposals on how to achieve
greater coherence within the United Nations system in
the area of counter-terrorism, but we members of the
Security Council should at least begin to discuss among
ourselves whether there is enough internal coherence
in the work entrusted to the aforementioned sanctions
committees.
At any rate, we greatly value the work of the United
Nations in combating terrorism in support of Member
States, which ultimately share the main responsibility
in facing this grave scourge.

23

S/PV.6900

Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for Pakistan’s leadership in hosting this debate. We
know that Pakistan is on the front line of terrorism.
The terrible attacks in Quetta, the Swat Valley and
elsewhere in Pakistan in the past week have been a
stark reminder of this. In the face of that violence, the
example of Malala Yousafzai and her fellow students is
inspirational. It must strengthen our determination to
oppose terrorism and it must be our beacon.
Terrorism is still one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security and therefore must
remain a decisive focus for the Council. The threat is
now more diffuse and decentralized, but the fact is that
in the past few years some 12,000 people have been
killed in terrorist attacks annually, and States and
regions are still destabilized. The nature of the threat
and the methods and strategies of terrorist groups are
constantly evolving and presenting new risks. We are
now engaged against terrorism’s direct threat in Mali
and the Sahel.
Of course, States’ understanding of the most
effective ways to tackle terrorism has also evolved.
Evidence and experience are accumulating, enabling us
to refine approaches and improve our effectiveness. We
know that good intelligence, strong law enforcement
and prosecutions are important, but we also know that
they are not enough. We must also tackle the drivers of
terrorism, the terrorist narrative and the processes of
radicalization.
The Security Council shares a strong commitment
against terrorism. That is very clear from all the
comments that have been made today, so I will limit
my comments to addressing two crucial elements of
a comprehensive approach: effective prevention, and
strengthened cooperation and coordination within and
between States.
States have had considerable success in prosecuting
terrorists and degrading major terrorist networks. That
is certainly the case in Australia’s own region of SouthEast Asia, where, for example, Indonesia has prosecuted
more than 600 terrorists since the Bali bombings in
2002. However, that shared law enforcement success
has also exposed a key challenge: prisons are, in many
cases, a weak link in our counter-terrorism efforts.
Terrorists continue to recruit and plan attacks from
prison, and the reality is that many prisoners are now
beginning to be released.

24

Effectively managing and rehabilitating extremist
detainees is therefore increasingly important for
prevention. Sharing best practices and developing
common strategies for that is essential. The Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum’s work in that area has been
highlighted today. Australia, Indonesia and other
South-East Asian countries are using that work to
develop regional approaches.
Terrorist organizations continue to recruit new
members and sympathizers. To defeat terrorism,
we must counter the forces that drive it. That means
strengthening our societies to reject violent extremism.
Approaches will vary depending upon circumstances,
but some common elements include the following.
The first is ensuring inclusive communities where
everyone has a voice and where everyone has access
to education, with strong curriculums, and access to
work. The world is experiencing a tremendous youth
bulge. As China’s Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai
said this morning, the average age of terrorists is
decreasing. Youth unemployment remains one of the
greatest vulnerabilities in all regions and societies. We
need to make urgent progress in engaging youth in our
societies, most basically by generating jobs.
The second is promoting values that, when broadly
subscribed, can help communities resist the terrorists’
message. Those values include tolerance, understanding
and dialogue within and between religions and cultures,
as well as respect for diversity.
The third is strengthening the rule of law and
ensuring fairness and equality before the law, so as to
remove a potential grievance that is often exploited by
terrorists.
Clearly, States need to be innovative in using
modern communications to promote those values. The
Internet provides a perfect medium for terrorists to
recruit, propagate their ideology and secure financing.
Research is showing that young people — those most
susceptible to extremists’ messaging — are more
familiar with the terrorist narrative than they are with
the positive counter-narrative. Governments need to
drive the debate on the Internet and through social
media to ensure that their positive messaging is heard
above the extremists’ messaging.
We must also continue to communicate the values
of tolerance, understanding, equality and diversity at
the international level. The Alliance of Civilizations

13-20590

S/PV.6900

and interfaith dialogue, such as the regional dialogue
we have had in South-East Asia for the past decade, are
still crucial.

leadership and for convening this important debate on
counter-terrorism. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his introductory briefing.

An effective, comprehensive approach to terrorism
also demands strong collaboration and coordination
nationally, regionally and globally.

First of all, on behalf of my country, I would like to
extend my deepest condolences to you, Mr. President,
your country and the bereaved and distressed families
who suffered from the hideous terrorist attacks in
Quetta last week.

Effective coordination at the national level requires
systematic cooperation between law enforcement
agencies and with other agencies that are better equipped
to address the causes of terrorism, such as agencies
for youth, culture, religion, education and community
affairs. That means frequent communication about
threats, operations and long-term objectives.
States also need to strengthen collaboration with
regional networks. We have learned from experience
with the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation the real benefits of bringing together
regional law-enforcement professionals for training in
a dedicated facility. The Centre has trained more than
12,000 officers and, in the process, built understanding
of the common challenges and diverse needs of the AsiaPacific region, strengthened personal relationships
that deliver cooperation across borders, and developed
a sense of common purpose. We need more of those
regional facilities in other regions. Australia is
committed to working with others to achieve that.
At the global level, effective coordination among
United Nations entities is necessary to promote a
comprehensive approach. The appointment of a United
Nations counter-terrorism coordinator would enhance
strategic and operational cohesion and should happen.
As others have mentioned, more cooperation is needed
globally to prevent the financing of terrorism. We also
need to further mainstream the analysis of terrorism,
its causes and measures to address it into the United
Nations peace and security agenda, including the
mandates of political missions and peacebuilding
efforts.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that, as a newly
elected member of the Security Council, Australia will
continue to strongly support the Council’s ongoing
efforts to combat and prevent terrorism. As the threat
continues to evolve, our strategies to counter it also
need to improve. The Council’s role will continue to be
central in that regard. No matter how hard the task, we
must be a step ahead.
Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for demonstrating your
13-20590

Over the past decade, the international community
has made concerted and cooperative efforts and achieved
progress in countering terrorism, such as significantly
weakening Al-Qaida’s core group in Afghanistan.
However, terrorism continues to be a serious threat
to international peace and security. Al-Qaida is still
a source of security concern, as its regional affiliates
continue to expand their influence in such regions as
northern Mali and the southern Arabian peninsula.
There is also the growing threat of home-grown
terrorism. Moreover, terrorist organizations have now
begun to build a nexus with other transnational criminal
operations, such as drug trafficking, kidnapping, the
illicit trade in arms and piracy. Terrorist organizations
are becoming more sophisticated and constantly finding
new ways to extend their reach through the use of the
Internet and other information and communication
technologies. Furthermore, the fear that terrorists may
acquire weapons of mass destruction lingers.
Terrorism can strike in any region and any country
at any time. Individual States alone cannot cope with the
scope, diversity and constant evolution of the terrorist
threat. Effective counter-terrorism efforts require
strong international cooperation in law enforcement,
information-sharing and the suppression of terrorism
financing. It is also crucial that Member States
provide support to other States in capacity-building
and technical assistance. Taking effective measures to
tackle terrorism is impossible without strengthening
the capacity and preparedness of all Member States.
The United Nations has played central roles in leading
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted unanimously by the General
Assembly in 2006, has provided a solid foundation
for comprehensive and systematic counter-terrorism
activities by the international community. As stressed
during its third review in the Assembly, last June, it is
imperative that all Member States fully and faithfully
implement the Strategy in an integrated manner.

25

S/PV.6900

The Republic of Korea welcomes the role of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate in implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions, coordinating individual
States’ efforts, promoting their cooperation and
contributing to the capacity-building of Member States.
We also acknowledge the continuing efforts of
the Secretary-General in maintaining a consistent
and results-driven United Nations approach to
counterterrorism. We commend the improvement
in international coordination through the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. The recent
establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre and its active operation are also laudable.
My Government supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation, contained in his report last year, to
appoint a United Nations counter-terrorism coordinator.
We are of one mind that terrorism cannot be
countered by military means or law enforcement alone,
and that a comprehensive approach is the only way
to deal with new manifestations of terrorism and to
address the conditions conducive to its spread.
First, it is necessary to tackle socioeconomic and
environmental conditions. We need to deal with the
diffusion of violent extremism by marginalized groups.
We need to solve unemployment problems and expand
educational opportunities. Our concerted efforts to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals, including
poverty eradication and sustainable development,
as specified in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, would be a big step in the right
direction. Furthermore, we need to strengthen dialogue,
understanding and tolerance among civilizations,
cultures, peoples and religions.
Secondly, it is essential that the effort to combat
terrorism be in accordance with obligations under
international law and fundamental values such as the
protection of human rights and the rule of law. We
need to ensure that countering terrorism and protecting
human rights are not contradictory, but complementary.
Only then can we win the hearts and minds of those
who are exposed to terrorism’s lure.
Thirdly, it is imperative to deal with the new trend
of using the Internet and social media to incite, recruit
and finance terrorist movements. We need to deny
a virtual safe haven for terrorists and prevent such
misuse of cyberspace. We look forward to in-depth and

26

constructive discussions on this matter at the Seoul
Conference on Cyberspace, to be held in October.
Fourthly, halting the flow of terrorist financing is
one of the fundamental measures to be taken. In that
regard, we acknowledge the roles of the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF) and related regional bodies.
As a member of the FATF, my Government is active
in global efforts to halt the financial flows that fuel
terrorism. We have managed training courses and
shared our own experience in establishing a financial
intelligence unit with other Member States.
Last but not least, we would like to emphasize
that the prevention of the terrorist use of weapons of
mass destruction is the top priority for international
security in the twenty-first century. In March 2012,
the Seoul Nuclear Security Summit produced the Seoul
communiqué, which provides highly comprehensive
and practical measures for the prevention of nuclear
and radioactive terrorism. We encourage the full
implementation of the commitments under the
communiqué. It was with that imperative in mind that
the Secretary-General convened the high-level meeting
on countering nuclear terrorism, with a specific focus
on strengthening the legal framework, in September
2012.
As the new Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Republic of
Korea will work together with Member States to
enhance global efforts to prevent the terrorist use of
weapons of mass destruction. During our term, we
plan to continuously strengthen the Committee and
qualitatively assist Member States in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004).
Through this open debate, I hope that we will
improve our understanding of the terrorist threat and
be reminded of the urgency of promoting cooperation
in countering terrorism. The Republic of Korea
stands ready to actively participate and cooperate in
implementing our comprehensive strategy to counter
terrorism.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Pakistani presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s debate focused on the fight against
terrorism.
I align my delegation with the statement to be made
by the Head of the Delegation of the European Union.

13-20590

S/PV.6900

As Pakistan was the victim last week of several
terrorist attacks, particularly in Quetta, which resulted
in more than 100 deaths, I very much want to express
France’s solidarity with Pakistan in the fight against
terrorism. Those recent attacks are a sad reminder of
the brutality and fanaticism of terrorists.
Terrorism has evolved, but it continues more than
ever to be a serious threat to international peace and
security. The international community must today
confront a loose conglomeration of local organizations
that claim to follow Al-Qaida and whose presence
endangers the security and development of entire
regions, especially in the Sahel and in the Horn of
Africa. We know that terrorist groups take advantage
of regional weaknesses to create safe havens for
themselves, which can become base camps from which
to target neighbouring States or can become hotbeds
of international terrorism. The emergence of such
zones, where trafficking of all kinds fuels terrorism,
represents a very concrete threat and can lead to putting
the very existence of a State in danger.
In resolution 2085 (2012), the Council underlined
the urgency of the situation in northern Mali, which is
a threat to the Malian population and to the stability
of the Sahel, of Africa and of the entire international
community. As members know, since that resolution’s
adoption the threat has become clear, and France
responded to the call from the Malian authorities for
assistance in facing it.

The Council has not ceased to reaffirm that
terrorism constitutes a serious threat to international
peace and security. Resolution 1368 (2001), of
12 September 2001, already affirmed that. It is affirmed
again in the draft presidential statement to be adopted
later today. In confronting the threat, the international
community must display unity and solidarity.
To fight terrorism in a comprehensive manner and
to avoid the emergence of lawless areas conducive
to the development of terrorism, it is essential that
the international community commit to effectively
implementing existing mechanisms and adopt longterm strategies.
First, the effective implementation of international
instruments and the strengthening of international
cooperation are essential to fight terrorism
comprehensively. The United Nations has made possible
the establishment of a legal framework in this area.
The body of United Nations conventions and protocols

13-20590

define the universal obligations to fight terrorism, and
we must continue to insist on their full implementation.
The relevant Council resolutions have also established
obligations in the matter, covering a wide range of
issues that range from combating incitement to commit
terrorist acts, and against financing such acts, to the
use of sanctions.
Beyond the establishment of that legal framework,
the United Nations has made possible stronger
international cooperation, especially through the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which aims to coordinate existing mechanisms and to
strengthen cooperation among States and organizations.
That strengthened cooperation applies in several types
of measures that enable the United Nations to take a
comprehensive approach in the fight against terrorism,
by addressing the causes — eliminating the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism — by helping
States fight terrorism through building their capacity,
and by putting in place measures to ensure respect for
human rights in the anti-terrorist fight. Such efforts
must be pursued.
Lastly, the fight against terrorism must be
integrated into more comprehensive, long-term
strategies. From that perspective, it is essential to put in
place security policies to combat the fragility of States,
which is often a factor in creating conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism. But those security policies
must be accompanied by programmes to encourage
development and good governance. It is therefore
necessary for the international community to provide
assistance designed to strengthen State governance and
institutional capacity — for example, by establishing
regional strategies. That is the approach employed
by the European Union, whose strategy for the Sahel
includes a security component and a development
component.
Strengthening capacities and promoting the
rule of law are two essential components for a longterm approach in the fight against terrorism. States
threatened by the activity of terrorist groups should
be able to benefit from political and operational
cooperation among States, especially at the regional
level. For instance, France is participating in the setting
up of judicial anti-terrorism hubs in Mauritania and
the Niger and encouraging training for judges, for it
is essential that those States have the means to judge
and sentence terrorists, while respecting human rights.
While a comprehensive approach to counter-terrorism

27

S/PV.6900

can sometimes require exceptional measures, it must
also be part of a long-term strategy.
The President: I wish to advise all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with longer statements are
requested to circulate the texts in writing and deliver a
condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We commend Pakistan for
having convened this debate, which constitutes an
excellent opportunity to highlight the importance of
strengthening a comprehensive approach to counter
terrorism. Brazil joins previous speakers in expressing
our condolences to you, Mr. President, to your country
and to the Pakistani people on the terrible terrorist
attacks that took place in Pakistan last week. We also
thank the Secretary-General for his presentation.
Brazil has long supported international efforts on
counter-terrorism. We have always condemned, and
always will condemn, terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. In fact, repudiation of terrorism is a
tenet enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution and serves
as a guiding principle for our foreign policy.
As a multidimensional threat, terrorism must
be addressed through a holistic approach that takes
into consideration its underlying causes. Radicalism
and violence often stem from long-standing social,
political, economic and cultural exclusion, amid which
a culture of intolerance may thrive. Development and
inclusiveness are key tools to combat terrorism. Fully
aware of the interdependence between peace, security
and development, Brazil commends the approach
contained in the Pakistani concept note (S/2013/3,
annex) in that regard.
Brazil fully supports the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Its various pillars provide
a comprehensive and integrated perspective on the root
causes of terrorism. Tackling the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism is the best means of preventing
the recurrence of this phenomenon in the long term.
As we have noted on a number of occasions,
prevention is always the best policy. Focusing on
preventive aspects means the promotion of democratic
values, international cooperation for social and
economic development, and political, ethnic and
religious tolerance.

28

Countering terrorism should never justify disregard
for basic individual rights and the rule of law. The fight
against terrorism must be undertaken in compliance
with international law and human rights law. Otherwise,
the very legitimacy of our efforts would be at stake.
We encourage the Council to continue to reflect
on ways to strengthen due process within the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
individuals and entities. The work of the Ombudsperson
has proved to be a valuable tool to increase fairness in
the consideration of delisting requests.
Cooperation and capacity-building are essential
tools in an effective strategy to fight terrorism. Many
countries have the political will to implement the
pertinent resolutions of the Security Council, but lack
the necessary capacity to do so. Brazil is pleased to
see capacity-building as a top priority for the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee can also play
a positive role in that regard by facilitating technical
assistance to Member States. We commend the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
for its efforts in organizing workshops and seminars
in different regions and call for the continuation of that
practice.
Brazil reiterates that there are no excuses for
terrorist acts. We reaffirm our commitment to a
coordinated and multidimensional response to the
challenges posed by terrorism, based on a comprehensive
view of this scourge. We remain convinced that
cooperation and dialogue within the United Nations
will enhance the tools at our disposal in the fight against
this phenomenon. The Security Council has a duty not
only to condemn acts of terrorism and work to prevent
the spread terrorism, but also to do so coherently and
universally, wherever and whenever international
terrorism strikes.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Egypt.
Mr. Mootaz Khalil (Egypt): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). The OIC Group thanks Pakistan
for its initiative in organizing this important debate. It
allows us to reflect on the current approach taken by
the United Nations to counter terrorism and address the
challenges we all face in the fight against that global
threat. The OIC Group reaffirms its full cooperation
13-20590

S/PV.6900

with the United Nations
community in that regard.

and

the

international

We would like to thank Her Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Pakistan for presiding over the
meeting and for her opening remarks. We would like
also to convey the condolences of the Group to the people
and the Government of Pakistan in connection with the
terrorist attacks that took place in Quetta last Friday. In
addition, we would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his participation and for his introductory statement.
At the outset, let me reiterate the position of
the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation in condemning unequivocally all acts
of terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of its motivation and objectives, and
regardless of the nature of the perpetrators, be they
individuals, groups or States.
The OIC believes that the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy constitutes an ongoing
effort. It is a living document that should be updated
regularly. We reaffirm the importance of the balanced
implementation of the Strategy in all its aspects, in
particular concerning conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism; measures to prevent and combat
terrorism; and capacity-building and respect for human
rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation is very
much aware of the fact that terrorism is one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
The member States of the OIC have been the prime
targets of terrorist acts. Despite its best intentions,
the world community has yet to enhance its response
in addressing this dangerous phenomenon. Applying
the following principles could improve the efforts of
the United Nations and its Member States to combat
terrorism.
First, the evolving nature of terrorism makes
effective regional and international cooperation
indispensable in the combat against terrorism. There
is a need to improve institutional cooperation between
Member States and to enhance the efforts of the United
Nations in that regard.
Secondly, the United Nations should stress that all
terrorist acts should be combated within a single legal
paradigm, so as to end the use of double standards in
addressing this serious threat. Criminalizing all acts
of terrorism, regardless of their motivation, should
be accompanied by the pursuit of all perpetrators
13-20590

of terrorist acts under due process of law, be they
individuals, groups or States. Criminalizing terrorist
acts committed by State actors is as necessary as
criminalizing acts committed by non-State actors. The
United Nations should increase its efforts to combat
terrorist acts committed by States and develop the
necessary legal instruments to penalize State terrorism.
Thirdly, there is a need to adopt a comprehensive
approach in criminalizing incitement to terrorism.
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005), adopted in
September 2005, was an important step in that regard.
Yet all forms of incitement should be criminalized and
prosecuted. Indirect incitement, which may take the
form of racism, xenophobia or insulting religious beliefs
and symbols, is a very insidious trigger for terrorism.
It can be more dangerous than direct incitement. The
United Nations should effectively address the dangers
posed by racism, xenophobia and offences against
religion, as such acts constitute a grave incitement to
terrorism.
Fourthly, we cannot rely on security and legal
measures alone to eradicate terrorism. The most
effective way to combat terrorism is to eliminate its
root causes. The international community should work
collectively towards resolving existing protracted
conflicts. It should recognize and fulfil the legitimate
right of peoples to self- determination. The international
community should also assist the efforts of all nations
towards poverty eradication, equity, raising the
standard of living and improving educational policies.
That will undoubtedly contribute to removing the
major root causes of terrorism. Furthermore, there is
a need to intensify international cooperation, dialogue
and understanding among cultures and civilizations to
eliminate prejudice.
The OIC Group notes with deep concern the
instances of intolerance, discrimination, profiling,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, religious
hatred and violence against Muslims, as well as the
denigration of their religion and its symbols, including
the Koran and the Prophet — peace be upon him — that
occur in many parts of the world. Such acts contravene
international human rights norms. They are against the
principle of the freedom of religion. They are against
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. They have implications that may result in
serious threats to international peace and security. We
acknowledge and respect the importance of the freedom
of expression in promoting tolerance and understanding

29

S/PV.6900

among nations. We condone the freedom of expression
that respects diversity and combats the myth of the
clash of civilizations, not the one that is used to incite
hatred or to target one specific religion or culture and
that deepens ignorance and disregard towards the other.
The OIC Group reiterates as well the need to
make a clear distinction between terrorism and the
exercise of the legitimate right of peoples to resist
foreign occupation. That distinction is duly observed
in international law, international humanitarian law, in
Chapter VII, Article 51, of the Charter of the United
Nations and in General Assembly resolution 46/51.
Before I conclude, I would like to add a few words
in my national capacity.
Egypt has suffered throughout its recent history
from the dangers of terrorism. We have always
supported international and regional counter-terrorism
efforts. Under the former regime, we resorted mainly
to military and security means at the expense of other
solutions. The policies that were adopted in the late
1980s and early 1990s had limited success. We came to
realize the dangers of radical and extremist thinking,
and therefore adopted innovative policies to address
such ideologies. We embarked upon a programme that
promoted teaching the true principles of Islam that
are based on tolerance and moderation and that reject
violence and extremism in order to review and redress
radical ideologies. Al-Azhar University, the main centre
of Islamic thought for centuries, increased the training
of religious leaders from Egypt and other countries on
combating radicalization and extremism. The teachings
exposed the fallacies of extremist ideologies that claim
a religious foundation.
An effective response to terrorism came with the
Egyptian Revolution in January 2011. It proved, in a
practical way, that change can occur by peaceful means.
It showed that people should not resort to terrorism
to achieve political change. The fact that people may
say no, stand up for their rights without violence and
succeed in fulfilling their goals peacefully meant that
there was no justification for terrorism. The fact that
Islamic political parties that believe in democracy
and resort to the ballot box can actually reach power
through such means serves to expose the lies of criminal
groups that claim an unfounded religious justification
for their crimes. That has been one major contribution
to international peace and security brought about by
the Egyptian revolution. The real defeat of extremist

30

terrorist ideologies did not occur by security means or
by the force of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. It happened in Tahrir Square with the success
of the revolution in institutionalizing peaceful change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of Senegal, I would like to extend my country’s deepest
condolences to the Pakistan Government and people
following the cowardly attacks endured in Pakistan
last week. We would also like to commend and express
our appreciation for the Pakistani delegation’s wise
and timely initiative to organize this open debate of
the Security Council on the fight against international
counter-terrorism, which continues to be of great
concern to the international community. Without
a doubt, international terrorism is a dangerous and
complex phenomenon that requires a holistic approach
in order to completely eradicate it, as is suggested by
the topic of this debate.
By reiterating our firm condemnation of terrorist
acts, whatever their motivation, my country is committed
to acting in a concrete and concerted way to achieve
results in our common objective in the fight against
that scourge. Today, this is indeed an enterprise that
really does require effective and sincere international
collaboration and cooperation. International terrorism
includes groups that ignore borders and that benefit
from information and communication technologies to
plan and commit their crimes.
Terrorism, without a doubt, is one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security,
as well as to human life and dignity. The alarming
frequency of terrorist attacks, despite the numerous
and untiring efforts undertaken to combat them, show
that additional work is necessary within the framework
of international cooperation and coordination. Our
work is more necessary than ever before. That is
why we support all actions that will lead to greater
mobilization and closer cooperation among members of
the international community to combat terrorism.
In that regard, the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, adopted in 2006, remains the most
comprehensive reference framework in providing and
effective response to this scourge. The Strategy reflects
our commitment and willingness to act in a coherent
and concerted fashion to achieve our common goal of
eradicating this danger. In order for the Strategy to be

13-20590

S/PV.6900

completely successful, the four pillars, because of their
intrinsic importance as well as their interdependence,
must be implemented impartially. In the same vein,
implementing the Strategy is indispensable in order
to improve cooperation and to make the fight against
terrorism more effective, particularly with regard to
an exchange of information and experiences. What
we need, therefore, is an effective global approach to
terrorism that should, by definition, be based on the
comprehensive and balanced implementaton of the
Strategy.
Likewise, by establishing a raft of obligations and
measures that States Members of the United Nations
must adopt to crack down on terrorist acts, resolution
1373 (2001), which established the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, offers a framework of action to prevent
and act effectively against terrorist acts. The visits of
the Committee to various countries have provided the
opportunity to review the concrete steps that States
have taken to implement the resolution.
As for my country, Senegal, in addition to the
establishment of a centre for strategic guidance, we have
undertaken enormous efforts to address the challenges
posed by border control, airline security and maritime
safety, among other things, not to mention the legislative
reforms that we have undertaken to adapt our domestic
legislation to the pertinent provisions of international
law. We have also engaged in dynamic cooperation at
the bilateral, subregional and international levels. In
that respect, the situation currently prevailing in the
Sahel, in particular in norther Mali is a source of grave
concern. That crisis, largely fuelled by arms and drug
trafficking, is further proof that our fight against the
tragedy of extremism and terrorism is far from over. In
that regard, we welcome the adoption by the Council of
resolution 2085 (2012), which provides the necessary
international legality and legitimacy to the action
undertaken by the countries of the south-west African
region, which are more than ever determined to help
Mali to dismantle those terrorist groups and regain its
territorial integrity.
The Organization’s global approach to the fight
against terrorism cannot succeed without effective
coordination. In that respect, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to appoint a United Nations counterterrorism coordinator, which will allow the Organization
not only to rationalize its counter-terrorism action, but
also to strengthen its visibility and effectiveness.

13-20590

Furthermore, the adoption of a global convention
on international terrorism would offer considerable
benefits in strengthening the legal framework of our
fight against the scourge. However, we recognize that
the international community must be more politically
resolved to overcome the differences and difficulties
that impede a speedy and consensual finalization of the
draft global counter-terrorism convention.
In conclusion, my delegation, like others here, looks
forward to enjoying a world that is free of all forms of
terrorism, thanks to our joint efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
strongly condemns all forms of terrorism and reaffirms
its commitment to contributing to the fullest extent
to the international fight against terrorism in all its
aspects, including through cooperation with the relevant
United Nations bodies. We welcome initiatives to
make the United Nations counter-terrorism work more
effective, and share the view that a comprehensive and
holistic approach is the only way to tackle terrorism in
a sustainable manner. Indeed, the 2006 United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is based on that
notion, and we agree that there is a need to implement
all of its four pillars evenly. In the interest of time, I
will address only a few subtopics of the Strategy in my
statement today.
Effective action to counter the financing of terrorism
is a key tool for weakening the operational capabilities
of terrorists. It is a top priority of Liechtenstein’s
overall commitment to ensuring that its financial
centre is not abused for any type of criminal activity.
The key to success in that area is strong domestic
legislation requiring all financial intermediaries to
exercise due diligence, backed up by Government
institutions — such as financial intelligence units — with
the necessary resources and capabilities to follow up
reported suspicious transactions. In its 12 years of
existence, the Liechtenstein financial intelligence unit
has been the backbone of our domestic effort in that
regard, in cooperation with its international partners.
Furthermore, the Liechtenstein unit continues to assist
other countries in establishing and training their
financial intelligence units, recognizing that capacitybuilding is key to our global effort to curb the financing
of terrorism.

31

S/PV.6900

Despite the comprehensive nature of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, police
and military action is frequently at the forefront of the
response to terrorism. Such action is often undertaken
in extreme circumstances and on the basis of sweeping
anti-terrorism legislation. Indeed, it is the duty of every
State to protect its residents from indiscriminate violent
attacks.
At the same time, every effort must be made to
ensure that a Government response to terrorism remains
within the confines of applicable human rights law, as
well as applicable rules of international humanitarian
law. It can be difficult to determine exactly what that
entails in a particular situation, especially as some
applicable rules of international law are rather general
in nature and require a Government’s actions to be
proportional to its goals and to balance competing
rights and interests. However, some practices that are
currently applied systematically are clearly ruled out by
international law. The United Nations should do more
to highlight such violations and share best practices in
that regard.
Nevertheless, the main responsibility rests with
individual Governments. They must ensure that the rule
of law is not an afterthought to its counter-terrorism
efforts, but rather its guiding light. Governments
must also consider the extent to which extreme
countermeasures may plant the seed of further terrorist
violence or otherwise undermine the principles of rule
of law and good governance. In that regard, we wish to
commend the Security Council for its continued effort

32

to strengthen fair and clear procedures for sanctions
listings regarding the individuals and entities associated
with Al-Qaida.
The Council has come a long way in improving legal
remedies for those who — rightly or wrongly — are
affected by sanctions, in particular through the extensive
mandate of the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost.
Now is the time for the Council to apply the lessons
of that process to other sanctions regimes, and thereby
underline its commitment to the rule of law.
Finally, I would be remiss if I failed to mention the
need to conclude the draft comprehensive convention
on international terrorism as part of our comprehensive
approach. In implementing the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, the various intergovernmental
organs, Secretariat offices and expert groups dealing
with counter-terrorism efforts have been successful,
mainly because they have placed results and
pragmatism above ideology. Who is to say that we will
not one day be able to do the same in the negotiations
on that overarching legal instrument? After more than
a decade of negotiations, it is time to make a last push
for a pragmatic solution – or otherwise to abandon the
effort.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

13-20590
