VI.

179

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

29 November 1979 and41/142of4 December 1986on the
implementation of the Declaration,
Convinced of the continuing need to achieve the full realization of the principles and objectives contained in the
Declaration, which will contribute to peaceful and
friendly relations between nations,
Noting that 1989 marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Declaration,
1. Reaffirms the lasting validity and importance of the
principles and objectives contained in the Declaration on
Social Progress and Development;
2. Decides to observe in 1989 the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration;
3. Invites all States, the specialized agencies, regional
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to take appropriate measures, such as those
set forth in the annex to the present resolution, which are
based on the measures recommended by the General Assembly in its resolution 41/150 of 4 December 1986 on the
fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and to support appropriate activities aimed at
encouraging the promotion of human rights and social justice;
4. Invites all States to inform the Secretary-General of
their views and comments concerning the impact of the
Declaration, since its adoption, on the formulation and
implementation of the national policies and measures of
their Governments, as well as the way in which the principles, objectives, means and methods set forth in the Declaration are taken into account in their policies, plans and
programmes and in their bilateral and multilateral relations in the field of development;
5. Invites all States to communicate to the SecretaryGeneral their views and comments on possible ways and
means of increasing the contribution of the appropriate organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to achieving the full realization of the principles and
objectives contained in the Declaration;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include the information received pursuant to paragraphs 4 and 5 above in
the report requested in paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 41/142, to be submitted to the Assembly at its
forty-fourth session through the Commission for Social
Development and the Economic and Social Council;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures for the observance of the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration, bearing in mind the recommended possible measures contained in the annex to the
present resolution, in order to draw attention to and emphasize the importance of the Declaration, and the role
played and the work done by the United Nations to ensure
the effective fulfilment of the objectives of the Declaration;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session an item entitled "Twentieth anniversary of the proclamation of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development";
9. Also decides to devote one plenary meeting during
its forty-fourth session to the observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the Declaration, which falls on 11 December 1989, and requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary preparations for the programme of that meeting.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

ANNEX
Recommended possible measures for the observance of the twentieth
anniversary of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development

I. The following measures are recommended for possible action at
the national level:
(a) Formal proclamation of 11 December 1989 as Social Progress
and Development Day;
(b) Issuance of special messages on 11 December 1989 by heads of
State or Government or other prominent civil personalities;
(c) Special meetings of parliamentary and other public and private
institutions on Social Progress and Development Day;
(d) Establishment or strengthening of national or local institutions
for the promotion of social progress and development and social justice,
and the encouragement of teaching programmes on social progress and
development at various educational levels;
(e) Dissemination of the text of the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development in national languages;
(j) Issuance during 1989 of social progress and development postage
stamps, first-day covers and special cancellations;
(g) Participation by non-governmental organizations in the observance of the anniversary, and the organization of activities by such organizations;
(h) Organization of activities within the framework and in support of
current United Nations decades and international years being prepared
on social development.
2. It is recommended that the following measures, among others,
should be taken by the Secretary-General at the United Nations level:
(a) Issuance by 11 December 1989 in all the official languages of the
United Nations of the Declaration on Social Progress and Development;
(b) Organization of commemorative events, according to standard
practice, at United Nations Headquarters and at the United Nations Offices at Geneva and Vienna, as well as at Nairobi and at United Nations
information centres, on or around 11 December 1989.

42/49.

Achievement of social justice

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the pledge of States Members of the United
Nations under the Charter of the United Nations to take
joint and separate action to promote higher standards of
living, full employment and conditions of economic and
social progress and development,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, 14 social progress and development shall be founded on respect for the
dignity and value of the human person and shall ensure
the promotion of human rights and social justice,
Taking into account recommendations made by the Secretary-General on some perspectives on the work of the
United Nations in the 1990s, contained in the annex to the
note on the preparation of the next medium-term plan, IS
1. Considers that the common purpose of the international community must be to forge from varied economic,
social and political conditions a global environment of sustained development, full enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, social justice and peace;
2. Recognizes that social justice is one of the most important goals of social progress;
3. Reaffirms the importance of co-operation among
countries in promoting a climate conducive to the achievement by individual countries of the goals of development
and social justice and progress;

14 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

15 See A/42/512.

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

180

4. Considers that such co-operation should continue to
be a major focus of activities of the United Nations in accordance with the principles of the Charter;
5. Calls upon Member States, in elaborating their national policy in the field of social development, to take into
consideration the importance of achieving social justice
for all.
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/50.

National experience in achieving far-reaching
social and economic changes for the purpose of
social progress

The General Assembly,
Guided by the desire to promote a higher standard of
life, full employment and conditions for economic and social progress and development,
Recalling its resolutions 2542 (XXIV) of 11 December
1969, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 and
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, as well as its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, the annex to which contains the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade,
Recalling also its resolutions 3273 (XXIX) of
10 December 1974, 31/38 of 30 November 1976, 36/19 of
9 November 1981, 38/25 of22 November 1983 and 40/23
of 29 November 1985, in which it reaffirmed the importance for every State to carry out fundamental social and
economic changes for the purpose of social progress and
the necessity of studying national experience in this field,
Taking note with concern of the findings on the economic
and social situation in many parts of the world, contained
in the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Highlights
of the world social situation 1987: recent developments
and current issues", 16
Desirous of securing the speedy and complete removal of
major obstacles to the economic and social progress of
peoples, as defined in the Declaration on Social Progress
and Development,14
Taking note of the proposal of the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to act as host to an interregional seminar on the national experience of developing and developed countries in carrying out far-reaching
social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress, as called for in paragraph 3 of resolution 38/25,
1. Reaffirms that further exchange of national experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress would contribute to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade;
2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
national experience in achieving far-reaching social and
economic changes for the purpose of social progress; 17

3. Appreciates that the Secretary-General is making arrangements to hold, in 1988, the interregional seminar
called for in paragraph 3 of resolution 38/25, within the
resources allotted to the programme for sectoral and regional advisory services;
4. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral reports on their national experience in carrying
16 See E/CN.5/1987/2.

17 A/42/57-E/1987/8.

out far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with Member States, a report on national experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress, taking into
account the provisions of General Assembly resolutions 36/19, 38/25 and 40/23, and to submit it to the
Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the Commission for Social Development and the Economic and Social
Council;
6. Requests the Commission for Social Development
and the Economic and Social Council to consider at their
next sessions the question of national experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-fourth session the item entitled "National experience
in achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for
the purpose of social progress".
85th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/51.

Implementation of the International Plan of Action on Aging and related activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 37 /51 of 3 December 1982, by
which it endorsed the International Plan of Action on
Aging, adopted by consensus by the World Assembly on
Aging, 18
Reaffirming its resolution 40/29 of 29 November 1985,
in which it stressed the importance of the United Nations
Trust Fund for Aging in assisting Member States, in particular developing countries, in formulating and implementing policies and programmes on aging,
Reaffirming further its resolution 40/30 of 29 November 1985, in which it expressed its conviction that the elderly must be considered an important and necessary element in the development process at all levels within a
given society, and reaffirming also that developing countries, in particular, need assistance in order to implement
the Plan of Action,
Reaffirming its resolution 41/96 of 4 December 1986, in
which it urged Governments to intensify their efforts,
within the context of their own national priorities, cultures and traditions, to implement the recommendations
contained in the Plan of Action,
Taking note of Commission for Social Development
resolution 30/1 of 4 March 1987 19 relating to the preparation by the Secretary-General of the medium-term plan
for the period 1990-1995,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the question of aging, 20
Recognizing the importance of the second review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Plan of Action,
which will be undertaken by the Commission for Social
Development at its thirty-first session, in 1989,

18 See Report of the World Assembly on Aging,
Vienna,
26 July-6 August
1982 (United
Nations
publication,
Sales
No. E.82.1.16), chap. VI, sect. A.
19 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1987,
Supplement No. 7 (E/1987/20), chap. I, sect. D.
20 A/42/567.
