S/PV.7996

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7996th meeting

Wednesday, 5 July 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Fernández Revollo
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mrs. Syrota
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-20500 (E)
*1720500*

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Chinese): As this is the
first public meeting of the Security Council for the
month of July, I should like to take this opportunity,
on behalf of the Security Council, to pay tribute to
His Excellency Mr. Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz,
Permanent Representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, for his service as President of the Council for
the month of June. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Llorentty Solíz and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: According to the official news agency of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and various
Government sources, at approximately 9 a.m. local
time on 4 July, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea launched a ballistic missile that it termed a “test
fire of intercontinental ballistic rocket Hwasong-14”.
The missile was launched near the Panghyon airfield in
northwestern Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
According to an official Government announcement, it
covered a distance of 933 kilometres during a 39-minute
flight, reaching an altitude of 2,802 kilometres, before
falling into the sea. According to those parameters, the
missile would have a range of roughly 6,700 kilometres
if launched on a more typical trajectory, making it an
intercontinental ballistic missile, according to widely
2/14

05/07/2017

used definitions. Once again, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea did not send pre-launch notifications
to international organizations responsible for airspace
and maritime safety. The country’s official media claim
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is now
“a full-fledged nuclear Power that has been
possessed of the most powerful intercontinental
ballistic rocket capable of hitting any part of the
world, along with nuclear weapons”.
This is the seventh time that the Council has met to
discuss the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
2017. Including today’s meeting, five of these emergency
consultations have followed the launch of ballistic
missiles by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
in open violation of Security Council resolutions.
The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launch
of a ballistic missile with intercontinental range,
which constitutes yet another brazen violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and a dangerous
escalation of the situation. The country’s leadership
must cease any further provocative actions and
comply fully with its international obligations. The
Secretary-General underlines how important it is
that the international community maintain its unity
in addressing this serious challenge. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must end any actions that
violate Security Council resolutions and allow time for
sincere dialogue to resume. All the parties must work to
reopen communications, particularly through militaryto-military channels, in order to reduce the risk of
miscalculation or misunderstanding.
Amid the escalating security situation in the
region, the United Nations and its partners play a
critical role in saving the lives of the most vulnerable
people in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
As the Council considers its response, we again remind
Member States of the importance of separating political
and humanitarian concerns and urge them to support
the lifesaving activities being carried out by the
humanitarian organizations in the country.
I would like to close by reiterating the SecretaryGeneral’s commitment to seeking peaceful and political
solutions. The United Nations will remain in close
contact with all the parties concerned and is ready to
assist in any way possible.
17-20500

05/07/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Jenča
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): To my
friends on the Security Council, I must say that today is
a dark day, because yesterday’s actions by North Korea
made the world a more dangerous place. Its illegal
missile launch was not only dangerous but also reckless
and irresponsible. It showed that North Korea does not
want to be part of a peaceful world. It has cast a dark
shadow of conflict on all nations that strive for peace.
Yesterday’s act came from the same vicious dictator
who sent a young college student home to his parents
unresponsive and in a coma. For Americans, the true
nature of the North Korean regime was painfully
brought home with the images of two guards holding
Otto Warmbier up as they transported him from a
prison, in which he should never have been. Otto
Warmbier is but one person out of the millions who
have been killed, tortured or deprived of their human
rights by the North Korean regime.
To Americans, the death of one innocent person
can be as powerful as the death of millions because all
men and women are created in God’s image. Depravity
towards one is a sure sign of willingness to do much
more harm. The nature of the North Korean regime is
clear. Only the scale of the damage that it does could
become different. That is why yesterday’s escalation is
so alarming. If North Korea treats an innocent young
student the way it treated Otto Warmbier, we should
not be surprised if it acts barbarically on a larger scale.
The United States does not seek conflict. In
fact, we seek to avoid it. We seek only the peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and an end
to the threatening actions of North Korea. Regrettably
we are witnessing just the opposite. Make no
mistake — North Korea’s launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) is a clear and sharp military
escalation. The North Korean regime openly states that
its missiles are intended to deliver nuclear weapons
to strike cities in the United States, South Korea and
Japan, and now it has greater capacity to do so. In
truth, it is not only the United States and our allies that
are threatened. North Korea’s destabilizing escalation
is a threat to all nations in and beyond the region.
Its actions are quickly closing off the possibility of a
diplomatic solution.

S/PV.7996

The United States is prepared to use the full range
of its capabilities to defend itself and its allies. One
of our capabilities lies with our considerable military
forces. We will use them if we must, but we prefer not
to have to go in that direction. We have other methods
of addressing those who threaten us and of addressing
those who supply the threats. We have great capabilities
in the area of trade. President Trump has spoken
repeatedly about that. I spoke with him at length about
it this morning.
There are countries that are allowing — even
encouraging — trade with North Korea in violation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Such countries
would also like to continue their trade arrangements
with the United States. That is not going to happen. Our
attitude on trade changes when countries do not take
international security threats seriously. Before the path
to a peaceful solution is entirely closed, however, there
remains more that the international community can and
must do diplomatically and economically.
In the coming days, we will bring before the
Security Council a draft resolution that raises the
international response in a way that is proportionate to
North Korea’s new escalation. I will not detail the draft
resolution here today, but the options are all known to
us. If we are unified, the international community can
cut off the major sources of hard currency to the North
Korean regime. We can restrict the flow of oil to its
military and its weapons programme. We can increase
air and maritime restrictions. We can hold senior regime
officials accountable.
The international community has spoken
frequently against the illegal and dangerous actions
of the North Korean regime. For many years, there
have been numerous United Nations sanctions against
North Korea, but they have been insufficient to get
it to change its destructive course. If we are to have
an impact on and move North Korea off its military
escalation, we must therefore do more. We will not look
exclusively at North Korea. We will look at any country
that chooses to do business with that outlaw regime.
We will show no patience for stalling or talking our
way down to a watered-down resolution. Yesterday’s
ICBM escalation requires an escalated diplomatic and
economic response.
Time is short. Action is required. The world is
on notice. If we act together, we can still prevent a
catastrophe, and we can rid the world of a grave threat.

17-205003/14

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

If we fail to act in a serious way, there will be a different
response. Much of the burden of enforcing United
Nations sanctions rests with China; 90 per cent of trade
with North Korea is from China. We will work with
China. We will work with any and every country that
believes in peace, but we will not repeat the inadequate
approaches of the past, which have brought us to this
dark day.
We cannot forget the multiple missile tests of this
year or yesterday’s escalation. We cannot forget Otto
Warmbier and others whom North Korea continues to
hold. We cannot forget the threats to our friends and
allies around the world. We will not forget, and we will
not delay.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this urgent meeting
jointly requested by the United States, the Republic of
Korea and Japan.
I also thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
North Korea once again launched a ballistic missile
in blatant violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. This is totally unacceptable. Japan lodged a
strong protest directly against North Korea immediately
following the launch and condemned the act in the
strongest terms. Here I express once again our strong
condemnation of this utterly unacceptable provocation.
Japan demands that North Korea immediately cease all
ballistic-missile and nuclear-development programmes
and provocations. Japan will never accept a nucleararmed North Korea.
The North Korean official media has announced
that North Korea successfully carried out the launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile. The missile
reached an altitude of more than 2,500 kilometres,
flew for approximately 40 minutes and landed within
the Japanese exclusive economic zone, approximately
300 kilometres off the Oga peninsula. A number of
Japanese fishing vessels were at sea at the time of the
launch. That shows how dangerous and irresponsible
North Korea’s action was. If it had not been such a
high-altitude launch, the missile would have flown for
more than 5,500 kilometres and could have reached
many other Member States’ soil.
Those provocations by North Korea trample upon
international efforts towards the peaceful settlement
of nuclear and missile issues and present an enormous
global threat. As North Korea claims that it is capable
4/14

05/07/2017

of hitting any part of the world, its threat has literally
become global. The most recent provocation has made
it even more evident that circumstances are not right for
dialogue with North Korea at this time. No other choice
for us is left other than to work together to increase
the pressure on North Korea. The thorough and faithful
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions is critically important. All States Members
must work together to pressure North Korea into taking
concrete action leading towards denuclearization. We
need to send a clear, united message that it is North
Korea that needs to change, not our side.
We must recall the Council’s determination to take
further significant measures in the event of a further
nuclear test or launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The latest launch requires a swift
response from the Council in the form of a resolution
with robust sanctions. Japan looks forward to working
closely with Council members to that end.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Sir, and the representatives of the
United States and Japan for convening this very
important meeting.
I also thank Mr. Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his very enlightening briefing
on the situation.
The Security Council is once again meeting
following a serious and unjustifiable violation by North
Korea of its international obligations, which threatens
international peace and security. With the launch of a
ballistic missile two days ago, North Korea continues
in its posture of an inexcusable headlong rush. It is
confirming its stubborn and proclaimed determination
to flout the authority of the Security Council. It continues
to ignore the numerous appeals and calls to reason,
which we have continuously addressed to it. Finally,
it persists with an irresponsible provocative attitude,
which threatens to leads us straight to an escalation.
France has condemned the missile launch, just as it
has condemned the numerous ballistic missile launches
carried out by Pyongyang in recent months. All of
North Korea’s actions fuel a dangerous and provocative
spiral of regional instability and even threaten peace
and international security. Today, the countries of
the region are directly threatened. I reiterate France’s
full solidarity with them, but let us be fully aware
that everyone is now affected by this threat. It is a
global threat.
17-20500

05/07/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The systematic and determined effort, initiated
at the highest level of the North Korean regime, to
develop its nuclear programmes speaks for itself. This
new ballistic missile launch, which follows in the wake
of previous launches and nuclear tests, represents
another step towards North Korea’s acquisition of
an operational nuclear capacity. It is a deliberate,
methodical and fully acknowledged assault on the
non-proliferation regime, which is at the heart of
our security system and which we cannot afford to
tolerate. Let us make no mistake — North Korea’s
nuclear programme is one of the main threats to the
non-proliferation regime that we have forged together,
step by step, in recent decades. The non-proliferation
regime itself is the backbone of international peace and
security, which we are responsible for protecting. This
dangerous forward push must cease immediately and
without preconditions.
Sanctions are never automatic or an end in
themselves, but when our messages, appeals and
even our warnings are deliberately, repeatedly and
systematically ignored, a determined response is
necessary. Negotiation is always the first choice,
but the current situation does not allow for it at
all. The deliberate, repeated and outright violation
by whomsoever of our decisions cannot be subject
to bargaining. It is up to North Korea to sincerely
demonstrate, through concrete action, that it is ready
to invest in a negotiated settlement. Otherwise, we will
have no other choice but to respond firmly.
Nuclear proliferation is essentially what is at stake.
In the face of this threat, weakness and lack of action
are not options. We have been brought together by a
shared sense of urgency and a common determination
to ensure that the authority of the Security Council is
upheld. We must therefore shoulder our responsibilities
together. The entire international community must
pursue its efforts to ensure the effective implementation
of measures already adopted, but we must also confirm
our decisive commitment to putting an end to the
irresponsible action of North Korea. Our goal must be
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. Time is of the essence. The
firm and unambiguous message conveyed through
today’s meeting is an important step in this direction.
France has been at the forefront of establishing a
non-proliferation regime and intends to stay there. In
the Security Council and in the European Union, France
has always responded with determination and firmness

S/PV.7996

to any attempt to undermine that regime. France has
contributed to building consensus with its partners to
ensure that a firm response is provided. I would like to
reassure the international community that my country
will continue to do so with determination. We will
therefore work with all our partners for the adoption of
a Security Council resolution aimed at imposing new,
robust and operational measures. We will also pursue
similar measures within the European Union.
When the basis of our collective security is
threatened, there is no room for equivocation. Given
the risk that the situation could continue to deteriorate,
the Council must and will assume its responsibilities.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Like the previous
speakers from the United States, Japan and France,
the United Kingdom condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
flagrant violation of unanimous decisions of the
Security Council.
Despite our repeated condemnation and successive
Security Council resolutions, the leadership of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has persisted in
pursuing its illegal programmes in misguided pursuit
of a nuclear weapons capability. This is simply not
acceptable. We have seen an unprecedented number
of ballistic missile tests over the past year, including
ground testing. However, with this launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile, the Council should
note that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
clearly intends to threaten directly an ever greater
number of States and indirectly the whole world.
All such ballistic missile activity by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is in violation of binding
Security Council resolutions, and any capability that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea develops
to threaten the security of other States is of grave
concern. Our response must be strong and clear. The
international community must redouble its efforts.
As the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdom
has said, North Korea strains every nerve and sinew
to build nuclear weapons and launch illegal missiles,
even as the people of North Korea endure starvation
and poverty. Amid reports of widespread hardship and
human rights violations in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Pyongyang’s priority should be
the health and welfare of North Korean people, not the
continuation of the nuclear programme.

17-205005/14

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We continue to urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to return to credible and authentic
multilateral talks on its nuclear and ballistic programmes
and to abide by its obligations under Security Council
resolutions. The United Kingdom has today summoned
the Ambassador of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in London, conveying in the strongest terms our
views of this reckless behaviour.
We will also be redoubling our efforts with partners
to seek strong enforcement of measures that aim to
bring the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
the right path. Increased vigilance is needed. We will
continue to encourage partners globally to take effective
action to understand and, when necessary, disrupt
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal
proliferation and other sanctions-evasion activity. We
will also work with allies and partners around the world
to consider the fullest range of measures to increase
diplomatic pressure.
The primary responsibility lies with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, but all members of the
international community must further strengthen
their resolve to enforce existing measures fully and
effectively without delay. We also urge all States to
comply with the Security Council’s requirements for
reporting on the implementation of measures. But as
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s own
statements of defiance make clear, even these steps will
probably not be enough. Faced with these provocations,
we must toughen our resolve. The United Kingdom
supports new binding measures to raise the cost
further for these illegal actions. The Security Council
should start work immediately on a new resolution to
achieve this.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Japan, the United
States and the Republic of Korea for asking for this
meeting to be convened this afternoon.
The missile test yesterday, of possible
intercontinental range, illustrates the determination of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to continue
the development of its ballistic missile and nuclear
weapons programmes. That is a cause of great concern
for the region and, indeed, for the world.
Sweden condemns yesterday’s test in the strongest
possible terms. We once again call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cease all development of
its ballistic missile and nuclear weapons programmes,
and to take immediate steps towards the programme’s
6/14

05/07/2017

complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions.
The continued unity of the Security Council in the
face of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
blatant violations of the Council’s resolutions is of the
utmost importance, as is the effective implementation
of relevant Council resolutions by all countries.
Implementation of the sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remains insufficient and
highly inconsistent. We reiterate that all United Nations
Member States must do their utmost in that regard.
There is no military solution to the situation on the
Korean peninsula. There is an urgent need for redoubled
efforts to build confidence, avoid further escalation
and take steps to prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic
and comprehensive solution to the situation on the
peninsula and the wider region. All must contribute to
that end, and we welcome all initiatives to facilitate a
peaceful and comprehensive solution through dialogue.
Tensions have risen in recent months, and the potential
for mistakes, misunderstanding and miscalculation is
high. A regional security mechanism should be the
medium-term goal.
We remain fully committed to the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. We reiterate our solidarity
with the neighbouring countries and their peoples, who
are living under the constant shadow of the threatening
behaviour of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We again call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to re-engage in a credible and
meaningful dialogue with the international community.
In the meantime, Sweden will stand united with Council
members in condemning any action that jeopardizes
international peace and security.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jenča for his technical
and useful briefing.
We stress once again that the current situation
on the Korean peninsula remains one of the main
challenges to the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Egypt expresses its great concern at the continued
escalation and tension on the Korean peninsula as
a result of the nuclear programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which represents one of the
main threats to international peace and security. We
call once again on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to comply fully with all its commitments, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions;
17-20500

05/07/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7996

to eliminate its entire nuclear arsenal; and to re-join the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as
a non-nuclear State without delay or preconditions.

missile programmes in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolutions, and thus in open defiance of the
international community.

Egypt is fully committed to make every possible
effort at the national level to implement all Security
Council sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Egypt supports fully all efforts aimed at
reaching a peaceful solution to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea nuclear programme issue and at
achieving durable peace on the Korean peninsula,
including all reunification efforts, especially in light of
the special and historic relations between Egypt and the
countries of the region.

The latest launch, having an intercontinental range,
is particularly worrisome. Equally worrisome is the
fact that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
claimed to have reached its objective of acquiring
intercontinental ballistic missile capacity. The
advancement of missile and nuclear capabilities by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is undermining
our collective security.

Egypt calls on the international community and the
Security Council to deal in a comprehensive manner
and without selectivity with all challenges facing
the Non-Proliferation Treaty so as to preserve the
credibility and effectiveness of the non-proliferation
regime and relevant Security Council resolutions.
That is especially important in therefore light of the
continued erosion of the credibility of that regime, which
represents the main pillar of the broader international
security architecture. That erosion is the result of the
non-universality of the Treaty and the double standards
applied when addressing challenges thereto.
In conclusion, my country encourages all parties
to exercise self-restraint and to resume discussions
aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement as soon as
possible. We take note of some of the positive proposals
made by China in order to achieve a gradual détente.
In that regard, we again urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cooperate with all efforts to
promote dialogue and to cease any measures that
may lead to further escalation and intention. We call
on all international parties to provide the conditions
necessary to reach a mutually agreed settlement that
would guarantee regional and international peace and
security, in line with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Egypt stands ready to make every possible effort to
support a peaceful settlement to this crisis in a manner
that would preserve regional and international peace
and security.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy condemns in the strongest
terms the latest missile test conducted by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. This latest
provocation confirms once again that the North Korean
regime continues to pursue its nuclear and ballistic

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
escalation and destabilizing activities pose a clear,
serious and growing threat to international security
and the global non-proliferation regime. We call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take
immediate steps to abandon its provocative, illegal and
self-isolating policies, put a verifiable and irreversible
stop to its missile and nuclear programmes, and embark
on a different path. That objective continues to require
a concerted multilateral effort by the international
community to maintain the high level of pressure on
the North Korean regime.
In that context, Italy stands ready to work
with all relevant stakeholders and members of the
Council in order to devise additional and significant
restrictive measures. In that endeavour, maintaining
the Security Council’s unity of purpose will be crucial.
We must also not forget that the civilian population of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
be highly vulnerable as a consequence of the regime’s
policies. We must therefore ensure, as we have in the
past, that new restrictive measures do not have any
negative unintended consequences for the humanitarian
situation in the country. The ultimate objective of the
pressure must continue to be a change in behaviour of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, framing a path
towards the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and the achievement of a peaceful and comprehensive
diplomatic solution through dialogue.
The full and effective implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions by the whole United
Nations membership continues to be Italy’s priority
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006). Maintaining an open channel
for dialogue with Member States, specifically through
regional outreach meetings, is proving to be an effective

17-205007/14

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

way to engage the membership and facilitate national
efforts to enforce the sanctions regime that is in place.
In that respect, I wish to point out that the rate
of submission of national implementation reports
has steadily increased. As of today, the Committee
has received 94 national implementation reports on
resolution 2270 (2016) and 70 on resolution 2321 (2016).
Moreover, all national reports under resolution 2321
(2016), the latest adopted, have been received in the past
four months, showing a higher submission rate than
under previous resolution regarding the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. While encouraging, that is
still not sufficient. Let me therefore, as Chair of the
1718 Sanctions Committee, make an urgent appeal to
all Member States to continue to provide the necessary
attention to this urgent matter.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the delegations of the United
States and Japan for having called for the holding of
this meeting. I thank you, Mr. President, for having
agreed to convene meeting so quickly, and Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jenča for his
clear and factual briefing.
Mr. President, you very aptly conveyed the
congratulations and gratitude of the members of the
Security Council to the Plurinational State of Bolivia
for its excellent and very productive presidency of the
Council during the previous month. I therefore echo
your words.
It is telling that the first formal meeting under
your presidency is devoted to yet another act of
defiance of the international community and, in
particular of the Security Council — specifically, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launching
of an intercontinental ballistic missile yesterday,
4 July, while we all celebrated the national holiday
of the United States with our American friends. The
Senegalese delegation once again most emphatically
condemns the launching of the intercontinental ballistic
missile that landed in the Sea of Japan. That act was
undoubtedly of a new order, because the successful
launching of an intercontinental ballistic missile shows
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, after
having methodically pursued its nuclear arms and
missile programmes, is more determined than ever to
acquire a nuclear deterrent force.
As Mr. Jenča stated, this launch comes after previous
such acts on the part of Pyongyang that all of us in the
8/14

05/07/2017

Chamber have condemned. It is not only a threat to the
people of the peninsula and the region but also greatly
undermines the regime of non-proliferation, with
the concomitant ambition of developing the delivery
means for nuclear weapons, thereby considerably
exacerbating tensions in the region and beyond. It is
also a serious threat to air travel both because there was
no warning of such a launch and because the region is
densely populated and its airspace is one of the world’s
most travelled.
Once again, the credibility of the Security Council
is at stake. Indeed, despite all of the sanctions and
measures adopted against it, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, far from abandoning its military
ambitions, has gone as far as testing the competence of
the Security Council to address the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s illegal military programme. In
so doing, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
continues to flagrantly violated the repeated resolutions
and prohibitions of the Council.
What are we to do now? We have continued to call
on North Korea to renounce provocations and invited it
to return to the path of dialogue. Indeed, sanctions could
go hand in hand with dialogue in a discrete manner, as
mentioned in the various resolutions on North Korea.
In conclusion, because there is no military solution
to the tensions on the Korean peninsula, my country
reiterates the importance of maintaining peace
and security in that part of the world and calls for a
comprehensive, peaceful, diplomatic and political
solution. To that end, my delegation will work with the
other members of the Council in drafting a resolution
on the supplementary measures that must be taken.
Mrs. Syrota (Ukraine): We thank the United
States, Japan and the Republic of Korea for initiating
the Council’s urgent briefing on the recent missile
launch of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
as well as the presidency for promptly convening such
a meeting. I also thank Assistant-Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča for his briefing on this alarming issue.
Indeed, the beginning of 2017 has already become
another unprecedented period of North Korean
destabilization and unlawful actions. The recent launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) on
4 July contributed enormously to the growing nuclear
threat in the region. Despite immense political and
diplomatic efforts to halt the North Korean weaponsof-mass-destruction programmes, we have seen no
17-20500

05/07/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

sign whatsoever that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s intends to change its behaviour. The
irresponsible North Korean policy has already seriously
undermined the non-proliferation regime as a whole.
The current developments on the Korean peninsula
raise three rhetorical but essential questions. Does
Pyongyang hear the signals from the Security Council?
Are those signals strong and clear enough? How much
time is left before a North Korean ICBM is equipped
with a nuclear warhead and successfully deployed?
Needless to say, the Council should use
every instrument at its disposal to ensure the full
implementation of its decisions. At the same time,
we cannot but recognize that the existing sanctions
regime appears to be inefficient in preventing
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea from
acquiring the technologies, materials, equipment and
financial resources for the further development of its
nuclear programme.
I wish to recall Ukraine’s previously stated
position that the Council should find ways to increase
international pressure on the North Korean regime
to respond to its reckless behaviour, which continues
unabated. We believe that only robust decisions and
steps on the part of the Council can put an end to the
systematic and brutal violations of international law and
eliminate the growing nuclear threat on the continent.
We also fully believe in the necessity of further
fostering neighbouring States’ defence capabilities
against that threat.
We cannot wait until the next nuclear test or missile
launch. Challenges related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear and missile ambitions
should be addressed collectively, decisively and
without further delay. We should not allow Pyongyang
to continue discrediting the role of the Security Council
in the context of global non-proliferation efforts.
Ukraine remains ready for constructive work with
all delegations on this issue, including on a new draft
resolution with more robust and operational measures,
to ensure positive changes in the current situation
and to move closer to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We too
thank the delegations of the United States, Japan and
Korea for having called this meeting; Mr. Jenča for his
briefing; and especially you, Mr. President, not only for

S/PV.7996

your responsiveness in convening this meeting, but also
for making this briefing open to the entire membership.
This is too serious an issue for a private meeting and
it is important for us to express our views before the
entire membership of the Organization.
Uruguay vigorously condemns the recent launch
by North Korea of a ballistic missile of allegedly
intercontinental range. We call once again on North
Korea to fully, verifiably and irreversibly abandon its
existing nuclear programmes, and to immediately put
an end to all related activities, including launches using
ballistic missile technology and other provocative acts.
North Korea’s behaviour is a threat to international
peace and security and constitutes a flagrant violation
of myriad Security Council resolutions. North Korea
must respect all the resolutions adopted by this
body and abandon its nuclear intentions. Such a step
would contribute to fostering peace on the Korean
peninsula and would help to pave the way to a
resumption of dialogue, with the ultimate objective of
achieving denulearization.
The use and threat of use of nuclear weapons
constitute a crime against humanity and a serious
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian law, as well as the Charter of the United
Nations. The only guarantee against the use or threat
of use of these weapons is their express prohibition and
total elimination. While we are in the Chamber dealing
with North Korea’s obstinacy in the proliferation
of nuclear weapons, the membership of the United
Nations is doing its utmost to be able to adopt, perhaps
next Friday, a treaty to prohibit the nuclear weapons.
Regrettably, neither North Korea nor the nuclear Powers
and other States are participating in those negotiations.
The objective of achieving a more secure world, free
of the lethal effects of nuclear weapons, should be seen
as the goal and responsibility to be born equally by all
those gathered in this Chamber today to guarantee the
safety and survival of humankind.
North Korea’s ongoing defiance and a lack of
concrete action on the part of the Security Council
and the concerned parties to reach a peaceful solution
to this situation simply raise tensions on the Korean
peninsula and might inflame the situation further,
with serious consequences. In order to make headway,
Uruguay understands that the sanctions regime must be
fully and properly implemented by all Member States.

17-205009/14

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Uruguay underscores the need to develop new
options for action, try new approaches and ways of
negotiating to untangle this situation, which gets worse
and worse with each passing month. The Security
Council must find an appropriate response to put an end
to the endless round of provocations and violations by
North Korea and to usher in a resumption of dialogue
for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We
reiterate our call for dialogue, as we see no viable
solution to the North Korean question other than that
of face-to-face negotiation and the shared political
commitment of the parties.
Uruguay urges the members of the Security Council
to come together as one on this issue and to maintain
their commitment to find a peaceful, diplomatic and
political solution aimed at the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula. In times of great tension, we must
remain calm, avoid unilateral actions and focus on
finding a solution to the problem.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča for his briefing on the launch by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of a
ballistic missile.
The situation requires thorough clarification and
investigation. The ballistic trajectory of the missile was
confirmed and registered on the Russian rocket-launch
warning system. According to information from the
Minister of Defence of the Russian Federation, based
on an objective and technology-based monitoring of the
situation, it has been established that the parameters
and data regarding the target of the missile were in line
with the tactical criteria of mid-range ballistic missiles.
We are carefully following the development of
the situation on the Korean peninsula and call the
Council’s attention to the joint Russian and Chinese
statement about this issue issued in Moscow on 4 July,
immediately following the rocket launch. We consider
this action by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to be inadmissible and to run counter to relevant
Security Council resolutions. Russia and China have
firmly urged the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to strictly comply with the provisions of said
resolutions. We share the serious concern regarding the
evolving situation on and around the Korean peninsula.
The escalation of military and political tensions in
the region, which is fraught with the risk of an armed
conflict, requires the international community to take
10/14

05/07/2017

collective measures for a peaceful settlement of the
situation through dialogue and consultation.
We reject any statement or action that could lead
to an escalation and hardening of antagonisms, and
call on all interested States to act with restraint, avoid
provocation and warmongering, demonstrate readiness
to engage in dialogue without preconditions, and make
active efforts aimed at de-escalating tensions.
The Russian Federation and the People’s Republic
of China have established a joint initiative, based on
the Chinese proposal of a dual-track approach of
promoting parallel progress in denuclearization efforts
and a suspension-for-suspension approach to establish
a peace mechanism on the peninsula, as well as the
Russian phased plan to settle the Korean issue.
We call on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to voluntarily declare a moratorium on the testing
of nuclear explosive devices and ballistic missiles. At the
same time, the United States and the Republic of Korea
should suspend their large-scale joint military training
exercises. In parallel, the sides could hold talks and
establish general principles for relations, including the
non-use of force, the rejection of aggression, peaceful
coexistence and steps towards the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula with a view to a comprehensive
settlement of all problems, including the missile and
nuclear issues.
All interested parties in the negotiations process
could, through their chosen format, address the peace
and security mechanisms of the Korean peninsuka
and North-East Asia, leading to the normalization of
relations between relevant States. I call upon all States
to support such an initiative, which would offer a true
window of opportunity to resolve the issues on the
Korean peninsula.
We reaffirm our strong commitment to the
international non-proliferation regime and our intention
to see the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and
the comprehensive and full implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. We express our intention,
together with other interested States, to pursue efforts
to ensure that, through dialogue and consultations, all
existing concerns are addressed in a balanced way. We
call on all sides to comply strictly with the obligations
set forth in the joint statement of 19 September
2005 and to swiftly resume dialogue with a view to
achieving a comprehensive settlement to the issue of
the Korean peninsula.
17-20500

05/07/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The option of resorting to military measures to
resolve the problem on the Korean peninsula should
be excluded. We express our support for the northern
and southern sides on the Korean peninsula to engage
in dialogue and consultations, demonstrate good
will towards one another, improve relations, engage
in cooperation towards a peaceful solution and play
their due and responsible roles in de-escalating the
situation on the Korean peninsula and resolving their
pending problems.
We recognize the importance of ensuring
international and regional balance and stability. We
stress that alliances between certain States should
never be established to the detriment of the interests
of third parties. We oppose the military presence of
extra-regional forces in North-East Asia and their
deployment on the pretext of countering the military
and missile programmes of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The deployment of the Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense system in North-East Asia is a serious
blow to the interests of the strategic security of States
of the region, including Russia and China, and does not
serve the goal of denuclearizing the Korean peninsula
or ensure peace and stability in the region on the basis of
indivisible security. We oppose the deployment of such
systems and call on the relevant sides to swiftly halt and
cancel the deployment process. All necessary measures
should be taken to protect the security interests of the
two countries, as well as to strike a strategic balance in
the region.
It is perfectly clear to us that any attempt to justify
a military solution is inadmissable and could have
unpredictable consequences for the region. Attempts
to strangle North Korea economically are equally
unacceptable, since millions of its people are in great
need of humanitarian assistance. The United Nations
has a role to play in that regard. Humanitarian efforts
must be depoliticized.
In summary, we must all acknowledge that
sanctions will not resolve the issue but merely expedite
a stalemate. Any attempt to resolve the situation by
force would be equally inadmissible. We must take the
security concerns of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea into account. It is important now to set aside the
dangerous logic of confrontation and to seek together a
settlement based on a comprehensive political solution
to the problems of the Korean peninsula, including the

S/PV.7996

issue of North Korea’s missile and nuclear programmes.
In that regard, we believe that China’s proposal for
mutual suspension and parallel progress, as well as the
Russian road map for a Korean settlement — including
the gradual establishment of a peace mechanism for
North-East Asia, leading to the denuclearization of the
peninsula — are appropriate starting points for such
talks. We call on all to participate in that work.
Mr. Fernández Revollo (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenča, for the information he shared
with us in connection with the latest developments
that prompted the convening of this afternoon’s
emergency meeting.
Bolivia once again expresses its strongest and
most energetic condemnation of the conduct of nuclear
tests and the launching of ballistic missiles by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, such as the
launch carried out yesterday, 4 July. Accordingly, we
call on that country to abandon its nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible way.
We urge all parties involved to refrain from
escalating rhetoric and actions that increase tensions
and jeopardize international peace and security,
especially in the Korean peninsula. In particular, we
urge all parties to refrain from any act of provocation,
any unilateral action and any action taken outside
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.
We hail and reiterate our support for initiatives
of the dual-suspension type, which would allow for a
simultaneous cessation of both the launch of ballistic
missiles and nuclear tests, on the one hand, and the
conduct of military exercises on the Korean peninsula,
on the other.
Finally, we call on all parties involved to exclude
any military alternative or threatened use of force and
to resume dialogue to achieve a peaceful, diplomatic
and political solution, resulting in the denuclearization
of the Korea peninsula.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would also like to
thank the delegations of the United States, Japan and
the Republic of Korea for convening today’s meeting.
I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his briefing.

17-2050011/14

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We join others in strongly condemning the latest
launch of an international intercontinental ballistic
missile by the Democratic Republic of Korea in violation
of various Security Council resolutions. We concur
with the Secretary-General that this constitutes “a
dangerous escalation of the situation”, which threatens
regional peace and security in the Korean peninsula.
It is absolutely essential that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea cease its provocative actions
in order to reduce the tension in the Korean peninsula
and prevent the further escalation of the situation. We
would like to once again underscore the need for finding
lasting comprehensive political and diplomatic solutions
through dialogue and negotiation. This requires that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea return to
its international commitments on denuclearization and
fully comply with relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. It is important that we maintain the unity of
the Council and speak with one voice in addressing this
issue, which is becoming extremely dangerous.
One thing makes us not lose hope: while there
might be differences as to methods and approaches,
there are in fact no differences in terms of the substance
of denuclearizing the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. This cannot be stated enough.
Finally, the latest launch of a ballistic missile
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is a
reminder to all of us that the full implementation of
the Council’s resolutions by all Members State is much
more critical now than ever before. I would like to
reaffirm the commitment of Ethiopia to continuing to
work towards the full implementation of these Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): First of all, let me
thank Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for
his briefing, as well as the United States and Japan
for calling for consultations on yet another flagrant
violation by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns North Korea’s
irresponsible and dangerous launch of a ballistic
missile with a possible intercontinental range, which
undermines our common international efforts to
strengthen regional and ultimately international peace
and security. Today once again, we see how the North
Korean regime continues developing its nuclear-missile
potential and we observe its steady progress in this
direction, which, of course, causes serious concern.
The expansion of the nuclear Powers club is totally
12/14

05/07/2017

unacceptable for the wider international community.
Therefore, Pyongyang must pursue a contrary approach
to the stance it is taking.
It is our urgent and common task to make North
Korea comply with international will. All Council
members are united in comprehending the full
seriousness and complexity of the situation in North
Korea. Let us use this unity to develop a comprehensive
and balanced approach in order to create conditions for
non-military solutions while maintaining the sanctions
regime and forcing the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to come to dialogue.
In this regard, Kazakhstan once again calls upon
North Korea to follow its positive example of willingly
abandoning nuclear tests and weapons to live in peace
and harmony with the entire world. We stand ready
to share our role and experience in this area with
Pyongyang if needed.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan is ready to support any
initiative leading to a diplomatic and peaceful solution
to the crisis on the Korean peninsula.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of China.
I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Jenča for his briefing.
The Security Council resolutions regarding this
issue contain explicit provisions forbidding any launch
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea using
ballistic-missile technology. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s launch of a ballistic missile
on 4 July was a flagrant violation of the relevant
Council resolutions and defied the will of the entire
international community. China finds it unacceptable
and strongly urges the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to abide strictly by the decisions of the Security
Council and to put a stop to any rhetoric or action that
might further exacerbate tensions on the peninsula.
At the same time, we call on all the parties concerned
to exercise restraint, avoid provocative actions or
belligerent rhetoric, demonstrate a desire for dialogue
without conditions and work actively together to defuse
the tension.
On 4 July, the Heads of State of China and Russia
exchanged views on the situation on the Korean
peninsula and agreed that the nuclear issue there should
be resolved through dialogue and consultation. Our
Foreign Ministries issued a joint statement expressing
17-20500

05/07/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

China and Russia’s shared position and concern regarding
the issue of the Korean peninsula. The statement laid
out our two countries’ joint initiative, based on China’s
two-track approach, and a suspension-for-suspension
proposal under Russia’s step-by-step plan. The current
situation on the peninsula is complex and sensitive,
and the dialogue process is at a standstill. China and
Russia’s joint initiative is aimed at addressing both the
symptoms and the root causes and at taking integrated
measures to strive for a solution. It is objective, fair,
reasonable and feasible. We hope that it will have the
support of the international community and help to
open a realistic route to resolving the problem of the
Korean peninsula.
China has always insisted on the importance
of achieving the denuclearization of the peninsula,
maintaining peace and stability there and seeking a
solution through dialogue and consultation. We have
always been firmly opposed to chaos and conflict in the
region, and military means should not be considered an
option in that regard. The deployment of the Terminal
High Altitude Area Defense system in North-East
Asia seriously undermines the strategic security of
the countries of the region, including China. As such,
it is not conducive to denuclearizing the peninsula or
achieving regional peace and stability. China urges
the countries concerned to cancel its deployment
immediately. The denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula and the achievement of lasting peace and
stability there are in the interests of all. We hope that
the parties concerned will work together with China and
duly play their roles and shoulder their responsibilities,
with a view to getting the Korean peninsula issue back
on the track of peaceful dialogue as soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Chinese presidency for
convening today’s emergency meeting. My delegation is
grateful for the opportunity to participate in addressing
the serious and urgent issue of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s launch of a ballistic missile of
intercontinental-class range on 3 July.
It is deeply regrettable that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has responded with yet another
and even more serious provocation to the repeated

S/PV.7996

messages from the new Government in Seoul, under
the leadership of President Moon Jae-in, emphasizing
the importance of resolving the issue peacefully and
expressing its willingness to engage in dialogue under
the right circumstances. It is also a source of profound
disappointment to us that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has once again chosen the wrong
path by test-firing another long-range ballistic missile
just a few days after the 30 June summit meeting in
Washington, D.C., between the Republic of Korea and
the United States, in which the two leaders called on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to refrain
from provocative, destabilizing actions and rhetoric,
and to make a strategic choice to fulfil its international
obligations and commitments.
The Republic of Korea condemns in the strongest
terms the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
latest provocation as a flagrant violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease testing
the unwavering resolve of both the Government of the
Republic of Korea and the international community
to achieve denuclearization on the Korean peninsula.
Its repeated provocations, in defiance of multiple
Security Council resolutions, will only strengthen the
international community’s resolve and be met with
a firmer response. Pyongyang must realize that its
obsessive pursuit of nuclear and missile programmes,
and its continued provocations, will serve only to worsen
its diplomatic isolation and deepen its economic plight.
Given the urgency and gravity of the issue,
we, the international community, must once again
demonstrate our strong resolve not to tolerate the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes, which have become a
global threat requiring global action. In that regard,
I recall the Security Council’s previously expressed
determination to take further significant measures in
the event of a further nuclear test or missile launch by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We must
indeed take stronger measures, which should include
a new sanctions resolution, to stop the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s provocations. At the same
time, the effectiveness of swift, full and thorough
implementation of the current sanctions resolutions
cannot be overemphasized in the quest to bring the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea back to credible
denuclearization negotiations.

17-2050013/14

S/PV.7996

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This is the last opportunity for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to chart a new beginning
in inter-Korean relations and in its relations with the
international community. It must renounce its nuclear
brinkmanship and step back from the point of no
return. Pyongyang should awaken from its delusion
that nuclear and ballistic-missile development can
ensure its security, and instead resolve to choose a path
to denuclearization.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make further statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for making this a public
meeting and enabling all of us to voice our concerns.
I would first like to tell my Russian friends that
not only has the Secretary-General said that the launch
was an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), and
the United States has said it was an ICBM, North Korea
itself has said that it was an ICBM. If Russia is in need
of any intelligence showing that the rest of the world
sees it as an ICBM, I am happy to provide it.
Secondly, with regard to being opposed to sanctions
on North Korea, the entire Security Council knows that
we have repeatedly adopted resolutions after which
nothing has happened. If members are happy with
North Korea’s actions, they should veto those sanctions.
If they want to be North Korea’s friend, they should

14/14

05/07/2017

veto it. But if they see this as a threat and for what it
is — North Korea showing its muscle — they should
stand strong and vote with the international community
to strengthen sanctions on North Korea. If they choose
not to, we will go our own path.
But it makes no sense not to join together on this
threat from North Korea. That country has had no
care for Russia or China in this. It has not listened
to anything that they have said, and it is not going to
listen to anything that they say. So it is time that we all
stood together and said that we will not put up with this
action. Anyone who sits there and opposes sanctions,
or goes in defiance of a new resolution, is holding the
hands of Kim Jong-un.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank my American colleague
Ambassador Haley for her comments. We too propose
that we work together. The point of my statement was
that we can see a meaningful way out of the situation on
the Korean peninsula only by combining regional and
international forces. It is clearly stated in the relevant
resolutions that it is not through sanctions alone but,
above all, through political efforts that we can find a
way out. That is the task we have ahead of us. History
has shown us that sanctions are not a panacea. We should
therefore seek a political solution and take the path of
creative diplomacy. And as I said in my statement, we
propose to work collectively to do that.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

17-20500
