A /77/PV.99

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

99th plenary meeting

Friday, 1 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

Sustainable Development

Agenda items 13 and 72 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/77/L.104)
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft decision A/77/L.104, entitled “2025 United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.104?
Draft decision A/77/L.104
(decision 77/566).

was

Agenda item 18 (continued)

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 13?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 72.

Draft resolution (A/77/L.106)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Kingdom of the Netherlands to
introduce draft resolution A/77/L.106.
Ms. Brandt (Kingdom of the Netherlands): It is
my honour to present to the Assembly, also on behalf
of my co-facilitators from the Republic of Senegal
and the Republic of Tajikistan, draft resolution
A/77/L.106, entitled “Follow-up to the United Nations
Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review
of the Implementation of the Objectives of the
International Decade for Action, ‘Water for Sustainable
Development’, 2018–2028”.
First of all, allow me to express our gratitude to
the Republic of Senegal for its pivotal leadership in
initiating the draft resolution. Over the past three
months, the co-facilitators have engaged in extensive
consultations and have listened attentively to the
different perspectives brought by Member States. And
I extend our heartfelt appreciation to all delegations
for their constructive engagement throughout that
collaborative process.
The draft resolution brought forward today is
intended as a responsive follow-up to the 2023 United
Nations Water Conference, co-hosted by the Republic
of Tajikistan and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
in March earlier this year. The Conference brought
together over 10,000 participants, including world

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25821 (E)

*2325821*

A/77/PV.99

leaders, representatives from business and civil society,
youth scientists and, of course, the United Nations
system. It catalysed more than 700 commitments as part
of the Water Action Agenda, a testament to our shared
commitment to driving impactful change towards a
water-secure world. The draft resolution harnesses the
renewed political momentum created by the Conference
to offer a pathway to advance our collective efforts in
addressing water-related challenges.
Modelled after the enabling resolutions for the
Oceans Conference, the draft resolution encompasses
the following elements.
In the preliminary section, the draft resolution
welcomes the 2023 United Nations Water Conference
and underlines the intricate interdependence of water,
ecosystems, energy, food security and nutrition. It
acknowledges the imperative to better integrate waterrelated issues into the agendas of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council and emphasizes
the importance of international cooperation to achieve
water and sanitation-related goals. Moreover, the text
takes note of the Water Action Agenda and advocates
for strengthening the Department of Economic and
Social Affairs of the Secretariat and UN-Water to
holistically address water priorities.
The subsequent operational section looks at the path
ahead of us. The 2026 United Nations water conference,
as proposed by the draft resolution, aims to accelerate
the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 6
and spark additional commitments. Similarly, the 2028
United Nations conference on the final comprehensive
review of the implementation of the decade’s objectives
will provide an invaluable platform to assess the
progress achieved by the decade and catalyse further
water-related actions.
And lastly, the operational section calls for the
Secretary-General to present a United Nations systemwide strategy on water and sanitation developed in close
consultation with Member States before the end of the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly. The
strategy signifies a pivotal stride towards enhancing
the coordination and the delivery of water priorities
across the United Nations system.
My co-facilitators, Ambassadors Jonibek Hikmat
and Cheikh Niang, and myself would like to thank
Member States once again for their dedication,
flexibility and constructive approach throughout
this process. We urge all delegations to support this
2/25

01/09/2023

important draft resolution moving us forward in shaping
the future of water at the United Nations. Only together
can we ensure that sustainable water management is not
just an aspiration, but a global reality.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.106. For the Assembly’s
information, the draft resolution has closed for
e-sponsorship.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.106, and in addition to the delegations listed
on the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra,
Angola, Armenia, Australia, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Chad, China, Costa Rica, Djibouti, El Salvador,
Georgia, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Kiribati,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Maldives,
Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal,
Norway, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Suriname, Turkmenistan,
Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Viet Nam.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.106, entitled “Follow-up
to the United Nations Conference on the Midterm
Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the
Objectives of the International Decade for Action,
‘Water for Sustainable Development’, 2018–2028”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.106?
Draft resolution A/77/L.106
(resolution 77/334).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation joined consensus today on the
adoption of resolution 77/334, on the follow up on the
review of the implementation of the objectives of the
International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable
Development”. Of course, this is an important stage for
23-25821

01/09/2023

the process of discussing water at the United Nations.
We note the efforts of the co-Chairs of the negotiation
process to reflect a balanced approach in their document
in terms of organizing future work.
Clearly, the question of water use is complex. There
is no need to repeat that water is a source of human
life and a strategically important sovereign resource.
In that connection, we hold the principled position that
water discussions at the United Nations should have a
progressive nature; in other words, at each new stage
of international cooperation in this field they should
be underpinned by previous experience and progress
achieved thus far. They should take into account the
whole spectrum of concerns expressed by delegations
and ensure the primacy of national sovereignty over
water resources. That approach would allow us to
guarantee success and a positive outcome of such
discussions.
With that in mind, we are convinced that the socalled “water strategy” of the United Nations, which
would lay the foundation for future dialogue between
United Nations Member States for many years ahead,
should be developed with substantive consultations
held with delegations and then adopted at the General
Assembly as an intergovernmental document. We are
strongly convinced about including that idea in the text
of the resolution. Unfortunately, operative paragraph 5
of the resolution we just adopted is actually a watereddown wording of that idea, which is a source of concern
for us.
Moscow has decided to dissociate itself from the
unclear wording of this paragraph. We are looking
forward to specific actions on the part of the Secretariat
to prepare this water strategy and to present the
project step by step to Member States for discussion
and then further adjustment. We would like to caution
immediately that if we see any signs of attempts
to railroad — during its development — unilateral
non-inclusive approaches to formulating this water
strategy or any signs of ignoring the principled positions
of delegations on any particular area, our country will
not consider itself bound by the provisions of this kind
of document. It is crucial to ensure that the United
Nations discussions have an intergovernmental nature.
Imposing biased narratives focused on limiting the
unconditional principle of the national sovereignty of
States, including on water-related issues, is a dead end.

A/77/PV.99

Ms. Demir (Türkiye): Türkiye welcomes
the adoption of resolution 77/334 by consensus.
We would like to extend our appreciation to our
co-facilitators — the Kingdom of Netherlands, Senegal
and Tajikistan — for their commitment to achieve a
consensus-based text after a long negotiation process.
Although this resolution does not reflect all the
concerns of my delegation, Türkiye joined consensus
due to the importance we attach to water issues. In
line with operative paragraph 5 of the resolution, we
expect the Secretary-General to closely consult with
the Member States in the preparation of the United
Nations system-wide water and sanitation strategy in a
transparent, inclusive manner. Türkiye stands ready to
contribute to that process and looks forward to working
with the Secretariat.
In relation to the Secretary-General’s appointment
of the United Nations Special Envoy for Water, we
expect the Special Envoy to approach water issues
in an unbiased, impartial and independent manner,
respecting the various positions, circumstances and
perspectives of all Member States. For that reason, it
is important that the terms of reference of the Special
Envoy be defined with utmost care. We will closely
follow up with, and actively engage in, future processes
foreseen in this resolution.
Mr. Sabo (Ethiopia): Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the floor.
Since the draft of resolution 77/334 was introduced,
our delegation has engaged in the negotiations in a
constructive manner, believing that it would lead to an
outcome text that reasonably accommodates the needs
and concerns of all Member States. From the start,
Ethiopia raised concerns about the lack of clarity on
the objectives and purposes of this resolution, but made
every effort to engage throughout the negotiations,
in the spirit of compromise. We have demonstrated
maximum flexibility during the negotiation process.
Our singular focus was on enhancing cooperation
to accelerate the achievement of the internationally
agreed water-related goals and targets, including
those contained in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The achievement of those goals is critical
to our collective aspiration of eradicating poverty in all
its forms and manifestations. To that end, the United
Nations has put in place robust mechanisms for the
follow-up and implementation of these goals and
targets. It should be noted that we have agreed to review

23-258213/25

A/77/PV.99

the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), including water-related goals, through
existing mechanisms.
In the light of all of this, we believe the resolution
selectively prioritizes one goal over the others, which
could undermine our modest gains towards achieving
overall sustainable development with the objective of
leaving no one behind. Ethiopia has been engaging
in the negotiations, hoping for an outcome that falls
within the scope of the SDGs and the Water Action
Decade and that avoids undue prioritization of one
goal over the others by making the best possible use
of existing mechanisms. In spite of our good-faith
effort, we regret that the resolution was made to focus
on political objectives outside its intended purpose and
core objective.
In March this year, the conference we had on the
midterm comprehensive review of the implementation
generated some momentum in enhancing the Water
Action Decade. In our view, the next review and final
evaluation should naturally come at the end of the
Water Action Decade in 2028. That could serve as a
basis should the General Assembly decide to declare
a subsequent Decade for Action. Alternatively, any
conference should have been linked to 2030, the year set
for the conclusion of the SDGs. Given the varying levels
of progress, it would be appropriate to give Member
States time as well as the financial and technological
support they need to better implement the Action
Agenda and the SDG Goals and targets related to water
and sanitation. For that reason, our delegation believes
the rational course of action is not to establish periodic
conferences through a resolution but to look forward to
the 2028 Final Review Conference. This would enable
us to take stock of our progress, which would inform
any potential declaration of the next Decade for Action
based on the objective assessment and evaluation of the
previous decade.
It has now become evident that the world is not on
track to achieve many of the SDGs. The international
community will have to make the greatest possible
effort to reverse the current trend if we are to make
meaningful progress by the set deadline of 2030. If
there is anything left to expedite, the task is not to have
proliferating processes but to rationalize our approach
and work together within the existing mechanisms. In
our view, what we need is robust and concrete action
that can rescue the 2030 Agenda. My delegation would
therefore like to register a strong reservation, based on
4/25

01/09/2023

our view that it is counterproductive to institutionalize
periodic United Nations Water Conferences outside
the remit of the Water Action Decade and the SDGs,
as reflected in the resolution. In fact, it duplicates
existing efforts and does not complement the activities
to support the implementation of SDG 6 in any way.
In our view, this resolution could have been a good
opportunity to further strengthen global cooperation and
partnership if it had incorporated the inputs provided
by some of us Member States. Unfortunately, they were
ignored and have not been reflected in the text, despite
the fact that we made a lot of compromises throughout
the negotiations. It is important that we work together
to achieve the goals and targets that we have agreed
on. We need to fulfil our commitments and strengthen
our cooperation in attaining these internationally
agreed development goals. Establishing a periodic
water conference instead of expediting implementation
within the scope and objectives of the SDGs and the
Water Action Decade is indeed counterproductive.
For those reasons, our delegation would like to put its
reservations on record.
Ms. Rodríguez Mancia (Guatemala) (spoke
in Spanish): Guatemala thanks the facilitators of
resolution 77/334 for their tireless efforts and their
openness during the process. We appreciate the text,
which takes into account the actions that contribute to
our achievement of our national development priorities
in terms of access to water and management of natural
resources and economic valuation of natural resources
through coordination and capacity-building at the
national and local levels. We highlight the resolution’s
call to strengthen capacity-building and technology
transfer so that developing countries such as ours can
achieve the goals we have set ourselves to benefit our
populations. We therefore join the consensus and would
like to make the following explanation of position.
Guatemala reserves its sovereign legitimacy over
water as an upstream country, but in no circumstances
is it obliged to grant rights to third parties. That is
due to the fact that water is a finite public good and
Guatemala must satisfy the needs of its population,
thereby ensuring that right across generations. We
emphasize that it is the duty of all States to protect
and conserve water and the resources around it in
order to guarantee access to water in their respective
geographic circumstances.
23-25821

01/09/2023

A/77/PV.99

The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position after adoption. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 18.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the General
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
23 at its 53rd plenary meeting, on 14 December 2022.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
decision, it will be necessary to reopen consideration of
agenda item 23. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to reopen its consideration of agenda
item 23?
It was so decided (decision 77/505 B).
Agenda item 23 (continued)
Operational activities for development
Draft decision (A/77/L.108)
The President: Members will recall that at its 3rd
plenary meeting on 16 September 2022, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 23 to the
Second Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 23
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The President: We shall now take a decision on
draft decision A/77/L.108, entitled “United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/77/L.108?
Draft decision A/77/L.108
(decision 77/567).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 23?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 124 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly (A/77/942)
Draft resolution (A/77/942, paragraph 30)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of El Salvador to introduce the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 30 of document A/77/942.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour and an enormous privilege
for me to address the General Assembly today on
behalf of the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly, a mandate entrusted to me and my dear
friend Ambassador Mitch Fifield, former Permanent
Representative of Australia, during the seventy-sixth
and seventy-seventh sessions of the General Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for this distinction to His Excellency
Mr. Abdulla Shahid, President of the General Assembly
at its previous session, and to you, Mr. President, at
this session.
On the seventy-fifth anniversary of our
Organization, we the Member States recognized
that our challenges can be addressed only through
reinvigorated multilateralism, and we committed to
modernizing the United Nations. Almost three years
after that milestone, I am pleased to present the outcome
of the first biennial cycle of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly. This draft resolution (A/77/942, paragraph
30) is therefore the result of two years of substantive
deliberations and negotiations by the Working Group,
marking a step towards strengthening the authority,
effectiveness and efficiency of the General Assembly
in addressing global challenges.
During the past two sessions the Ad Hoc Working
Group held one general debate, four thematic debates
and two interactive dialogues between Permanent
Missions and the Secretariat. With the aim of revitalizing
the revitalization process, two additional informal
meetings, a dialogue among former Presidents of the
General Assembly and a workshop with the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research were also
organized. I would also like to take this opportunity to

23-258215/25

A/77/PV.99

highlight some of the main recommendations proposed
by the Ad Hoc Working Group.
In the first thematic area, which is the role and
authority of the General Assembly, the Member States
reaffirmed the Assembly’s functions and powers and
recognized its role in matters related to the maintenance
of international peace and security, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations. The relationship
between the Assembly and the Organization’s other
principal organs was also a central topic of deliberation
among Member States, with important decisions
adopted on synergies, complementarity and interaction
with the Security Council. In addition, practical steps
were taken to preserve the primacy of the general
debate during the United Nations high-level week,
including mechanisms for Member States, individually
and collectively, to streamline the number of high-level
meetings and side events held every year in September.
In the second area, the Ad Hoc Working Group
also addressed the working methods of the General
Assembly, recognizing that concerted and urgent
efforts are needed to reduce the burdens on its agenda.
Significant efforts were made to establish a mechanism
to carry out in-depth analysis of the Assembly’s
programme and to formulate concrete proposals to
streamline it. The role of the General Committee and
the process of aligning the programmes of the General
Assembly, its Main Committees and the Economic
and Social Council will be key. Similarly, a number of
recommendations have been formulated with the aim
of improving the accessibility of the United Nations
for persons with disabilities, including a request for
the Secretariat to provide information on impediments
to accessibility and actionable options for improving
the situation.
Regarding the process for selecting and appointing
the Secretary-General and other executive Heads, we
believe the Working Group has taken important steps
to improve the process and to continue to ensure that
it is guided by the principles of transparency and
inclusiveness. However, much remains to be done. A
discussion of the process at the seventy-ninth session,
that is, before the next selection and appointment
process begins, will be supported by a number of
mechanisms that allow for careful analysis of past
processes. We hope those agreements and mechanisms
will lay a foundation for necessary improvements in
the future. In relation to the election and appointment
of executive Heads of the United Nations, the draft
6/25

01/09/2023

resolution builds on previous efforts and encourages
the Secretary-General to take further additional steps
to achieve gender parity and geographic balance. It
also reiterates the need to ensure improvements in both
those aspects for the staff of all departments and offices
and at all levels of the Organization.
Regarding the Working Group’s work on the Office
of the President of the General Assembly, I am pleased to
inform the Assembly that significant results have been
achieved for strengthening it with resources that will
enable it to continue to perform its important functions.
We hope those results will be supported by the decisions
made by the Administrative and Budgetary Committee
during the seventy-eighth session.
I would also like to highlight the work of the
Working Group in relation to the role of women in
diplomacy. While we recognize that much remains
to be done, we are encouraged by the agreements
that have been reached, including on ensuring the
continuity of initiatives such as the Advisory Board
on Gender Equality and the meeting of the General
Assembly Platform of Women Leaders. In that regard,
the Ad Hoc Working Group once again pointed out that
our Organization has not yet had a woman SecretaryGeneral. We strongly encourage Member States to take
that into account during the next selection process and
in subsequent ones when nominating female candidates
for the position. The same principle was applied in the
Assembly when Member States recognized that only
four — I repeat, four — women have been elected
as Presidents of the Assembly since the creation of
the United Nations, encouraging Member States to
nominate women for that position as well.
The Ad Hoc Working Group has made a practice of
working to reach consensus for many years. The draft
text that we are presenting today is no exception. After
12 weeks of exhaustive negotiations that culminated
in the early hours of Saturday, 24 June, during which
delegations showed a true spirit of compromise, the
text was unanimously adopted by the Working Group
on Friday, 7 July. We hope that today the plenary of the
General Assembly will also adopt the draft resolution
by consensus. However, despite that success, we fully
recognize that urgent additional efforts are needed
and that it is more important than ever to work to
strengthen the Assembly. The work by no means stops
here and in future we must continue to do everything
possible to incorporate the premise of revitalizing the
General Assembly into our work every day. I encourage
23-25821

01/09/2023

States to follow up on and ensure the implementation
of all revitalization resolutions and to actively
participate in the Ad Hoc Working Group, which is
a platform for dialogue, the exchange of views and
discussion of action-oriented solutions. Permanently
strengthening the United Nations and the Assembly,
its most representative body, must be the focus of this
process. After all, revitalizing the General Assembly
is a demonstration of the desire to build a multilateral
system that is relevant, flexible, agile and capable of
facing ever-evolving challenges.
Allow me to express our sincere gratitude and
appreciation to the representatives of the Member States
for their active involvement, work and constructive
engagement even far into the night during the negotiations
on the draft resolution. I would also like to take this
opportunity to acknowledge the excellent work of the
Secretariat and to thank it for its support throughout the
process, especially through its Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management. And I should
not conclude without expressing my gratitude to the
Australian and Salvadoran teams. Australia’s support,
creativity, commitment and dynamism was key to us as
co-Chairs, enabling us to achieve these results.
I want to thank you once again, Mr. President, for
placing your trust in me and my Australian colleague,
enabling us to lead this initiative, in my case for three
years in a row. I thank you very much and I thank the
Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria to make a statement in
explanation of position before adoption. I would like
to remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Bendjama (Algeria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM).
At the outset, NAM would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your interest
in strengthening the work of the General Assembly
and making this among the top priorities of your term
during the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly. NAM looks forward to the adoption of the
draft resolution on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly (A/77/942, paragraph 30).

A/77/PV.99

NAM is grateful to the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly, Ambassadors González López
of El Salvador and Fifield of Australia, as well as
their able teams of experts, for their leadership and
tireless efforts during this session. We especially thank
them for their dedication to achieving a practical and
ambitious draft resolution that includes many concrete
steps aimed at improving the Assembly’s efficiency
and effectiveness. We also thank all the delegations
that showed the flexibility needed to achieve our
common goal. NAM has always been committed to
this vital process, and we engaged constructively and
in good faith throughout the negotiations. We regret,
however, that some delegations were unable to show
flexibility on significant issues. It is our hope that
every delegation will make an effort to demonstrate the
necessary flexibility in future negotiations.
The draft resolution to be adopted today is
productive and ambitious, the result of inclusive,
transparent and intense consultations. We thank all
delegations for their active engagement. In our view, the
draft resolution presents significant progress on many
important issues, including strengthening the Office of
the President and reaffirming the role of the Assembly
itself. If it is implemented effectively, our Organization
will be more productive and efficient in future. The
Movement applauds the progress that we have made
in increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the
work of the Assembly by streamlining its agenda, and
especially by eliminating duplicate and overlapping
agenda items. NAM welcomes the efficiencies of the
biennialized format and recent innovations in the
working methods of the Ad Hoc Working Group, as
well as informal interactive dialogues with former
Presidents of the Assembly. NAM is also pleased that
the resolution recognizes that multilingualism, as
a core value of the Organization, contributes to the
achievement of the goals of the United Nations.
The Movement also calls for maintaining and
enhancing the progress that has been made in the
process for selecting and appointing the SecretaryGeneral, while bearing in mind the need for gender
balance and geographic representation in the course
of identifying and appointing the best candidate for
the post. NAM welcomes the ongoing efforts and
progress towards achieving equal and fair distribution
in terms of the gender and geographic balance of the

23-258217/25

A/77/PV.99

executive Heads of the United Nations system and the
Senior Management Group of the Organization.
NAM looks forward to continuing to work with all
delegations to further advance the process of revitalizing
the General Assembly. It is now up to all of us to
ensure that these measures are implemented without
further delay. Let us not forget that the revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly is a political
process, not a procedural one, and is mainly aimed
at strengthening the role of the General Assembly as
the chief deliberative policymaking and representative
organ of the wider United Nations system.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before adoption.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
resolution. In that connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present oral
statement is made in the context of rule 153 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly. It will also be
distributed to Member States.
The activities referred to in operative paragraphs
9, 48, 88, 91 and 92 of the draft resolution would
entail new activities in 2024, and annually thereafter,
related to the revitalization of the work of the General
Assembly, including its working methods, and the
strengthening of the accountability, transparency and
institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly. The adoption of the draft
resolution would give rise to budgetary implications
ranging between $1 million and $1.1 million per year,
including three additional positions at the P-3/P-4
level, starting in 2024. Detailed cost estimates would
be developed following further internal consultation
within the Secretariat.
Should the General Assembly adopt the draft
resolution on the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, a revised estimates report would be
submitted for consideration by the General Assembly
through the Fifth Committee during the main part of its
seventy-eighth session, detailing the requirements for
which an additional appropriation would be requested
for 2024. Requirements for 2025 and thereafter would
be presented in the proposed programme budgets
for consideration by the General Assembly in the
applicable years.
8/25

01/09/2023

The statement that I just read out was distributed
through the plenary space on the e-deleGATE portal and
will be made available in the The Journal of the United
Nations under the e-statements link for the meeting.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly” contained in the
report of the Ad Hoc Working Group. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution contained in paragraph 30 of
document A/77/942 was adopted (resolution 77/335).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Gómez Aoiz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
It is my honour to make this statement on behalf of
the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Türkiye, North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Albania, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the potential
candidate country Georgia, also align themselves with
this statement.
At the outset I would like to express our deep
gratitude for the leadership and tireless dedication of
the two co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly,
Ambassadors Egriselda González López, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador, and Mitch Fifield, former
Permanent Representative of Australia, for leading an
ambitious resolution (resolution 77/335) to a consensus
result. We have made progress in the four central areas
of the resolution, and I would like to underscore six
specific examples of that.
First, we have agreed on greater streamlining of
the programme of the General Assembly, particularly
through voluntary commitments to limiting the number
of side events, specifically during the high-level week.
In just two weeks, our commitment will be put to the
test. Let us ensure that the text of the resolution and this
commitment become part of the explanatory package
for our leaders and that they are properly adhered to.
Secondly, we agreed to make the necessary
efforts for the Office of the President of the General
Assembly that will enable him — or, hopefully soon,
her — to address the increasing number of mandates and
23-25821

01/09/2023

processes that the President of the General Assembly
and their Office have to supervise.
Thirdly, we have jointly made further progress
towards gender equality through support to the
President of the General Assembly to guarantee gender
balance between rapporteurs and panellists during
the ministerial week and through a renewed call to all
Member States to designate women candidates for the
post of President of the General Assembly. However, it
is regrettable that so far only four of the 78 Presidents
of the General Assembly have been women. It is
also disappointing that the laudable proposal by the
co-Chairs to adapt the regulation to today’s realities
has not achieved the necessary consensus.
Fourthly, we have also made some progress in
improving transparency and accountability in the
selection process for the Secretary-General, but we
could have done more to lay the groundwork for the
process for the appointment of the next SecretaryGeneral.
Fifthly, we have recognized the significant role of
the General Assembly in peace and security, thanks
to projects such as the veto initiative, and the need to
cooperate closely with the Security Council in that area.
Last but not least, we have finally succeeded in
including strong language on improving accessibility
at the United Nations. We believe that progress lays a
foundation to build on for the next resolution, in two
years’ time.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, which is a
cross-regional group comprised of 27 States, including
my own country, Estonia.
I would like to begin by thanking the Permanent
Representatives of Australia and El Salvador and
their teams for their outstanding co-chairing of these
complex negotiations. I also thank them for proposing
an ambitious zero draft that sought to go beyond the
status quo, in order to make important and needed
changes to our Organization, which stands at the core
of the rules-based multilateral system. The ACT group
invites all Member States to take stock of the advances
in resolution 77/335, on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly, which we have just adopted,
and to actively engage in implementing it as soon as
possible. ACT also requests that the elected President

A/77/PV.99

of the General Assembly work in close collaboration
with the Secretariat for a swift implementation of the
resolution. It is an ambitious text that contains a number
of improvements aimed at continuing to strengthen the
General Assembly and improve the accountability of
the Security Council to the Assembly.
What are the areas where ACT sees progress
this year? The current text reaffirms the role of the
General Assembly in matters of peace and security and
underlines the importance of the veto initiative in that
context. We also agreed to create a digital handbook
on the practices and situations in which the General
Assembly has had a relevant role in peace and security.
We are pleased that this year’s resolution acknowledges
the importance of the workshop on the relationship
between the General Assembly and the Security Council.
We managed to include stronger language encouraging
Member States to bear in mind that we have still never
had a woman Secretary-General, which is particularly
relevant to the upcoming process. We agreed to create
a repository of the past selections and appointments
of the previous Secretaries-General. Where setting a
predictable timeline for the selection and appointment
process is concerned, we consider the new language
on joint letters, the reference to notional events and
the recognition that the Secretary-General-designate
requires sufficient time to prepare for taking office,
as a step in the right direction. We welcome the new
language that invites future candidates to voluntarily
disclose the funding sources for their campaigns, which
is a necessary minimum measure of transparency. Last
but not least, we also agreed to strengthen the language
that now requests the presentation of vision statements.
We made some progress with the outcome
document, even though we again missed opportunities
to introduce additional improvements. This should
have been a pivotal year ahead of the selection and
appointment of the next Secretary-General, which
is only two years away. We regret the approach that
some took to simply put up blocks rather than engage
substantively in negotiations towards compromise,
particularly on proposals that enjoy wide support among
the United Nations membership. Owing to some close
cooperation in the General Assembly setting between
permanent members of the Security Council, several
such proposals by ACT did not make it into the final
text. In our common interests, we need to find a way to
change that pattern in future.

23-258219/25

A/77/PV.99

What are the issues that remain unresolved and
should therefore be brought into the seventy-ninth
session? We need a clear and much more predictable
timeline for the overall process. There was broad support
for a structured time frame, including start, end and
intervening dates for the entire process. All Member
States, candidates, civil society and even the broader
public would benefit from that clarity. We also regret
that the General Assembly was unable to recommend
that the Council consider adding a dedicated chapter
on the veto to the annual report, which would contain
an analysis of the cases in which the veto has been
exercised, or appropriately reflect the special reports of
the Council. We hope the Council will take up the idea
in its next report.
Let me conclude my statement on behalf of the
ACT group on a positive note. We are making some
evolutionary progress. Looking to the future, ACT
stands ready to continue working tirelessly with other
negotiation groups to finally formalize a process
for the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and to improve the Security Council’s overall
accountability to the General Assembly. We count on
the valuable support of all United Nations members to
achieve those important and timely goals.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to focus on why brave leadership is
paramount for the culture of the United Nations.
Costa Rica commends the steadfast courage
shown by Ambassadors González López and Fifield,
of El Salvador and Australia, who in resolution
77/335 presented us with a creative, ambitious initial
text that transcended routine technical rollovers. A
mere technical rollover would have squandered the
opportunity to make this Organization more relevant
to the people it serves. El Salvador and Australia
faithfully carried out the task assigned to them by the
President of the General Assembly, with the objective
of significantly improving the Assembly’s authority,
effectiveness, and efficiency. We also applaud the
negotiation groups involved, notably the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM), for
their skilful approaches, as well as for their conviction
and resolve in demonstrating that the United Nations
belongs to all of us, not just a select few. Together with
ACT and NAM, we continued to improve the process
for the selection and appointment of the SecretaryGeneral and other executive heads.
10/25

01/09/2023

The determined leadership shown in achieving a
bold outcome during those negotiations was in stark
contrast to the conduct of the permanent members
of the Security Council. Costa Rica regrets that
permanent members de facto exercised their veto
power, obstructing positive proposals supported by
the overwhelming majority of States in the General
Assembly and despite the best efforts of negotiating
groups and other States in their national capacity. That
is again a consequence of the tyranny of consensus.
Towards the end of the negotiations some of the
permanent members eventually acknowledged their
lack of flexibility and offered an apology. Though that
was appreciated, it does not erase the fact that their
veto power effectively extended into negotiations in
the General Assembly. That is as inappropriate as it is
concerning, especially when the very purpose of this
work is to enhance the authority and functions of the
most representative, legitimate and democratic body of
the United Nations — the General Assembly.
Costa Rica, in its national capacity and as a member
of ACT, entered the negotiations in good faith and with
a genuine desire to make progress on tangible results
in the four clusters of the resolution that reflect ACT’s
core principles and the values and aspirations that my
country upholds in our Organization. At this moment
in history, when multilateralism is under severe strain,
we must lay the ground to ensure that the senior leaders
of this Organization are visionaries, equipped with a
clear mandate from Member States to transform it and
its programme of work. That is why we welcomed the
proposals of the co-Chairs which, together with ACT
and NAM, sought to significantly improve the process
of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General and
other executive heads. In that regard, I would like to
highlight three points.
First, in recent years there have been positive
developments in how the selection and appointment of
the Secretary-General are conceived. From a secretive
affair dominated by the Security Council, we have
worked towards an inclusive, more transparent process,
with a significant role played by the General Assembly.
But it is essential to continue that progress in order to
assert the authority of the Assembly and achieve a more
accurate reading of Article 97 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which establishes that it is the Assembly
that appoints the Secretary-General. We regret that
the groundswell of support for progress during the
negotiations was not reflected in the language adopted
23-25821

01/09/2023

today in decision 77/568. Costa Rica is determined
to continue to press for progress on the principle of a
meaningful choice for the General Assembly through
the presentation of multiple candidates, and for the
Assembly to set the terms of the appointment, including
relating to length and renewability. Formal discussions
on such issues may have been blocked in the text,
against the will of the vast majority of States, but we
remain committed to these unavoidable changes, and
we will not give up.
Secondly, another matter of concern was the
obstruction of language that would have allowed
the General Assembly to make recommendations to
the Security Council, as established in Article 10 of
the Charter. That is an extremely serious matter since it
contradicts a function that is established in the Charter
of the United Nations. Indeed, it was surprising to see
the strong coordination of permanent members in that
negotiation; we can only hope for such close cooperation
within the Council itself and in its work.
Thirdly, the text adopted emphasizes several key
points regarding gender parity at the United Nations.
The document recognizes women’s significant
contributions to diplomacy and advocates for their
inclusion in the rules of procedure. It strongly calls
on the President of the General Assembly to prioritize
gender parity in appointing co-chairs, co-facilitators,
speakers and panellists for all General Assembly
meetings. Additionally, it encourages the President
to maintain the Advisory Board on Gender Equality
and the Platform of Women Leaders. It calls on the
Secretary-General to intensify efforts towards gender
parity within the United Nations System-wide Strategy
on Gender Parity and expresses concern about gender
parity in appointing executive heads. Lastly, it highlights
the historical gender disparity in electing women to
the presidency of the General Assembly, emphasizing
the need for States to consider that disparity when
nominating candidates for the position.
The next Secretary-General should be a woman.
The resolution stops short of saying that, but every
one of us sitting in this Hall knows it and should act
on it when the time comes. Yes, there are modest
achievements on gender parity and positive language
on regional representation, but the reality remains that
for many of the top posts at the United Nations, one
must have the correct passport and friends in high
places. Huge swathes of talented individuals from
across the world continue to be overlooked as posts

A/77/PV.99

continue to be monopolized by nationals of powerful
countries. That is no way to run an organization and all
members of the United Nations are obliged to denounce
the politicization of United Nations appointments
whenever we see it.
Costa Rica welcomes the advancements made
towards transparency, accessibility and accountability
in the resolution but urges the States Members of the
United Nations to remain vigilant. We look forward
to continuing to engage positively and proactively to
further enhance the authority and the efficiency of our
General Assembly.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
I would now like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Egriselda González López, Permanent
Representative of El Salvador, and Ambassador Mitch
Fifield, former Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations, who as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group have so ably conducted its discussions
and complex negotiations. I am sure that the members
of the Assembly join me in expressing our sincere
appreciation to them.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 124?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/77/L.105)
Draft decision (A/77/L.109)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.105.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution on “Model United
Nations” (A/77/L.105), on behalf of the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Jamaica, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and my own country, Portugal.
Model United Nations simulations have made
an important contribution to helping the United
Nations achieve its goals and garnering support for
multilateralism by teaching young people about our
Organization and involving them in supporting its work.
Participation in model United Nations simulations

23-2582111/25

A/77/PV.99

provides a training ground for youth delegates and
enhances the implementation of the United Nations
youth agenda. It provides valuable exposure and builds
the skills that young persons can develop and harness to
increase their engagement and advocacy at all levels on
issues of significance for current and future generations.
The text that we are presenting today is the firstever United Nations draft resolution on the topic. It
recognizes the important contribution of model United
Nations to diplomacy and international cooperation,
and in building young people’s capacities in the field
of international affairs, providing them with the
knowledge and opportunities they need. Special
attention was given to encouraging Member States, the
United Nations system, civil society and other relevant
stakeholders to raise awareness and promote equal
opportunities for all to access model United Nations
programmes. The text welcomes the work of the
Secretariat’s Department of Global Communications,
including through its information centres and
initiatives such as the United Nations Guide to Model
United Nations. It also encourages organizations to
consider the theme of the current General Assembly
session when organizing model United Nations and
notes that United Nations Day, 24 October, can be
effectively used to raise awareness about the role of
model United Nations in engaging young people with
multilateralism. In addition, while welcoming the
establishment of the United Nations Youth Office, the
draft resolution encourages its follow-up on areas of
potential support from the United Nations system to
model United Nations.
I want to take this opportunity to thank all
delegations for their constructive participation and
responsibility in achieving a consensus text. I also
want to thank all the sponsors of the draft resolution.
We believe the final draft reflects the priorities of the
entire United Nations membership. I would like to
add a word of appreciation to the Secretariat for its
support during the process, which helped us to achieve
a comprehensive draft resolution that we hope will
be adopted by consensus. Finally, allow me a special
word of gratitude to the experts from our Missions, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, Jamaica, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic and Portugal, who worked hard to
put together the document that is before us today.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.105 and draft decision A/77/L.109.
12/25

01/09/2023

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/77/L.105, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Armenia, Bahrain, Barbados, Belize, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Colombia, Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Estonia,
France, the Gambia, Georgia, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana,
Haiti, Iceland, Italy, India, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
the Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated States
of Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, San Marino, Suriname,
Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Uganda, the
United States of America, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.105 and draft decision
A/77/L.109.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.105, entitled “Model United Nations”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/77/L.105?
Draft resolution
(resolution 77/336).

A/77/L.105

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft decision A/77/L.109, entitled “Scope
of the Summit of the Future”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft decision A/77/L.109?
Draft
decision
(decision 77/568).

A/77/L.109

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): It is an honour and a pleasure
for me to address the Assembly on my own behalf and
that of my co-facilitator, Ambassador Antje Leendertse
of Germany. As co-facilitators, our task, as set out in
23-25821

01/09/2023

resolution 76/307, was “to facilitate open, transparent
and inclusive intergovernmental consultations on the
preparatory process” of the Summit of the Future.
The resolution obliged us to provide adequate time for
negotiations on the Pact for the Future. While reaching
an agreement has taken us a while, Ambassador
Leendertse and I would like to sincerely thank the
President and delegations for the trust and confidence
placed in us to facilitate this important process. We
want to put on record our deep respect and appreciation
for their passionate engagement, wise counsel and
the outstanding spirit of cooperation and flexibility
demonstrated throughout the entire process. We are
happy to say that we have succeeded in fulfilling
our mandate.
The Assembly may recall that on 15 August we
conveyed to Member States a draft decision that we
put under silence procedure. We believed that the draft
decision that we have just adopted as decision 77/568,
which was the result of extensive consultations held
since April 2023, took account of the priorities and
inputs of Member States in a balanced and concise
manner. We also believed that it provided a framework
for negotiating an ambitious Pact for the Future during
the upcoming seventy-eighth session, with adequate
time for negotiations. The silence procedure pertaining
to the draft decision formally concluded at 6 p.m. on
Friday, 18 August. Despite the breaking of silence
on six of the elements under paragraph (a), we feel
reassured and optimistic that the process has provided
us with a solid basis for moving into negotiations on the
Pact for the Future in the next session. Thanks to open,
transparent and inclusive consultations throughout the
seventy-seventh session, and the very constructive
and flexible approach of all delegations, we should
appreciate that the majority of the draft text submitted
under silence was unopposed.
While we as co-facilitators were disappointed to
not see the third revision adopted, we do want to remind
delegations of the substantial compilation of all our
hard work where silence was not broken. Please allow
me to read out the following for the record.
“Under the chapeau, we retain: (i)
reaffirmation of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; (ii)
reaffirmation that the three pillars of the United
Nations — development, peace and security and
human rights — are interlinked and mutually

A/77/PV.99

reinforcing; (iii) reaffirmation that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge
and indispensable requirement for sustainable
development; and (iv) recalling the Declaration
on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations.
“Under Chapter 1: Sustainable Development
and Financing for Development, we retain: (vi)
accelerating the full achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable
Development Goals, which are integrated and
indivisible and balance the three dimensions
of sustainable development — the economic,
social and environmental; and building on the
2023 Sustainable Development Goals Summit;
(ix) fulfilling all commitments under the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, including on financing for
development, as a key framework for the provision
of the means of implementation for the achievement
of sustainable development; (x) building on the
outcomes of recent United Nations high-level
meetings related to sustainable development and
financing for development; and (xi) addressing all
obstacles to achieving sustainable development.”
I turn now to Chapter 2: International Peace and
Security. Even though silence was broken in this
paragraph under Chapter 2, which we discussed
intensively, there were many elements that were not
opposed explicitly during the silence procedure. Those
would be promoting and maintaining international
peace and security, and addressing threats, including
root causes thereof, through the peaceful settlement of
disputes; refraining from the threat or use of force in any
manner inconsistent with the United Nations Charter;
prevention of conflicts while promoting a culture of
peace, diplomacy and mediation; confidence-building
measures; peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining
peace and countering terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, in accordance with international
law, including full adherence to the United Nations
Charter, its purposes and principles, and United
Nations resolutions.
“Under Chapter 3: Science, Technology and
Innovation and Digital Cooperation, we retain
(xiv) strengthening all aspects of global digital
cooperation and bridging digital divides, through
an open and inclusive process, building on the
work being done in existing processes and forums

23-2582113/25

A/77/PV.99

in the United Nations and on the contributions of
relevant stakeholders, through the elaboration of a
Global Digital Compact, to be intergovernmentally
negotiated during the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly and which would be annexed to
the Pact if intergovernmentally agreed.
“Under Chapter 4: Youth and Future
Generations, we retain the elements (xv)
promoting the meaningful, inclusive and effective
engagement of youth and youth-led and youthfocused organizations in the work of the United
Nations; and thinking and acting in the interests
of future generations, including through the
elaboration of a declaration on future generations,
to be intergovernmentally negotiated during the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly
and which would be annexed to the Pact of the
Future if intergovernmentally agreed.
“Under Chapter 5: Transforming Global
Governance we retain (xvii) reforming three of the
principal organs of the United Nations: reform of
the Security Council, revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly and the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council, while
avoiding overlaps with and duplication of existing
intergovernmental processes; (xviii) strengthening
of the Peacebuilding Commission; (xix) deepening
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations as appropriate according
to their respective mandates; (xx) developing a
framework on measures of progress on sustainable
development that complement or go beyond gross
domestic product; (xxi) reforming the international
financial architecture and ongoing efforts to
improve the international debt mechanisms; (xxii)
promoting a rules-based, non-discriminatory,
open, fair, inclusive, equitable and transparent
multilateral trading system; (xxiv) fostering
peaceful and sustainable uses of outer space,
recognizing the role of relevant intergovernmental
bodies, including the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space.”
Delegations also agreed that a series of issues
would be taken into account in the relevant chapters of
the Pact for the Future. These included, among other
things, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and its pledge to leave no one behind, to end poverty and
hunger everywhere, to combat inequalities within and
among countries, to build peaceful, just and inclusive
14/25

01/09/2023

societies, to ensure the lasting protection of the planet
and its natural resources and to create conditions for
sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth,
shared prosperity and decent work for all, taking into
account different levels of national development and
capacities, as well as the realization of the human
rights of all, the achievement of gender equality and the
empowerment of all women and girls.
Finally, concerning the negotiations on the Pact for
the Future in the seventy-eighth session, a clear consensus
emerged that to ensure a process that is streamlined and
well-coordinated while also allowing for substantive
engagement on various areas, in consultation with the
President of the General Assembly, coordinators should
be designated as may be deemed necessary for specific
chapters or elements. It is also the desire of Member
States that no parallel meetings should be held. Given
that overall positive assessment, we recommend that
the incoming President of the General Assembly begin
the preparations for the Pact on this basis, taking into
account the discussions that have taken place during
the seventy-seventh session.
As set out in resolution 76/307, it is essential that
adequate time be allotted for negotiations on the Pact
for the Future during the seventy-eighth session, and
we suggest that co-facilitators be appointed quickly
to allow consultations on the Pact for the Future to
commence as early in the session as is practicable.
We highly recommend that the co-facilitators base a
zero draft of the Pact on the areas in which there was
broad consensus, following the structure that we are
genuinely happy has been adopted by consensus today.
Once again, there is a lot of substance to build on in the
next session so that we can agree on an ambitious Pact
for the Future.
It would be remiss of me to conclude without
expressing our sincere gratitude to all delegations for
the work invested in this process. We appreciate their
commitment, and it is our hope that the momentum
built during this session will be maintained and carry
us to a successful negotiating period in the seventyeighth session. Lastly, I want to express our heartfelt
gratitude to our colleagues in the Secretariat for their
professional and diligent support.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 (G77) and China. At the outset, I would like to commend
all the efforts and hard work of the co-facilitators of this
23-25821

01/09/2023

process, Ambassadors Neville Gertze, the Permanent
Representative of Namibia, and Antje Leendertse,
the Permanent Representative of Germany, in order
to enable us to advance towards consensus on this
complex and significant process.
The Group has worked in a constructive and highly
committed way in the past few months in order to finalize
a document that includes the priorities of developing
countries for the Summit of the Future, as well as for its
outcome document, entitled “Pact for the Future”, mainly
related to our conditions in that regard, and to bridge
the enormous gap between developed and developing
countries, which would make it possible to advance
towards a common future of sustainable development,
peace and respect for the human rights of all, including
the right to development, in a context of human dignity,
for every country and every people. The achievement of
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and
girls will also be crucial in the future we want.
Since no agreement was possible on a detailed and
balanced text with elements to be agreed by all Member
States, today the G-77 and China would like to express
its understanding that decision 77/568, which we have
just adopted, is a streamlined and general text with no
substance whatever in the chapeau and chapters, and
that it might not be the best document to reflect the
scope of the Summit of the Future. However, it is at
least a minimum common ground where all delegations
can find room to include their interests and priorities
in the next few months, as we negotiate a Pact for the
Future. Those negotiations could take into account the
deep debates and the work done during the preparatory
process on matters that are a priority for developing
countries, considering an adequate balance for the
whole document.
We hope that in the coming months we will
participate in open, transparent and exhaustive
intergovernmental negotiations in order to incorporate
all the necessary substance into the Pact for the Future,
especially the needs and priorities of the global South.
Since the priority for this year continues to be the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Summit, we
reiterate that, for the Group of 77, the full achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Sustainable Development Goals should be at the
heart of preparations for any outcome of the Summit of
the Future. A balanced, comprehensive and ambitious
political declaration of the SDG Summit, which we
hope will finally be adopted, will constitute an essential

A/77/PV.99

input for the preparatory process of the Summit of the
Future, including its ministerial meeting in September,
as well as for the Summit itself.
The ministerial meeting will also be a significant
contribution to the negotiations on the Pact. The
Summit of the Future should strengthen multilateralism
in moving towards a more just, equitable,
non-discriminatory and sustainable world that is
helping all countries advance towards sustainable
development and prosperity, in line with the Charter.
Unquestionably, the pathway to that noble purpose
is a change to the current unjust and exclusionary
international order. In that regard, the Group strongly
believes that a future world cannot be conceived without
ending and refraining from promulgating and applying
unilateral coercive economic, financial or trade
measures that are not in accordance with international
law and the Charter, since they dramatically affect
the rights and dignity of the people living under such
illegal measures and hinder their countries’ efforts to
achieve sustainable development.
The Group underlines the importance of addressing
the problems and challenges of the present in order to
create a better environment for future generations. In
that regard, development issues should be at the centre
of discussions as cross-cutting matters, as well as the
eradication of poverty and hunger. To that end, it will
be crucial to be able to count on the necessary means of
implementation, including reforming the international
financial architecture and establishing measures
going beyond gross domestic product to enable a more
inclusive approach to international cooperation. The
Group also emphasizes that the Summit of the Future
must provide concrete solutions for the promotion
of technology transfer from developed countries to
developing countries, as well as for capacity-building
and technological and scientific cooperation aimed at
closing the digital and technological divide and fostering
sustainable development in its three dimensions in a
balanced and integrated manner.
In these times of multidimensional crises that weigh
particularly on the countries of the global South, we
can only look to the future in the belief that solidarity,
equity, social justice and cooperation must prevail to
achieve the development and well-being of present and
future generations.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
expressing our gratitude to you, Mr. President, for

23-2582115/25

A/77/PV.99

convening this meeting to take action on the streamlined
version of decision 77/568, on the scope of the Summit
of the Future. Pakistan joined the consensus on the
decision. My delegation greatly appreciates the efforts
of the Permanent Representatives of Germany and
Namibia as co-facilitators of the preparatory process
for the Summit of the Future. They tried to complete
their tasks during the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly by presenting to you, Mr. President,
an abridged version of the decision on the scope of
the Summit. At the same time, they annexed the third
draft to the letter addressed to you. I want to express
my appreciation for their efforts as co-facilitators to
enlist the elements of the third draft, which had broad
support from Member States, in order to preserve those
elements for subsequent negotiations.
While my delegation has joined the consensus
on the decision, I would like to underline that the
following important elements in Chapter 2, entitled
“International peace and security”, were not mentioned
in the letter addressed to you despite the fact that there
was no objection to them. Those elements are root
causes of conflicts, confidence-building measures,
and full adherence to the United Nations Charter,
its purposes and principles, and to United Nations
resolutions. My delegation appreciates the statement
just made by Ambassador Gertze of Namibia in his
capacity as co-facilitator. He mentioned and included
the elements in his statement, but we sincerely believe
that those elements will be enumerated either through
a subsequent co-facilitators’ letter or in an alternate
supplemental letter addressed to you, Mr. President,
before the start of the negotiations on the Pact for
the Future. My delegation believes that it is vital that
all elements, including those on which there was
convergence, be included in a letter before the start of
the negotiations, because they provide a solid basis for
negotiations on a very comprehensive, inclusive and
forward-looking Pact for the Future.
Mr. Cruvinel Barenho (Brazil): Brazil aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
Let me start by thanking Germany and Namibia
for the enormous efforts they put into the preparatory
process for the Summit of the Future in this last
semester. We also thank Pakistan and Cuba for their
leadership in the Like-Minded Group and in the G-77
and China, respectively.
16/25

01/09/2023

We are pleased that the General Assembly
continued to make progress on the preparations for
the Summit of the Future. The provisions in the text
will guide Member States in our future work and will
provide a clearer path for the negotiations on the Pact
for the Future. Its consensus adoption as decision
77/568 is therefore a positive step forward that should
be duly recognized. Nevertheless, we must register
Brazil’s disappointment with the final outcome of
the work done in the last few months. We all devoted
enormous amounts of time and effort to negotiating a
substantial scope that would provide specific tracks
for future negotiations, ensuring an important basis
for the ambitious multilateral reforms and innovations
we want to see reflected by the end of the process in
September 2024. In that vein, we would like to thank
the co-facilitators for preserving and forwarding to the
Office of the President of the General Assembly the
third revised draft of the decision on the scope of the
Summit of the Future. We understand that the tracks
to which no objection was made should be guiding
elements for Member States to build on for the Pact for
the Future. Brazil will remain committed to advancing
many of those elements, such as the reaffirmation of
the principles of the Rio Declaration, including the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities,
reform of the international financial architecture and
of the Security Council, and the strengthening of the
Peacebuilding Commission, among others.
Notwithstanding the shortcomings of today,
Brazil remains a firm believer in the potential of
multilateralism to bring about the transformational
progress needed to achieve sustainable development,
protect human rights for all and ensure a peaceful and
just international order. That is what will animate us in
working towards the Summit of the Future.
Mr. Molla (Bangladesh): While aligning myself
with the statement delivered by the representative
of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77 and China on
decision 77/568, entitled “Scope of the Summit of the
Future”, I would like to add some comments in our
national capacity.
At the outset, we want to express our sincere
appreciation to the co-facilitators, Ambassador
Leendertse, Permanent Representative of Germany,
and Ambassador Gertze, Permanent Representative of
Namibia, for their commendable efforts to ensure open,
transparent, inclusive and constructive facilitation
during the preparatory process of the Summit of the
23-25821

01/09/2023

Future. Throughout the consultation process on the
draft decision regarding the scope and limits of the
Summit of the Future, the delegation of Bangladesh
was actively and constructively engaged. Although
we are a small delegation, we spent countless hours
in the negotiation room and engaged with delegations
to bridge gaps and find common ground. Our efforts
led to agreement on most of the issues, including those
to which we attach high importance, such as a culture
of peace, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, climate
change, gender equality and bridging the digital divide,
to name only a few.
Regrettably, with the streamlined draft that was
presented to us and adopted, we now face the unfortunate
situation of losing the gains that were the product of
our efforts over five months. While we understand the
circumstances that led the co-facilitators to present the
streamlined version of the decision, we regret that there
was no broader consultation within the membership
subsequent to the breaking of the silence. Given that
the third revision of the decision was placed under
silence and the silence was broken, it was reasonable to
expect that Member States would be consulted before
presenting a very different version straight for action.
That came as a surprise to us and we are not entirely
happy about it.
Having said that, we would like to express our
appreciation to the co-facilitators for their transparency
and for putting the text of the streamlined draft on
record. We also appreciated the statement by the
Permanent Representative of Namibia in that regard.
We hope their letter will serve as a useful reminder of
the agreements that were reached on most of the issues
and that delegations will pay due attention to it during
the negotiations on the Pact for the Future.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
commitment to remaining constructively engaged
in the upcoming negotiation process for the Pact for
the Future.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Group of 77
and China.
My delegation also aligns itself with the adoption of
decision 77/568, for which we have great expectations.
We would like to express our gratitude for the efforts of
the co-facilitators in reaching consensus. The decision
covers the main areas of interest encompassed by a

A/77/PV.99

Summit of the Future very broadly and gives us space to
tackle the main aspects and the concerns of developing
countries during the substantive negotiations. I want
to underscore the fact that it includes, as cross-cutting
issues, the Sustainable Development Goals with a view
to 2030 and beyond, as well as gender equality, human
rights and social and sustainable development issues,
among others, all of which should be integral to the Pact.
The social dimension sketches out everyday life for
all citizens, including its shortcomings and aspirations.
That impacts our democracies and the building of
peaceful, inclusive societies. The Summit of the Future
is another link in the chain of our efforts and must be
consistent with this cross-cutting concern. The text
adopted and others under way should enable us to begin
work on a second social summit in 2025 without delay,
which should update the Copenhagen commitments in
2025 in the light of our new challenges. And we believe
that the General Assembly should continue to progress
in this direction.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
I would like to express my sincere thanks
to Ambassador Antje Leendertse, Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations,
and Ambassador Neville Melvin Gertze, Permanent
Representative of Namibia to the United Nations,
co-facilitators of the preparatory process of the Summit
of the Future during the seventy-seventh session who
have so ably conducted the discussions and complex
negotiations of the consultative process. I am sure the
members of the Assembly join me in extending to them
our sincere appreciation.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 126.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution (A/77/L.103)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Jamaica to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.103.
Mr. Wallace (Jamaica): On behalf of the 14 member
States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), I have

23-2582117/25

A/77/PV.99

the honour to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.103,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community”.
The members of the Caribbean Community
have presented a draft resolution that builds on its
predecessor resolutions 73/347 and 75/323, adopted
during the seventy-third and seventy-fifth sessions,
respectively. Apart from providing the rollover of the
agenda item to the seventy-ninth session of the General
Assembly, the draft resolution ensures that the strong
foundation of partnership between CARICOM and the
United Nations can continue to be vigorously pursued
and deepened. It acknowledges the region’s inherent
vulnerabilities, including to climate change and to
external economic and financial shocks.
CARICOM is celebrating the fiftieth anniversary
since its establishment with the signing of the Treaty
of Chaguaramas in July 1973. Our region has made
significant progress since then to consolidate democracy,
build peaceful and resilient societies, strengthen
our integration and empower our peoples. However,
our region has also had to contend with persistent
challenges, including natural disasters, the illicit trade
in drugs, small arms and light weapons and ammunition,
high prevalence of non-communicable diseases and
de-risking and the withdrawal of correspondent banking
relations in the region. International cooperation and
collaboration, including with the United Nations, is
essential to address those challenges.
Climate change is a fundamental threat to the
sustainable development of the member States of the
Caribbean Community. Global responses to climate
change must be ambitious and guided by science
to meet the commitments of the Paris Agreement.
Cooperation between CARICOM and the United
Nations will be essential in addressing the adaptation
and resilience of the region. The Caribbean Community
remains committed to implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway. Challenges
in accessing development finance, high debt burdens
and the lingering impacts of the coronavirus disease
pandemic continue to impede our development
aspirations. We look forward to the fourth International
Conference on Small Island Developing States to be
held in Antigua and Barbuda in 2024 as an opportunity
to forge a new programme of action for the sustainable
development of small island developing States. It is also
18/25

01/09/2023

imperative to take forward the work of the high-level
panel on the multidimensional vulnerability index.
Lastly, CARICOM underscores the commitment
of the United Nations to Haiti’s long-term stability
and socioeconomic development as an important
cornerstone of the Organization’s engagement with the
region. We therefore acknowledge the critical nature of
the role played by the United Nations in assisting the
Haitian Government and its people through the United
Nations country team and the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
In conclusion, I would also like to express
CARICOM’s gratitude to all the delegations that took
an active part in drafting the text before us today and
whose spirit of solidarity and consensus will, I trust,
enable us to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
We express our appreciation to the delegations that have
sponsored draft resolution A/77/L.103 and encourage
those who have not done so to lend their support
and become sponsors of a draft resolution that is so
important for our region, the United Nations system
and the international community.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.103.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to the delegations listed in
document A/77/L.103, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Canada,
Georgia, Guatemala, Kenya, Lesotho, Marshall
Islands, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.103, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.103?
Draft resolution A/77/L.103
(resolution 77/337).

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, may I remind
23-25821

01/09/2023

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Heartney (United States of America): The
United States has joined consensus on resolution 77/337
and welcomes cooperation between the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and the United Nations to
address the Caribbean’s most pressing challenges.
That includes, as the resolution states, addressing the
coronavirus disease and other public health challenges,
public education, peace and security, and the need to
urgently respond to the risks posed by climate change.
We were disappointed that some Member States
insisted on language in the resolution that distorts the
best available science, as reflected in the findings of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and
that downplays the need to urgently reduce global
net greenhouse gas emissions by 43 per cent by 2030
from 2019 levels to limit warming to 1.5°C. Those
distortions are counterproductive, since the impacts of
climate change are particularly dire for the members
of CARICOM.
The United States is taking action to tackle the
climate crisis at home and abroad to avoid the most
catastrophic impacts and to seize the opportunity that
tackling climate change presents. That includes, for
example, efforts to reduce United States emissions by
50 to 52 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030 and to build
global resilience through the President’s Emergency
Plan for Adaptation and Resilience. That plan will help
more than half a billion people in developing countries
adapt to and manage the impacts of climate change and
scale up climate finance.
The United States looks forward to working with
CARICOM and other partners, including the United
Nations, to continue efforts to address the threat
posed by climate change. To that end, in 2022, Vice
President Harris launched the United States-Caribbean
Partnership to Address the Climate Crisis 2030, an
umbrella initiative under which the United States is
supporting the clean energy transition, improving
access to development financing, promoting food
security and building human and technical capacity in
the Caribbean to mitigate the effects of climate change.
Ms. Gómez Aoiz (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States.

A/77/PV.99

The European Union and its member States support
resolution 77/337 on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and encourage further cooperation between the
two organizations. The Caribbean Community and
the European Union share historical, cultural and
economic ties, common interests and shared values.
The EU is committed to strengthening development
efforts in the region on the basis of almost 50 years of
cooperation, including through the Caribbean Forum of
African, Caribbean and Pacific States-European Union
Economic Partnership Agreement.
However, we are disappointed that the resolution
was submitted for adoption before the different
delegations reached an agreement on operative
paragraph 11, which remains problematic to our group.
We strongly regret that language on climate change
has been weakened compared to the last iteration
of the resolution (resolution 75/323) at a time when
the devastating impact of climate change on the
Caribbean is every year more obvious. While we value
our partnership with the Caribbean Community and
therefore joined consensus on the resolution today, we
stress that operative paragraph 11 does not reflect the
latest language on climate at the United Nations and
cannot be used as a basis for future negotiations.
We reaffirm our strong commitment to United
Nations-CARICOM and European Union-CARICOM
cooperation, with the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals and the implementation of the Paris
Agreement at the forefront of our shared interests.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In a spirit of solidarity with countries of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), the Russian
Federation joined consensus on resolution 77/337
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community. At the same time, once again
we would like to underscore our position that rather
than endlessly raising ambitions, the international
community, especially developed countries, would
do better to pay greater attention to honouring their
commitments in terms of mobilizing financing,
ensuring access to the necessary technologies and
providing training. Those issues should be the focus of
the resolution, in particular its section on climate, and
should be a springboard for cooperation between the
United Nations and countries in the region.

23-2582119/25

A/77/PV.99

If we look simply at the pledges in that area,
according to a number of expert estimates such as those
presented by Oxfam in its “Climate Finance Shadow
Report 2023”, of the $83.3 billion pledged by donors in
2020 for climate objectives, the real amount of financial
support was only between $21 to $24.5 billion. That is
less than a quarter of what was pledged. Against that
backdrop, it is unlikely that simply publicly declaring
an increase in ambition will contribute to tangible
progress in the fight against climate change.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after the adoption.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda
item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/77/L.107)
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Kazakhstan to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.107.
Mr. Rakhmetullin (Kazakhstan): The delegation
of the Republic of Kazakhstan, on behalf of the nine
members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), has the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.107, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is
a
permanent
intergovernmental
international
organization established on 15 June 2001, consisting of
nine member States, three observers and 14 dialogue
partners. On 2 December 2004, the General Assembly
granted observer status to the SCO within the United
Nations. Since then, there has been increasingly
close cooperation between the SCO and the United
Nations Secretariat, specialized agencies, funds
and programmes of the United Nations system. The
Shanghai Cooperation Organization has worked
diligently to jointly implement projects to achieve the
goals of the United Nations as enshrined in its Charter.
It is noteworthy that the SCO has played a decisive
role in regional affairs since its member States account
20/25

01/09/2023

for half of the world’s population and a quarter of the
global gross domestic product.
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization has been a
partner of the United Nations in key political, economic
and security spheres, among others, including
measures to promote peace and counter terrorism and
transnational crime, including drug trafficking and
illegal migration. It is significant to note that there
are regular consultations that the Secretary-General
has with his counterparts in SCO through existing
inter-agency dialogue platforms. In April 2010, the
United Nations and SCO Secretariats signed a joint
declaration on cooperation.
I would like to extend our thanks and appreciation
to all delegations for their active participation and
consistent contributions during the negotiation process.
I strongly encourage Member States to not only endorse
and support the draft resolution but also to consider
joining it as co-sponsors. We hope to see it adopted
by consensus.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/77/L.107.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/77/L.107, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Belarus, Cambodia,
the Gambia, the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Niger.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.107, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei Darussalam, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gambia, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
23-25821

01/09/2023

Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Togo
The draft resolution was adopted by 80 votes to 2,
with 47 abstentions (resolution 77/338).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Azerbaijan,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Guyana and
Yemen informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegations of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Heartney (United States of America): The
United States supports close cooperation between the
United Nations and various international organizations
to make progress on our international challenges,
in line with the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other

A/77/PV.99

relevant international law. Accordingly, the United
States has joined consensus on numerous resolutions
similar to this one that encourage cooperation between
such organizations and the United Nations. However,
at the behest of some of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) members, the SCO has continued
to emphasize policies and positions that are inconsistent
with the Charter of the United Nations. Those policies
and positions include justifying Russia’s brutal war
against Ukraine and emphasizing the concepts of
cultural and civilizational diversity as a cover for
attempts to undermine universal human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
SCO member States are challenging the rule of
law and international asylum practices by prosecuting
individuals for speaking out about regional political
autonomy and by committing to repatriating dissidents
based on the accusations of other SCO members.
Additionally, the United States disagrees with the
SCO’s position that equates terrorism, separatism
and extremism. That position provides States with
the pretext to repress political opponents and dissent,
restrict the activities of civil society and marginalize
ethnic and religious minorities, ostensibly in the name
of countering terrorism. Such Government overreach
is wrong and in addition actually undermines counterterrorism efforts. As the General Assembly has
underscored repeatedly in reviews of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, respect for human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law are
complementary and mutually reinforcing with effective
counter-terrorism measures.
Taken together, the United States cannot support
resolution 77/338, which emphasizes policies and
positions that are inconsistent with the Charter
of the United Nations. That is why we have voted
no accordingly.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of China, who wishes to speak on a point of order.
Ms. Zhu Jiani (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
would like to know which delegation requested a vote
on resolution 77/338.
The President: The request for a recorded vote
was put forward by the delegation of the United States
of America.
Mrs. Guerra Tamayo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to clarify that my delegation will not be

23-2582121/25

A/77/PV.99

speaking on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. We
have requested the floor to speak in explanation of vote
in our national capacity.
The Cuban delegation would like to explain its
vote on resolution 77/338 submitted under sub-item
(s) of agenda item 127, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization”, which we support. We are not in favour
of the politicization of United Nations cooperation
issues. It is important that we return to the practice of
consensus on this matter in the General Assembly. We
must preserve unanimous support for the promotion
of cooperation.
The President: I thank the representative of Cuba
for clarifying the background of her intervention.
Ms. Ali (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation
takes the floor in explanation of vote after the voting.
My delegation thanks the representative of
Kazakhstan for introducing the resolution 77/338,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization” and
acknowledges the role that the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization plays in addressing security in the
region in all its dimensions, including in cooperation
with relevant regional organizations. My delegation
recognizes the efforts of the States members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization in promoting
counter-terrorism cooperation, combating drugs,
addressing
security,
using
information
and
communications technologies and strengthening peace,
sustainable development and intercultural dialogue.
Therefore, any attempt to undermine the integrity of
the resolution is unacceptable as it would constitute an
erosion of the tradition of consensual agreement due to
the narrow political interests of some countries.
My delegation considers such attempts against a
resolution of a technical nature to be an indicator of the
growing politicization and polarization in the United
Nations, which does not bode well for the Organization.
Hence, my delegation has expressed its support for
this resolution by voting in favour of it in order to
preserve the integrity of our work and the objectives
of the United Nations in achieving cooperation and
maintaining international peace and security and
solving international problems of an economic, social,
cultural and humanitarian character.
22/25

01/09/2023

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements made in the
exercise of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes
for the first intervention and to five minutes for the
second intervention and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Kazakhstan for
introducing resolution 77/338 and express our regret
that a vote on it was requested, despite the fact that
our delegation is trying to not politicize a whole host
of resolutions on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, independently
of how we view said organizations. It is regrettable
that the United States of America is politicizing this
agenda item. Moreover, we reject attempts to shirk
responsibility for stoking the conflict in Ukraine and
to make accusations in the context of a discussion on
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which have no
relevance to this issue.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is exercising its right of reply with respect
to the statement made by the United States. China
is a founding member of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), and we were very happy to be
co-sponsor resolution 77/338. We would like to thank
Kazakhstan for its work, as coordinator, to promote
the resolution.
Since its founding in 2001, the SCO has upheld the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, maintaining and safeguarding international
equity and justice, and fighting international hegemony
and bullying. We have built cooperative relationships
based on dialogue rather than confrontation, and
partnerships rather than alliances. We have bolstered
the maintenance of international peace and stability.
In July, the SCO, including China, the Russian
Federation, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan,
Uzbekistan, Pakistan and India issued the New Delhi
Declaration, which reaffirmed that SCO cooperation
is not against any country or organization and the
above-mentioned countries would resolve issues and
work on the basis of the United Nations Charter, the SCO
Charter, international law and the principles of broad
cooperation with other countries and organizations.
Secretary-General Guterres attended and spoke at that
23-25821

01/09/2023

meeting, congratulating the successes of the SCO and
expressing his hope that the SCO member States would
continue to work with the United Nations in pursuance
of the commitments made.
The SCO is an observer organization of the General
Assembly. It signed a declaration of cooperation with
the Assembly, and United Nations resolutions on
cooperation between the two entities have been adopted
by consensus over many years. The United States
and all other Member States took part in this process
of consensus. This year, however, the United States
objected to the technical rollover of this resolution.
Although Kazakhstan made tremendous efforts to
resolve those issues, the United States still resorted to
requesting a recorded vote on the resolution. We are
opposed to the behaviour of the United States — extreme
confrontation and dividing the unity of the membership,
with the intention of politicizing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations. The
accusations lodged against the SCO and its member
States by the United States are totally groundless.
In a similar vein, we regret the vote by the member
States of the European Union, which is a regional
organization deeply involved in the work of the General
Assembly, but displays a passive position with regard to
cooperation between the SCO and the United Nations. I
must say that this is a double standard.
Mr. Evseenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
United Nations should respond to the issues of the
day and reflect the diversity of international relations,
including cooperation with regional organizations.
That is a necessary condition for the work of the
United Nations to remain effective in today’s world. In
our view, these circumstances do not require further
evidence. Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
is no exception. The territory covered by the SCO is
more than two thirds of the Eurasian territory. The
population of its countries amounts to 3.5 billion — half
of the planet’s population. The SCO’s tasks include
strengthening intergovernmental friendship, trust and
good-neighbourliness.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 77/338, on
cooperation between the United Nations and the SCO,
is important and constructive. It notes the efforts of
Belarus to join the organization as a member State. My
country has long been an observer and a reliable partner
to the SCO. The initiative to put this resolution to a vote

A/77/PV.99

is both surprising and disappointing. Unfortunately,
individualism and the ambitions of some States have
taken precedence over multilateralism. The populist
rhetoric of those States of developing cooperation
between the United Nations and inconvenient or
competitive regional organizations often drowns out
the constructive calls for cooperation. Belarus will
continue to advocate for consistent, balanced dialogue
on an international level and do everything it can to
strengthen multilateralism.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item
(s) of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 30 (continued)
Prevention of armed conflict
(b) Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this sub-item in the agenda of the
seventy-seventh session. In connection with the item,
I have received a letter dated 21 August 2023 from the
Permanent Representatives of Finland and Türkiye
to the United Nations requesting its inclusion in the
provisional agenda of the seventy-eighth session of
the Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this sub-item and
to include it in the provisional agenda of its seventyeighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/569).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 30?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 35
Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this item in its agenda of the seventyseventh session on the understanding that there would

23-2582123/25

A/77/PV.99

be no consideration of this item by the Assembly. In
connection with the item, I have received a note verbale
dated 12 April 2023 from the Permanent Mission of the
Comoros to the United Nations requesting the inclusion
of the item in the provisional agenda of the seventyeighth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-eighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/570).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 58 (continued)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this item in its agenda of the seventyseventh session. In connection with the item, I have been
advised that the Permanent Mission of Croatia to the
United Nations requests its inclusion in the provisional
agenda of the seventy-eighth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-eighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/571).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 58?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 61 (continued)
Zone of peace, trust and cooperation of Central
Asia
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this item in its agenda of the seventyseventh session. In connection with the item, I have been
advised that the Permanent Mission of Turkmenistan
to the United Nations requests its inclusion in the
provisional agenda of the seventy-eighth session.
24/25

01/09/2023

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to include this item in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-eighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/572).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 61?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 87
Request for an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice on the legal
consequences of the separation of the Chagos
Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this item in its agenda of the
seventy-seventh session. In connection with the item,
I have received a letter dated 7 August 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the United
Nations requesting its inclusion in the provisional
agenda of the seventy-eighth session.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
include agenda item 87 in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-eighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/573).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 87?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Implementation of the resolutions of the
United Nations
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this item in its agenda of the seventyseventh session. It is my understanding that it would be
desirable to include the item in the provisional agenda
of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include it in the provisional agenda of its
seventy-eighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/574).
23-25821

01/09/2023

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 157
Financing of the United Nations Mission in East
Timor
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the Assembly
decided to include this item in its agenda of the seventyseventh session. It is my understanding that it would
be desirable to defer consideration of this item to the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of agenda item 157 and
to include it in the provisional agenda of its seventyeighth session?
It was so decided (decision 77/575).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 157?
It was so decided.
The President: I should like to remind delegations
that the following agenda items remain open for
consideration during the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly: 9, 12, 14, 18, 18 (a) and (j), 20, 21,
21 (a), 27, 30, 30 (a), 32, 33, 37 to 43, 47, 55, 60, 62, 62
(a) and (b), 66, 69, 69 (a) to (c), 72, 72 (a), 78, 116, 116
(b), 118, 118 (d), (e), (f) and (i), 119, 120, 126, 126 (a) and

A/77/PV.99

(b), 127, 127 (a), (c), (f), (g), (m), (o), (x) and (z), 128, 134
to 156 and 158 to 167.
As Members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly, with the exception
of agenda item 12, “2001–2010: Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa”; sub-item (b) of agenda item 126, “Central role
of the United Nations system in global governance”;
and item 127, “Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations” and its sub-items.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
9, 12, 14, 18, 20, 21, 27, 30, 32, 33, 37 to 43, 47, 55, 60,
62, 66, 69, 72, 78, 116, 118, 119, 120, 126, 127, 128, 134
to 156 and 158 to 167 and their relevant sub-items?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

23-2582125/25
