VI l.

------ - - --

Rl.'solutions adnpted on the reports nf the Fourth CommiH,·,·

ples to take due account of the rcgister 111 connection with
its consideration of the relatcd items:
24. Requests the Special Committcc to continuc to
examine this question and to report thcreon to the (ieneral
Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssimi.
86th p/enary meeting
7 /)l'Ccmher /983

38/51.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples by the specialized agencies
and the international institutions associated
with the United Nations

The General Assemhly,
Having examined the item entitled "lmplementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Indepcndencc to Colonial Countries and Peoples by thc specializcd agencies and
the intemational institutions associated with the l/nited
Nations",
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 Deccmber 1960, and the Plan
of Action for the Full lmplementation of the Declaration,
contained in the anncx to its resolution 35/ 118 of 11
December 1980, as well as ali other relevant resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly on this subjcct, in particular resolution 36/52 of 24 Novemhcr 1981 on thc item
and 37/233 of 20 December 1982 nn thc question of
Namibia,
Having examined the reports submitted on the itcm by
the Secretary-General, 16 thc Economic and Social Council 37 and the Special Committce on thc Situation with
regard to the Implemcntation of thc Declaration on the
Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countries and Pcoples, 38
Taking into account the relevant provisions of the Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia 31 adopted at the Intemational Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of thc Political
Declaration adopted by thc Seventh Conference of Heads
ofState or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983, ·12 and other documents of the Co-ordinating Burcau of thc Non-Aligncd
Countries,
Aware that the struggle ofthe people ofNamibia for self'..
determination and independencc is in its crucial stagc and
has sharply intensified as a consequence of the stcpped-up
aggression by the illegal colonialist régime of Pretoria
against the people of the Territory and the increased general support rendered to that régimc by certain Western
countries, especially the Unitcd States of America and
Israel, coupled with efforts to deprive thc Namibian people
of their hard-won victories in the liberation struggle, and
that it is therefore incumbent upon the en tire international
community decisively to intensify conccrted action in support ofthe people ofNamibia and their sole and authentic
representative, the South West Africa People's Organization, for the attainment of their goal.
Deeply conscious of the critica! need of the Namibian
people and their national liberation movement, the South
West Africa People's Organization, and of the pcoples of
36 N38/ 111 and Add. l and 2. Add.3 and ( ·orr. l and Add.4
37 Officia/ Rccords o(thc (ieneral .l,wlil/,/\ //11r1,· ,-,~!,¡!, S,•,11,,11. \"upp/,·
ment No. 3 (A/3813). ,haps. 1 and VI.

other colonial Territorie~ for concrctl' assistance from thc
specialized agencies and other organi1.ations of the llrntcd
Nations ~ystcm in their \lrugglc for liberation from n,lonial rule and in their etforts to achieve and consolidate
thcir na1ional indcpendcnce.
Rea/finning the responsibility ofthe specialized agencies
and other organizations of the llnited Nations systcm to
1akc ali thc neccssarv mcasurcs, within 1hcir respective
sphcres of compete11cc, to rnsurc thc full and spcedy
implcmcntat10n or the Declaration on the ( ,ranting of
Indepcndence to Colonial Countries ami Pcoples and othcr
relevan! resolutions of the United Nations. particularly
thosc relating to the prnvision of moral and material
assistance, on a priority hasis. to thc pcoplcs of the colonial Territories and their nat1onal liberation movemcnts,
Deeplr conccrned that although there has been progress
in the extension of assistance to refugecs from Namibia,
the action taken hitherto hy the organizations concemed in
providing assistancc to the people of thc Territory through
their national liberation movcment the South Wcst Africa
People's Organization. still remains inadequatc to nwet
the urgent and growing needs of the Namibian peoplc.
l:xpressing 1/s con/idcnt hope that closcr contacts and
consultations between thc specialized agencies and other
organizations of the l lnited Nations system and the
Organization of Afriean l lnity and the national liberation
movement concerned ~ill help to overcoml' procedural
and other difficulties which have impeded or delayed thc
implementation of sorne assistance programmes.
Recal/ing its resolution 371233 C of 20 Deccmber 1982.
re4uesting ali specialized agencies and other organintions
and conferences of the l nited Nations system to grant full
membership to the Unitcd Nations Council for Namibia
as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia,
J:.wrcssing its apprecic1tio11 to the General Seeretariat of
the Organization of A frican l lnity for the continued cooperation and assistancc ntended by it to the speciah1ed
agencies and other organi1ations of the United Nations
system in conneetion with thc implementation of thc relevan! resolutions of the l lnited Nations.
l:"xpressing its apprecrnlio11 a/so to the Governments of
the front-line States for the steadfast support extended to
the people of Namibia and their national liberation movement, the South West Africa People's Organization, in
their just and legitimate struggle for the attainment of freedom and independence, despite increased armed attacks
by the forces of the racist régime of South Africa. and
aware of the particular necds of thosc Govcrnments for
assistance in that connection.
Noting the cfforts of the llnited Nations Development
Programme in the extcnsion of assistance to the national
liberation movements and commending its initiativc in
establishing ehannels for closer periodic contacts and consultations hetwecn the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the l lnited Nations system and thc
Organization of African Unity and the national liberation
movcmcnts in thc formulation of assistanee programmes.
l\'oting a/so the support given by the specialized agencies
and other organizations of the llnited Nations system to
the implementation of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia, in accordance with General Assembly resolution
12/9 A of 4 Novcmber 1977,
Dcplonng the continued links with and assistance rendered to South Africa h) certain specialized agencies in the
t1nanciaL economic. technical and other fields, in contravention of thc relevan! 1csol11tinns of the l Jnited Nations.
---

--

l8 l/,1r/ .. \u¡~elnnl'nt \'o. :!3 ( \ -~X ~-'L chap V1.

B4

General Assemhl)· - Tbirty-ei~hth St>ssion

Uravely conccrncd, in parti,·ular, at the continued collaboration bctwccn thc lntcrnational Monctary Fund and thc
Governrncnt ni South ;\frica in disrcgard of relevan! General Assemhlv re~olutions. c,pecialh rc'iolution 37/2 of21
Octobcr 1982.
Bcaring in 111111d the importancc of thl' activitics or nongovcrnmental organi,ations aimcd at putting an cnd to the
assistann· which is ~till bcing rcndercd to South Africa by
~orne spcciali1ed agencies.
Mindfu/ of tlw 11ccess1ty of kceping undcr continuous
rcvicw thc acti11tics of thc spccialized agencies and other
organizations of thc llnited Nations systcm in thc implcmentation ofthc various I l11ited Nations dccisions relating
to dccoloni1atio11,
1. ,lppr/lres tlw chapter uf thc rcport of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of thc Dcdaration on thc Granting of lndepcndencc
to Colo11ial <·ount11c~ and !'copies relating to thc qucstion; ,h
2. Rcaj/im1.1 that thc spccialized agencies and othcr
organizations a11d bodies or thc United Nations system
should continuc to be guidcd by the relevant resolutions of
the Unitcd Nations in their cfforts to contribute, within
thcir spheres uf co111pctencc, to the ful! and spcedy implementation of the Declaration on thc Granting of lndcpendcnce to Colonial Countries and Peopl<:s. contained in
Ueneral Asscmbly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Rrnffir111s a/.10 that thc recognition by the General
Assembly, the Security Council and other United Nations
organs of thc legitimacy of the struggle of colonial peoples
to cxcrcise thcir right to selt~determination and indepcndence entails. as a corollary. the extension by the specialized agencies and other organizations uf the United
Nations systcm of ali thc neccssary moral and material
assistance to thosc pcoplcs and thcir national liberation
movcments:
4. ¡,·xprcsses lis apµrena//on to those speciali7ed agencies and othcr organizations uf the United Nations system
which havc continucd lo co-operatc in varying degrecs
with the United Nations and thc Organization of African
Unity in the irnplcmentation uf the Dcclaration and other
relevan! resolutions uf thc United Nations and urges ali
the spccializcd agencie~ and othcr organizations of the
U nitcd Nations systcrn to accelcratc the ful] and spcedv
implcmentation of thc relcvant provisions of thosc resolu·tions;
S. Fxpressn its co11c1-r11 that the ass1stancc extended
thus far by certain spcciali1ed agencies and other organizations ofthe Unitcd Natio11s system to thc colonial peoples.
particularly thc people of Namibia and their national liberation movement. the South West Africa People"s Organization, is far from adequate in rclation to thc actual needs
of the pcoplcs concerned:
6. Requcs/s ali specializcd agencies and other organizations and bodies of thc U nitcd Nations system, in accordancc with the rclcvant rcsolutions ofthe General Assembly
and the Security Council, to take ali nccessary measures to
withhold from thc racist régime of South Africa any form
of co-operation ami assistancc in thc financia!, economic,
technical and othcr fields and to discontinue ali support to
that régimc uRtil the pcoplc of Namibia havc exerciscd
fully thcir inalienable right to sclf-detcrmination, frccdom
and national indcpcndence in a united Namibia and until
the inhuman ,yste111 ni ar1arthcid has been totally cradicatcd;
7. Rciterat,•1· i/1 m11ri1·111m that thc spccialized agencies
and othcr organi1ations a11d budies of the United Nation~

system should rcfrain from taking any action which might
imply recognition of thc legitimacy ot: or support for. thc
domination ot thc I erritory by the racist régimc of South
Africa:
8. Regrels that, notwithstanding the statement of the
rcprcsentative ofthc World Bank on 8 Junc 1983 that thc
Bank has tcrmi11atcd business rclations with the South
African régime, 1') thc World Bank and thc lntcrnational
Monetarv f'und continuc to maintain links with thc racist
régimc oÍ' Pretona. as cxempliticd by the continucd membership of South A frica in both agencies. and expresses the
vicw that thc two agencies should put an cnd to ali link~
with the racist régimc:
9. S!rongl_r ,·011dcmns the pcrsistcnt collaboration
betwcen the lntcrnational Monctarv Fund and South
Africa, in disregard of repeatcd rcsolu.tions to thc contrary
by the General ,\sscmbly, particularly thc granting of a
loan of $1.1 billion to South Africa in Novembcr 1982 in
defiancc of General Asscmbly resolution 37/2, and calls
upon the lntcrnational Monetary Fund to rcscind the loan
and to pul an end to such collaboration:
1O. ( ·0111111c11ds those non-governmental organizations
which, by thcir activities, as cxemplificd by the cooperation between the Centcr for lnternational Policy and
the lJnitcd Nations Council for Namibia, are hclping to
inform public opinion, in thc United States of America
and elsewhere. and mobilize it against the assistance rendercd by the lnternational Monetary Fund to South
Africa, and calls upon ali non-governmcntal organizations
to rcdouble their ctforts in this rcspcct;
11. Urges thc exccutive heads or the World Bank and
thc Intcrnational Monetary Fund to draw the particular
attention of their governing bodies to the prcscnt resolution. with a vicw to formulating spccific programmes beneticial to the peoplcs uf the colonial Territorics, particularly Namibia:
12. Requcsts the spccialized agencies and other organi1ations ofthe United Nations system to render or continue
to render. as a matter of urgency, ali possiblc moral and
material assistancc to the colonial peoples struggling for
liberation from colonial rule, bearing in mind that such
assistancc should not only mect thcir immediatc needs but
also creatc conditions for development after they havc
exercised their right to self-detcrmination ami indcpcndcnce:
13. Once aguin rcquests the specializcd agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations systcm to continuc to providc ali moral and material assistance to the
ncwly indcpendent and emerging States:
14. Reileratcs 1/s rccommcndation that thc spccialized
agencies and other organizations of the Unitcd Nations
system should initiatc or broaden contarts and cooperation with the colonial pcoplcs and their national libcration movcmcnts directly or, where appropriatc, through
the Organization of African Unity, and revicw and introduce greatcr flcxibility in their procedures with respcct to
the formulation and prcparation of assistance programmes
and projects so as to be ablc to extend thc nccessary assistance without delay to help thc colonial pcoples and thcir
national liberation movemcnts in their struggle to cxcrcisc
their inalienable right to sclf-determination and independence in acconlancc with General Asscmhly resolution
1S14(XV);
1S. Notes w11h satisfaclion that the South Wcst Africa
Pcople's Organi1.ation continues to be thc bencticiary of a
number of programmcs established within thc framcwork
ofthc llnited Nations lnstitute for Namibia at l.usaka and

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ----- - - - - - - - - - - - - - --

that the United Nations Council for Namihia. in cooperation with the South West Africa People's Organization, continues to represent the people of Namibia at
meetings of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, and urges those agencies and organizations to increase their assistance to the
South West Africa People's Organization. as well as to thc
United Nations Institute for Namibia and the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia;
16. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system that have not already
done so to include in the agenda of the regular meetings of
their governing bodies a separatc item on the progress they
have made in the implementation of the Declaration and
the other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
17. Notes with satisfaction thc arrangements made by
severa! specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system whieh enable representatives ofthe
national liberation movements recognizcd by the Organization of African Unity to participate fully as observers in
the proceedings relating to rnatters concerning their
respective countries, and calls upon those agencies and
organizations that have not yet done so to follow this
example and to make the neccssary arrangemcnts without
delay;
18. Notes with satisfaction the admittance of Namibia.
represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia.
as a member of the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency
and the lntemational Telecommunication Union, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 37/233 C,
and urges the specialized agencies and other organizations
ofthe United Nations system that have not so far granted
full membership to the United Nations Council for
Namibia to do so without delay;
19. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and institutions of the United Nations system to
extend, as a matter of priority, substantial material assistance to the Governments of the front-line States in order
to enable them to support more effectively the struggle of
the people of Namibia for freedom and in dependen ce and
to resist the violation of their territorial integrity by the
armed forces of the racist régime of South Africa directly
or, as in Angola and Mozambique. through puppet traitor
groups in the service of Pretoria;
20. Urges the specialized agencies and othcr organizations and institutions of thc United Nations system to
assist in accelerating progress in ali sectors of thc national
life of the small Territories. particularly in thc development of their economies;
21. Recommends that ali Governrncnts should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations systern of which they
are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other rclevant resolutions of
the United Nations and, in that connection. that they
should accord priority to the question of providing assistance on an emergency basis to the peoples of the colonial
Territories and their national liberation rnovemcnts;
22. Reitera/es its pruposal. under article 111 of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the lnternational Monetary Fund, 40 for the urgen\ inclusion in the
agenda of the Board of Governors of thc Fund of an ítem
dealing with the relationship between thc Fund and South
Africa and further reiterates its proposal that. in pursuance
of article II of the Agreement, the relevan\ organs of thc
United Nations should participate in any meeting or the
4oSee Agreements /Jetwee111fw l'mted Nailon, ami rhc S¡w, 1<1/1:cd .-l~c11de,
and the lnternational /1ton11c Fncrgr lg('11n (( lnncd Na11nn, puhli'catmn
Sales No. E/F.61.X .1 ). p. 61 _

--

---- - - - - - - -

------- -- - - - - -

235

Board of Governors called by the Fund for the purpose of
discussing the item and urges the Fund to discuss its relationship with South Africa at its annual meeting in Septernber 1984. in compliance with the above-mentioned
Agreernent;
23. Rccommcnds the sending in 1984 of a high-level
mission to the Intemattonal Monetary Fund which. subject to the agreernent of the United Nations bodies
involved. would be composed ofthe Chairman ofthe Special Committec on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independencc to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Presiden! of
thc lJnited Nations Council for Namibia and the Chairman or the Special Committce against Apartheid;
24. Draws thc attcntwn of the specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples. contained in the annex to General
Assembly resolution 35 118. in particular to those provisions calling on the agencies and organizations to render
ali possible moral and material assistancc to the peoples of
the colonial Territories and their national liberation movemcnts;
25. L'rges the executive heads of thc specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system,
having regard to the provisions of paragraphs 14 and 24
above, to forrnulate. w1th the active co-operation of the
Organization of African Unity where appropriate, and to
submit. as a matter of priority, to their goveming and legislativc organs concreti:- proposals for the ful] implementation ofthe relevant United Nations decisions. in particular
specific programmes of assistance to the peoples of the
colonial Territories and thcir national liberation moverncnts;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations of
the United Nations system in working out appropriate
measures for implementing the relevan\ resolutions of the
United Nations and to prepare for suhmission to the relevan! bodies. with the assistance of those agencies and
organizations. a report on the action taken in implementation of the relevan\ resolutions, including the present resolution. since the circulation of his previous report;
27. Requests the Ernnomic and Social Council to continuc to consider, in rnnsultation with the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of thc Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
( 'olonial Countries ami Pcoples. appropriate measures for
thc co-ordination of the policies and activitics of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations systcm in implementing the relevan! resolutions
of the General Assembly;
28. Requcsts the Special Committce to continue to
examine this question and to report thcreon to the General
Asscmbly al its thirty-ninth scssion.
8óth plenary meeting
7 Deccmhcr 1983

38/52.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

n,c <iencral AsscmNr,
Rn·allinK its resolut1ons on the United Nations Educational and Training Prngrarnrnc for Southern Afriea, in
