S/2021/516

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 June 2021
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 21 February to 20 May
2021, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350 (1974) and
extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2555 (2020).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was generally maintained, despite several violations of the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of 1974. The overall security
situation in the UNDOF area of operations was volatile, with continued military
activity in the areas of separation and limitation in violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2555 (2020).
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and ensure that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing across the line, as well as the crossing of the line by aircraft, drones and
individuals, constitute violations of the Agreement. In its regular interactions with
both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon the parties to exercise
restraint and avoid any activities that might lead to an escalation of the situation
between them.
4.
Late on 28 February, United Nations personnel at positions 68 and 80 and at
observation post 55 heard two fighter aircraft crossing the ceasefire line from east north-east to west-south-west and subsequently heard an aircraft crossing from west
to east. At around the same time, personnel at various United Nations positions and
observation posts in the area of operations observed flares and explosions on the
Bravo side that they assessed to be anti-aircraft missile fire engaged from Syrian air
defence systems outside the area of limitation. Late on 28 February, open sources
reported air strikes being carried out by the Israel Defense Forces on locations in
southern Damascus, in the vicinity of Sayyidah Zainab. Neither party confirmed any
kinetic activities associated with these reports.

21-06969 (E)

070621

*2106969*

S/2021/516

5.
On 16 March, personnel at United Nations positions 32 and 37, observation
post 72 and Camp Faouar heard a detonation from an unknown location within the
UNDOF area of operations, with personnel at several United Nations positions
noticing multiple flares east of United Nations position Hermon South and in the
vicinity of Umm Batinah on the Bravo side. United Nations personnel at observatio n
post 51 observed two explosions east of their position in the vicinity of Umm Batinah,
with those at observation post 73 observing two rockets being launched and
anti-aircraft fire east of Harfa in the area of limitation on the Bravo side. Later on
16 March, the Israel Defense Forces conveyed a message to UNDOF stating that, “in
Syria, infrastructures that are connected to transfer and storage of Iranian weaponry
exist”, “despite the numerous warnings regarding the Iranian activities in Syria’s land,
with emphasis on the weaponry transfer to the State, it continues” and “Israel will
respond severely against all mobilization of troops against Israel from Syrian
territory”.
6.
Early on 22 April, open sources reported strikes by the Israel Defense Forces on
Syrian air defence positions in the vicinity of Damascus and a surface-to-air missile
fired from the Syrian Arab Republic landing in the Negev area of Israel. The Israel
Defense Forces responded with strikes on locations in the Syrian Arab Republic,
injuring four Syrian armed forces personnel. Reaffirming their earlier public
announcement, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF of their assessment that
a surface-to-air missile had been fired from the Syrian Arab Republic into “Israeli
territory, near the southern Negev”, and that they had responded by striking “the
battery from which the missile was launched, as well as additional surface -to-air
batteries in Syria”. On 22 April, United Nations personnel at position 68 sighted
multiple tracer rounds from east-north-east of their position, consistent with
anti-aircraft fire in the area of limitation on the Bravo side.
7.
Late on 5 May, United Nations personnel at observation post 73 noticed an
aircraft on the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) fire a projectile in a south-easterly
direction into the area of separation and subsequently noticed an explosion on the
horizon, also in the south-east. Open sources reported an Israel Defense Forces
helicopter targeting a suspected militia position in the vicinity of Jubbata al-Khashab.
This report was not confirmed by the Israel Defense Forces.
8.
On 10 May, United Nations personnel at position 10A heard explosions east of
United Nations position 16 in the area of separation. Syrian State media and other
open sources reported an Israel Defense Forces helicopter conducting two strikes on
a house west of Hadar, which is adjacent to the area of separation, injuring one person.
The Syrian armed forces confirmed to UNDOF the open-source reports, including the
reported injury. There was no confirmation of the reported strikes by the Israel
Defense Forces.
9.
On 14 May, personnel at United Nations positions 27, 80 and 85 and observation
post 54 heard three explosions east of their positions. Shortly thereafter, the Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that three rockets had been fired from the north of
Tasil, in the southern part of the area of limitation on the Bravo side, with one “landing
short on Syrian territory” and the other two “landing within Israeli territory”. Syrian
authorities informed UNDOF of their awareness of the incident, denied involvement
and assessed that Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (also known as Da’esh) was
responsible for the attack. Open sources reported the firing of three rockets from the
Syrian Arab Republic towards Israel, with no casualties resulting.
10. In a letter addressed to the President of the Security Council and to me dated
22 April (S/2021/391), the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic
relayed the information that, on 22 April, “the Israeli occupying authorities had once
again attacked the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, firing successive salvos of
2/9

21-06969

S/2021/516

missiles from the occupied Syrian Golan towards the area around the capital,
Damascus”. On 14 May, he conveyed that, on Wednesday, 5 May, Israel had launched
“a missile attack against the coastal area south-west of Ladhiqiyah and Masyaf area”,
resulting in the death of one Syrian civilian and injury to six others, inc luding a child
and his mother. It also caused material damage and losses (see S/2021/453). In the
same letter, he reported that, “on Thursday, 6 May, an Israeli helicopter fired a missile
from over the occupied Syrian Arab Golan at one of the outposts in the town of
Jubbata al-Khashab, without causing damage”.
11. On 27 March, personnel at United Nations observation post 54 observed two
armed individuals from the Bravo side, whom they assessed to be Syrian se curity
personnel, crossing the ceasefire line east of their position, engaging in conversation
with some shepherds in the area and subsequently returning to the area of separation.
On 8 April, personnel at United Nations observation post 53 observed three main
battle tanks and two bulldozers of the Israel Defense Forces east of the technical fence
removing stone walls and barbed wire, and subsequently crossing the ceasefire line
in the vicinity of observation post 53 and moving into the forest in Kudnah in the area
of separation. After approximately 80 minutes, United Nations personnel observed
the tanks and bulldozers returning to the Alpha side.
12. During the reporting period, UNDOF personnel twice experienced restrictions
of movement in the areas of limitation on the Bravo and Alpha sides. On 10 March,
an UNDOF patrol observed four armed individuals in the village of Umm Batinah
blocking the roads from the village to Jaba and Mumtinah in the area of limitation on
the Bravo side. On 19 April, an Israel Defense Forces soldier blocked an UNDOF
patrol for 15 minutes from moving east at a road junction south-west of Odem in the
area of limitation of the Alpha side. The patrol subsequently used another route.
13. The presence of Iron Dome systems, artillery systems and a multi-launch rocket
system on the Alpha side constitutes a military violation in each case. Pursuant to the
terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, the presence of any unauthorized
military equipment in the area of limitation is a violation.
14. On 17 March, personnel at United Nations position 85 observed an aircraft
flying from the Alpha side across the ceasefire line and over the area of separation.
On 16 March, United Nations personnel at position 80 observed a drone cross the
ceasefire line from north-north-west to north-east of their position. On 16 May,
personnel at United Nations positions 60 and 80 observed three drones flying on the
Bravo side. UNDOF was unable to determine the point of origin of the aircraft and
drones or to attribute responsibility for them to either party.
15. UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. It assessed that the individuals were
shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock as well as hunters
carrying hunting weapons. The Israel Defense Forces continued to express concern
about the crossings, which they stated were a threat to the safety and security of their
personnel operating in the proximity of the ceasefire line. The Israel Defense Forces
increased their operations in response to the crossings, including by firing warning
shots on 35 occasions to discourage individuals from the Bravo side from approaching
the Israeli technical fence.
16. On 7 March, personnel at United Nations observation post 53 observed six Israel
Defense Forces personnel east of the technical fence apprehending one Syrian
national east of their position for allegedly crossing the ceasefire line. The Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had released the person, but did not
provide the exact time and location of the release. Syrian authorities informed
UNDOF on 10 March that two Syrian nationals had been apprehended and detained
by the Israel Defense Forces for allegedly crossing the ceasefire line. On 11 March,
21-06969

3/9

S/2021/516

Syrian authorities also informed UNDOF that the Israel Defense Forces had released
the Syrian nationals at the location where they had been apprehended.
17. Sporadic heavy explosions and bursts of heavy machine gun and smal l arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the areas of separation and limitation on
the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that the military activity was the result of controlled
detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of clearance and training b y the Syrian
armed forces. UNDOF observed the continued presence of Syrian armed forces
personnel, some of whom were armed, staffing several checkpoints within the area of
separation, in violation of the Agreement on Disengagement. UNDOF also observed,
on several occasions, the presence of Syrian anti-aircraft guns within the area of
limitation.
18. Between late 30 April and early 1 May, personnel at United Nations positions 60
and 68 and observation post 56 observed several bursts of small arms fire and a total
of 11 exploded hand grenades in and around two Syrian armed forces positions near
Tall al-Kurum, at least 200 metres south of observation post 56. The personnel also
heard and observed several shots, illumination flares, tracer rounds and explosions in
the vicinity of their positions, with personnel at observation post 56 observing 15
armed persons moving towards a compound and clearing the area.
19. UNDOF protested to the parties with regard to all violations of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement that it had observed, including the firing into
and across the area of separation as well as across the ceasefire line, the crossing of
the ceasefire line by aircraft, the presence of unauthorized equipment and personnel
in the areas of separation and limitation, and the crossings of the ceasefire line by
drone as well as by civilians from the Bravo side. UNDOF closely liaised with the
parties, including during periods of heightened tension, to de-escalate the situation.
20. During the reporting period, UNDOF assessed that the overall security situation
on the Bravo side remained volatile. Open sources reported continued attacks by
unknown armed elements involving improvised explosive devices and small arms
targeting Syrian security forces in the UNDOF area of operations. On 30 April and
1 May, unknown armed elements reportedly attacked a position of the Syrian armed
forces between Jaba and Umm Batinah close to the area of separation in the northern
part of the area of limitation. The Syrian armed forces reportedly reinforced their
presence in the vicinity of Umm Batinah. In the central part of the area of operations,
UNDOF observed kinetic activity around a Syrian security forces position close to
observation post 56 (see para. 18). In the southern part of the area of operations, open
sources continued to report almost daily attacks, some involving improvised
explosive devices and assassinations, targeting Syrian security forces checkpoints and
convoys, other government authorities and former members of arme d opposition
groups. Such security incidents reportedly continued in the area of limitation,
including in Jasim, Muzayrib, Nawa and Tafas, where attacks reportedly occurred on
or close to UNDOF patrol routes.
21. On 16 March, open sources reported an attack by armed elements affiliated to a
former opposition commander on a Syrian armed forces convoy on the road between
Yadudah and Muzayrib, within the area of limitation, that left 22 personnel dead and
5 others injured. The open sources also reported the subsequent build-up of Syrian
armed forces personnel in the area, followed by assassinations of Syrian security
services personnel and reconciled former members of armed groups in the area. Open
sources contained reports of assassinations of members of the Syrian security forces
on 15 April and 14 May by unknown armed elements in the vicinity of Nawa and on
21 April in Ghadir al-Bustan, with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant claiming
responsibility. There were also open-source reports of violence in other parts of
Dara‘a Governorate.
4/9

21-06969

S/2021/516

22. On 18 March, UNDOF supported the International Committee of the Red Cross
in facilitating the crossing of a woman from the Alpha side to the Bravo side through
the Qunaytirah crossing to attend a funeral, and also her return on 24 March.
23. UNDOF continues to implement its mandate in the context of the measures
adopted by the authorities of Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to control the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak, including limitations on the movement of
United Nations personnel and their mandatory testing and quarantine after any
crossing between the two sides and any cross-border movement. Since early March
2020, the Alpha side continued to restrict the movement of UNDOF and Observer
Group Golan personnel through the Qunaytirah crossing, which it opens on a caseby-case basis only, affecting the operational and administrative activities of the
mission. UNDOF continued to liaise with the Israel Defense Forces on their
facilitation of the crossing of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan personnel at the
Qunaytirah crossing, and in particular on the need for United Nations personnel to
cross using only documents issued by UNDOF at the Alpha gate and to return to the
established crossing procedures.
24. On 20 April, 16 UNDOF personnel tested positive for COVID-19, resulting in
affected personnel being placed in isolation. UNDOF also put in place other
COVID-19 control measures, including the strict isolation of contingents and a
telecommuting arrangement for international personnel and national staff. As at
17 May, there were 15 active COVID-19 cases among UNDOF personnel, including
military and international staff and Observer Group Golan personnel, with others
having recovered. On 30 April, UNDOF launched the vaccination of its personnel,
which is ongoing.
25. Both parties continued to suspend inspections of their positions in the area of
limitation conducted by Observer Group Golan, citing COVID-19 as the reason
therefor. Neither party agreed to the inspection mechanisms, including physical
distancing, that UNDOF recommended to them, in order to resume inspections.
However, both sides recently agreed to resume inspections on the basis of new
modalities agreed upon between UNDOF and the parties taking into account the
COVID-19 context.
26. As part of the return to full mandate implementation, UNDOF had resumed the
restoration, including repainting and refurbishment, of the barrels marking the
ceasefire line, which had ceased for security reasons and continues to be te mporarily
suspended owing to COVID-19 restrictions.
27. Progress in the incremental return of UNDOF to the Bravo side continued
despite being slowed by the restrictions on construction owing to COVID-19 control
measures. The additional work to extend United Nations position 60 also continued.
UNDOF began the construction of the new United Nations position 86B at the
location of the former United Nations observation tower in the southern part of the
area of separation. The reconstruction of United Nations observation post 71
continued, and the post is scheduled for completion and reoccupation by the end of
July 2021. The reconstruction of United Nations observation post 57 also began, with
completion scheduled for August 2021.
28. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Observer Group Golan, who are
under the operational control of UNDOF and maintain seven fixed and one temporary
observation posts along the ceasefire line. The focus of Observer Group Golan
remains on continuous static observation and situational awareness.
29. UNDOF monthly operational patrols continued on routes in the areas of
separation and limitation, with 1,174 operational activities carried out in Februa ry,
21-06969

5/9

S/2021/516

1,318 in March and 1,166 in April 2021. UNDOF patrol routes cover approximately
97 per cent of the area of separation and 70 per cent of the area of limitation.
30. The movement of UNDOF personnel through Lebanon continued to be
restricted owing to measures related to COVID-19 and Lebanese administrative
requirements. The route between Beirut and Damascus, through the Judaydah and
Masna‘ border crossing, which is a primary resupply route for UNDOF, remained
open for the commercial movement of goods.
31. UNDOF continued to assess that there remains a significant threat to United
Nations personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, as well as a probable threat from the
possible presence of sleeper cells of armed groups. In addition, the deterioration in
the security situation in the central part of the area of operations and the volatile
security situation in the southern part have continued to slow progress on the opening
of new routes in the area of limitation.
32. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of positions and observation posts on both the Alpha
and Bravo sides, in addition to regular rehearsals, exercises and training for identified
contingencies. Risk mitigation measures, including force protection measures,
continued to be developed at positions and observation posts and at the operational
base at Camp Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
33. As at 17 May, UNDOF comprised 1,109 troops, including 60 women
peacekeepers. Troops are deployed from Bhutan (3), Czechia (4), Fiji (151), Ghana (5),
India (199), Ireland (136), Nepal (399), the Netherlands (1) and Uruguay (211). In
addition, 70 military observers from Observer Group Golan, including 14 women,
assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
34. In its resolution 2555 (2020), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for six months, until 30 June 2021, and requested me to report
every 90 days on developments in the situation and the measures taken to implement
resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful settlement of the conflict in the
Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various levels to implement resolution
338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation in the Middle East (A/75/297),
submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 74/14 on the Syrian Golan.
35. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict further reduces the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Financial aspects
36. The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/291 and decision 74/571,
appropriated the amount of $63.3 million for the maintenance of the mission for the
period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021.

6/9

21-06969

S/2021/516

37. As at 14 May 2021, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNDOF amounted to $20.1 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $2,028.8 million.
38. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 31 December
2020, as has reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment, in
accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

V. Observations
39. I am concerned about the continued violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement in a particularly volatile time for the region, including the breaches of the
ceasefire that occurred on 16 March, 22 April and 14 May, which also posed a risk to
United Nations personnel. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing across
the ceasefire line. I remain concerned by the continued presence of the Syrian armed
forces in the area of separation and the firing of rockets from the Bravo side. There
should be no military forces in the area of separation other than those of UNDOF. The
continued presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in the area of limitation
on both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as the flying of aircraft and drones across
the ceasefire line, is also of concern. These developments are in violation of the
Agreement. I urge the parties to the Agreement to exercise utmost restraint and
comply with the Agreement. I continue to encourage members of the Security Council
to support efforts to raise the awareness of both parties with regard to the risk of
escalation and the need to preserve the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic.
40. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF. All
violations of the ceasefire line increase tensions between the signatories to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and undermine stability in the area. The
continued liaison by UNDOF with the parties has contributed to de-escalation during
times of heightened tension.
41. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remain
essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be a priority
for the Force. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Force’s plans for an incremental return to operations and positions
in the area of separation and to ensure that the Force can implement its mandate fully,
including inspections on both sides. At the same time, the parties must continue to
support the enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
42. Given the worrying trend of continued violations of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, the safety and security of military and civilian personnel in
UNDOF and Observer Group Golan are of particular concern. It is therefore of
particular importance that the Security Council continue to bring its influence to bear
on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to operate
safely and securely and is allowed to operate freely in accordance with the Agreement.
It remains important that the parties also continue to facilitate the deployment of all
personnel to UNDOF for effective mandate implementation.
43. The continued support of Member States, and in particular the confidence of
troop-contributing countries to UNDOF and their commitment to its mission, remain
key factors in the Force’s ability to carry out its mandate. I am grateful to the
Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland, Nepal, the Netherlands
and Uruguay for their contributions and the commitment, resolve and consummate
professionalism of their military personnel in UNDOF. I am also thankful to those

21-06969

7/9

S/2021/516

Member States that have contributed military observers to the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization.
44. I consider the continued presence of UNDOF in the area essential. I therefore
recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of the Force for six months,
until 31 December 2021. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has given its
assent to the proposed extension. The Government of Israel also has expressed its
agreement.
45. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Missi on and
Force Commander, Lieutenant General Ishwar Hamal, and to the military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership in UNDOF and the military observers in
Observer Group Golan, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned to them
by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment, under extremely
challenging circumstances.

8/9

21-06969

S/2021/516

21-06969

9/9
