S/PV.9298

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9298

th meeting
Wednesday, 29 March 2023, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fernandes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Barnor
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Camilleri
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2023/208)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08961 (E)
*2308961*

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2023/208)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/208, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): First of all, I would
like to thank members for the opportunity to present
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/208) on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I
also welcome the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Georges
Nzongola-Ntalaja, the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Rwanda and the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Burundi to today’s meeting.
Since my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9215), there has again been a marked deterioration
in the security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. An intensification of the
conflict with the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and
the persistent activity of other armed groups, such as
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the Zaire and
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo
2/23

29/03/2023

(CODECO), to name only a few, continue to inflict
unbearable suffering on civilians and exacerbate the
increasingly tragic humanitarian situation. In North
Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri, hundreds of thousands
of people have fled the abuses of armed groups and
the clashes between M-23 and the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
and between CODECO and the Zaire. In North Kivu
in particular, clashes between the M-23 and the
FARDC have forced 900,000 people to flee their
homes. The already considerable humanitarian needs
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to
increase. The humanitarian crisis remains one of the
most neglected in the world.
The displaced persons whom I visited live in
extremely dangerous conditions. I also take this
opportunity to call for the mobilization of the
necessary resources for the implementation of the
2023 humanitarian response plan, which requires
$2.25 billion. I condemn the persistent obstacles to
humanitarian access, such as the attack on a United
Nations Humanitarian Air Service helicopter in
February, which forced the World Food Programme to
temporarily suspend its flights in conflict zones. I call
upon all parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and facilitate humanitarian access
to vulnerable people, wherever they are located. With
regard to the issue of displaced persons, I would like to
focus on the particularly dangerous situation in which
women find themselves. To ensure protection that is
tailored to their needs, funding for the 2023 national
plan for the prevention of sexual exploitation and abuse
is essential. More than $2 million is required to support
those activities, especially in the areas affected by the
M-23 crisis. Among the initiatives currently under way,
I welcome the creation of a victim support fund and the
provision of psychological assistance to women by the
World Health Organization.
(spoke in English)
In response to those immense security and
humanitarian challenges, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is working
tirelessly in hostile environments to fulfil its mandate.
Our efforts are focused on supporting the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the execution
of its core responsibility for the protection of civilians,
as well as for the disarmament and demobilization
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of armed groups and the implementation of security
sector reform.
With regard to the protection of civilians,
MONUSCO has remained firmly engaged with the
Congolese armed forces in the discharge of its key
strategic priority of protecting civilians through a
wide range of actions, including joint patrols, fire
support, information-sharing, intelligence-gathering
and logistical support. Our force has adopted an agile
posture, allowing for the quick redeployment of troops
in response to early-warning alerts and outbreaks
of violence.
In Ituri, armed groups of CODECO, the ADF and
the Zaire have taken advantage of the FARDC’s shift in
focus towards Masisi and Rutshuru against the M-23.
MONUSCO set up static combat units in Kambala
and Bokuku to address the rising insecurity in Djugu
territory, facilitate the movements of displaced
people and secure humanitarian corridors. I urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to reinforce its military and police deployments in Ituri
and pursue efforts to address the grave threat to civilians
posed by the armed groups operating in the province.
The Mission also responded quickly to improvised
explosive device terrorist attacks by the ADF in Beni
territory by providing demining support and through
the medical evacuation of injured civilians. In South
Kivu, the Mission provided dedicated protection to the
displaced populations in Bijombo and Mikenge. I would
like to stress that the effectiveness of MONUSCO’s
protection depends to a large extent on close and
transparent collaboration with the FARDC and the
foreign forces that are deployed in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, either bilaterally or under the
East African Community regional force, in order to
ensure optimal planning and coordination, mutual safety
and human rights protection. The year 2022 was one of
the deadliest on record for MONUSCO peacekeepers.
MONUSCO is operating in an increasingly complex,
volatile and dangerous environment. Far too many of our
United Nations peacekeepers are paying the ultimate
price. I want to pay tribute to the sacrifices made by
our forces and once again express my condolences
following the death of a South African Blue Helmet
during the attack on a MONUSCO helicopter near
Goma in February.
Military operations alone will not provide stability
in eastern Congo. I commend the regional efforts

S/PV.9298

under way, such as the third phase of Nairobi process
consultations, the Luanda process mini-summits and
the successive holding of summit meetings by the East
African Community and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Through the stewardship of regional
bodies, the Nairobi and Luanda peace processes are
being tailored to foster efforts to find sustainable
solutions to the conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I call on the Council to lend
its full weight to those efforts by encouraging the
parties to abide by their commitments and ensuring
that recalcitrant actors are held to account. I commend
former President Kenyatta, as facilitator, for launching
the preparations for the fourth stage of the Nairobi
process, and Angola’s President Lourenço, as Chair of
the International Conference on Great Lakes Region,
mandated by the African Union, for deciding to deploy
an Angolan contingent to support the ad hoc verification
mechanism and the M-23 cantonment.
Tomorrow, 30 March, is the last day granted by
the regional initiatives for the M-23 to withdraw to the
vicinity of Mount Sabinyo, at the border with Rwanda
and Uganda. The FARDC and the Angolan army have
jointly identified locations for their cantonment. While
the M-23 has withdrawn from some of its positions, it
is still in control of large portions of Masisi, Rutshuru
and Nyiragongo territories, in violation of the Luanda
communiqué. I am once again calling on it to fully
comply with the Luanda communiqué. The territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must be respected by all in the region.
While insecurity spreads, the tensions between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda have
continued to increase, resulting in several cross-border
incidents. Those confrontations pose a severe risk of
regional escalation.
(spoke in French)
In a context of insecurity and humanitarian crisis,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is preparing
for general elections, scheduled for 20 December. I
commend the dedication of the Congolese authorities
and the Independent National Electoral Commission in
their determination to meet the deadlines in the face
of logistical challenges, and especially in the face of
insecurity. In eastern Congo, the violence, clashes
and population displacements, and the problem of
the areas under the control of the M-23, are serious
obstacles to the task of registering voters. In the west of
the country, intercommunal violence in Mai-Ndombe

23-089613/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

province, which is still going on, is also a hindrance
to the process. In the light of those challenges and in
line with its mandate, MONUSCO, in partnership with
United Nations agencies, is supporting the electoral
process and has responded by transporting 126 tons
of electoral material for the Electoral Commission to
North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri. MONUSCO is also
supporting the inclusiveness and proper conduct of the
electoral process through engagements with prospective
candidates and civil society.
I welcome the efforts of the Electoral Commission,
which is endeavouring to address the operational
challenges of voter registration by extending
registration periods, imposing sanctions to deter
malpractice on the part of its agents and denouncing
hate speech. However, the electoral process is still
marked by a worrying lack of trust between the main
stakeholders in civil society and the opposition, and has
even led to a call for a boycott of the voter registration
by part of the opposition. I reiterate my appeal to all
Congolese stakeholders to work together to ensure a
peaceful, transparent, credible and inclusive electoral
process in strict compliance with the Constitution
and electoral law. I reiterate the Mission’s readiness,
through its mandate to use its good offices, to support
them in that regard.
(spoke in English)
On 24 March, President Tshisekedi Tshilombo
reshuffled his Government. I wish his new
Administration success in implementing its programme.
In addition to supporting the protection of civilians,
MONUSCO remains committed to supporting the
Government’s disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) and security-sector reform efforts.
The Demobilization, Disarmament, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme is the flagship
DDR initiative in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and MONUSCO is mandated to support it as a priority.
While the Mission is assisting the development of
screening and vetting mechanisms for ex-combatants, I
encourage the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to remain firm in banning amnesty and
army reintegration for those responsible for serious
human rights violations. That will be essential to restore
trust between the populations and State institutions.
Greater complementarity must be promoted between
the Programme and the national transitional justice
process, with national consultations under way.
4/23

29/03/2023

Similarly, the Demobilization, Disarmament,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
cannot succeed without security-sector reform. I urge
the new Government to invest in the operationalization
of those processes, without which there can be no
progress in stabilizing eastern Congo. Successful
security-sector reform is also necessary to enable
MONUSCO’s exit strategy and the transition to a
new partnership with the United Nations. It will
enable the deployment of the security forces and
adequate financial resources required to re-establish
State authority and swiftly implement development
programmes, as well as to uphold human rights and
foster community reconciliation. The Mission’s
departure from Tanganyika illustrates what can be
achieved with the necessary resolve. MONUSCO
supported the deployment of 174 police officers to
enable the successful handover of Bendera camp to
the Congolese National Police in February. However,
a stronger presence of Congolese security forces is
required to avoid protection gaps. While United Nations
agencies have mobilized resources to consolidate peace
through joint projects, Government-led development
and reconciliation efforts are still badly needed to
sustain peace and stability.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Council
for its continued support to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and for its visit from 9 to 13 March,
which demonstrated United Nations solidarity and
mobilization in the face of the security, electoral and
structural challenges in the country. I note that it was
quickly followed by a visit from the African Union Peace
and Security Council, demonstrating the solidarity and
commitment of the region. I also welcome the Pope’s
visit to Kinshasa from 31 January to 3 February, which
brought messages of peace and reconciliation in these
difficult times for the country.
Finally, my thanks once again go to all the troopand police-contributing countries and their personnel,
and to the national and international civilian staff of
the Mission. I commend their continuous efforts in
support of the national and provincial authorities and
the defence and security forces in the implementation
of our mandate in a particularly difficult context.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative for her briefing, and I would
like to emphasize three points.
First, we must consolidate our efforts to guarantee
the integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. For more than a year, the actions
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), an armed group
sanctioned by the Security Council and the European
Union, have been destabilizing the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In recent days, the M-23 has
withdrawn from a number of positions, notably around
Sake. Those initial disengagements must continue
in accordance with the Luanda process agreed by
the African Union. As President Macron recalled
during his visit to Kinshasa on 4 March, the steps
that were agreed by all must be carried out: respect
for the ceasefire and the verification thereof under
Angolan supervision; the cantonment of the M-23; the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process;
and the deployment of regional forces. All external
support to the M-23 and the other armed groups active
on Congolese territory must cease immediately.
The Luanda and Nairobi processes must mutually
reinforce each other. France welcomes the efforts of
the East African Community regional force, whose
deployment must continue in the areas liberated by the
M-23 withdrawal. France also welcomes the upcoming
dispatch of an Angolan contingent to secure the M-23
cantonment areas and protect the ad hoc verification
mechanism. We also condemn the attacks carried
out by the armed groups of the Allied Democratic
Forces and the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo, as well as the ongoing activities of the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda. All the
combatants must disarm.
Secondly, all the actors on the ground must work
together to protect civilians and the most vulnerable.
The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Congolese armed forces must work together
with the regional forces in a coherent and coordinated
manner to protect civilians. France calls on the
Secretary-General and Member States to provide
MONUSCO with the necessary means to implement its
mandate. MONUSCO also needs to be able to support
the deployment of the East African Community regional
force. We call for continued support to be provided to
the Congolese authorities so that they can assume their
primary responsibility of protecting civilians. That same

S/PV.9298

spirit of partnership must also be given a priority in the
humanitarian response. During its visit to the Bushagara
camp, the Council noted that outstanding efforts are
being made by the different actors working together, in
particular the United Nations actors. More sites must be
made available by the Congolese authorities to receive
refugees and displaced persons. France, which is
engaged in the response to the humanitarian emergency
in Goma, will provide €34 million in aid to meet the
needs of the most vulnerable populations. As part of
the European Union’s humanitarian airlift, three flights
have brought in 100 tons of cargo, including emergency
shelters, hygiene kits and medicines. The European
Union will provide €50 million in humanitarian aid to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2023.
Thirdly, progress must continue in the area of
justice and in preparing for the elections scheduled
to be held in December. Progress has been made in
the fight against impunity. I refer specifically to the
law adopted last December for the protection and
reparation of victims of sexual violence. Efforts must
also continue to be made to ensure transitional justice,
protect human rights and combat hate speech and
incitement to violence.
In conclusion, France reaffirms its support for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in organizing transparent, free and inclusive elections
within the time frame provided for by the Constitution.
Major efforts have been made to incite voter registration.
MONUSCO is providing logistical support. The
International Organization of la Francophonie is also
working, at the request of the Independent National
Electoral Commission, to provide support to the
institutions and civil society involved in the electoral
cycle. The right conditions must be in place for the
proper holding of elections throughout the territory of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Democratic
Republic of Congo must not be allowed to fall victim to
war. A path to peace is possible if everyone shoulders
their responsibilities.
Mr. Eckersley(United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Representative for her very helpful briefing and
for all the support she and her team gave to the Security
Council on our recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, during which we saw at first hand the
severity of the security crisis in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as the extremely difficult
context in which the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the

23-089615/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo (MONUSCO) is operating. We also saw some of
the tragic human cost. The United Kingdom remains
deeply concerned about the intensifying violence and
the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We strongly
condemn the continuing advance across North Kivu
province of the United Nations-sanctioned Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23), an illegal armed group. The
resumption of violence has caused significant human
suffering and displaced more than 800,000 people
since March 2022. We strongly condemn the violence
perpetrated by all other armed groups. All support for
armed groups must stop, including external support for
the M-23, and we call on all the parties to exert any
influence they have to de-escalate the situation.
We welcome the indications of M-23 withdrawal
and the handing over of locations to the East African
Community regional force, but any withdrawal must
be complete and in line with the agreed process based
on the Luanda road map. Now is the time, as we heard
from the Special Representative. We reiterate our full
support for regional diplomatic efforts, including the
Nairobi and Luanda processes. The United Kingdom
urges all the parties to respect the commitments made
under those processes, including with respect to the
withdrawal of the M-23, an end to all support for
armed groups and stopping the use of incendiary hate
speech. The regional and bilateral forces deployed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo — including the
East African Community regional force, the Uganda
People’s Defence Forces, the Burundi National Defence
Force and the recently announced Angolan troop
deployment — must engage with each other and with
MONUSCO substantively on the de-confliction of their
operations. That is critical to ensuring the protection of
civilians, the safety and security of peacekeepers and
the effective implementation of MONUSCO’s mandate.
The United Kingdom fully supports MONUSCO,
including its vital role in protecting civilians and
facilitating humanitarian assistance. We commend the
Mission and the Special Representative for their work
in challenging circumstances, but MONUSCO cannot
tackle that crisis alone. The effective cooperation of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
with MONUSCO is vital to ensure that the Mission can
implement its mandate, in particular with respect to the
protection of civilians. We encourage the Government
to engage in a serious dialogue with MONUSCO to
clarify how we might achieve a responsible, conditions6/23

29/03/2023

based reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look forward
to receiving options for that in July. The Government
must also do its work with MONUSCO on critical
pillars of the peace process, such as the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and security
sector reform.
We must come together as a Council to give a
very simple message. The violence must stop to give
dialogue a chance to succeed. That is the only way to
build confidence and provide a lasting resolution to the
crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
and I welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Permanent Representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Permanent Representatives of France and Gabon for
their leadership in organizing the Security Council’s
visit from 9 to 12 March to Kinshasa and Goma,
which reflected the Council members’ commitment to
continuing to work to overcome the challenges posed
by the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. For Ecuador, it was also a valuable and unique
opportunity to take a close, objective and transparent
look at some of the country’s needs, challenges and
opportunities. We are grateful for the openness shown to
us by members of the national authorities, civil society
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in terms of access to information, which
has given us a much better understanding than usual of
what we read in the reports that the Council receives.
We recognize the work done by the Independent
National Electoral Commission in the voter registration
period for the 2023 elections. We are encouraged by
the efforts that have been made to increase women’s
participation and call for that type of initiative to be
stepped up in the light of the women and peace and
security agenda. We remain concerned about the effect
on the population of the deteriorating security conditions
and the possibility that this could put the upcoming
elections in jeopardy. We therefore urge all the actors
involved to continue working to ensure free, transparent
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and inclusive elections, as the only mechanism that can
enable the transition to a lasting peace.
Ecuador condemns the continuing attacks on the
civilian population by various armed groups, such as
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo, the Mouvement du 23 mars,
the Mayi-Mayi and others, and we acknowledge the
enormous work that MONUSCO is doing to monitor and
provide information about them within the Mission’s
main areas of operations in the provinces of Ituri, North
Kivu and South Kivu. We believe it is crucial to ensure
that the Mission has the necessary resources to do that
work in order to guarantee humanitarian access and
assistance for the protection of civilians. This morning
Ms. Keita gave us a comprehensive report on these
issues, all of which require unwavering attention on the
part of the Council. Nor can we remain indifferent to
the violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The high levels of abuses and human rights violations,
with 844 reported cases, of which at least 628 involve
summary and extrajudicial executions, 11 of them
involving women and 52 involving children, show that
the situation in the country is an emergency.
Finally, and as was noted during the visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that I touched on at
the beginning of my statement, neither can the Council
ignore that there are factors originating in Rwanda
that could exacerbate tensions. We therefore urge that
any existing differences be resolved through dialogue
and established conflict-resolution mechanisms,
one of which is the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework Agreement for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes Region for the east of
the country.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by thanking Special Representative Keita
for her briefing and welcoming the participation of the
Permanent Representatives of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi in today’s meeting.
The Security Council’s visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo provided an opportunity for the
United Arab Emirates to reinforce its commitment to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its people,
promote regional dialogue and de-escalation, and
support the efforts of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) at this critical time. The United
Arab Emirates commends the important work that

S/PV.9298

Ms. Keita and other United Nations personnel have
undertaken on the ground in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also thank the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Secretariat for ensuring a successful visit, as
well as France and Gabon for co-leading the mission.
The Council’s visit was an opportunity to appreciate
first-hand the work of MONUSCO peacekeepers
as they carry out daunting but necessary tasks in a
complex and often perilous landscape. The current
situation is deeply concerning, and the insecurity in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to deepen. The ongoing attacks by armed groups are
targeting civilians and forcefully displacing hundreds
of thousands of people. The Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) and other armed groups represent a serious
threat to the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well
as to peace and security across the wider region. We
also condemn the M-23’s violations of the ceasefire. All
armed groups, including the M-23, should immediately
cease their hostilities and unconditionally lay down
their weapons.
This is a pivotal moment for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and the Council’s focus should be on the
security and safety of civilians, especially women and
children. The Council’s visit has firmly cemented my
country’s belief in an approach that simultaneously
addresses the causes and symptoms of insecurity, while
also prioritizing the protection of civilians. Following
our visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I
would like to emphasize three key takeaways.
First, regional dialogue is essential to meeting the
Congolese people’s aspirations for peace and prosperity.
We commend the efforts of regional leaders within the
framework of the Nairobi and Luanda processes and
their work to harmonize those peacemaking endeavours.
The United Arab Emirates supports regional efforts
that promote political dialogue and advance security
and stability, such as the deployment of the East
African Community regional force. For those efforts
to bear fruit, the de-escalation of tensions is more
important than ever. To that end, we echo the call for
the implementation of the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement by its signatory States made by the African
Union Peace and Security Council in its communiqué
of 17 February.
Secondly, protection efforts must be prioritized to
ensure long-term stability. MONUSCO’s work is vital

23-089617/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to protecting women and girls and local communities
from sexual and gender-based violence. Women’s
participation in peace efforts is a key driver of longterm stability. It is only when women are protected
from violence that they can participate fully, equally
and meaningfully in conflict management and
peacebuilding efforts, and we encourage MONUSCO
to make additional efforts to that end.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the ongoing spread
of hate speech, disinformation and misinformation
against both MONUSCO and the United Nations
more broadly. We reiterate our call for MONUSCO
to strengthen its efforts to counter hate speech and
disinformation. The Security Council can and should
support those efforts.
In addition, the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and stabilization programme must be
fully implemented, along with other projects aimed at
reforming the security sector. Failed efforts have only
exacerbated the conflict, and effective reintegration
policies can further encourage members of the armed
groups to lay down their weapons and re-enter civilian
life. In that regard, MONUSCO’s role is critical,
particularly its work with all stakeholders to support
social cohesion and resilience in communities. As
we approach the elections, the armed groups must
cease hostilities and renounce violence. We should
continue to promote conditions conducive to a peaceful
environment and support credible elections in which all
Congolese can have their voices heard.
Finally, I want to address the appalling humanitarian
situation in the east of the country. The Council’s visit
to the Bushangara internally displaced persons camp
near Goma was a sobering reminder of the extremely
dire situation facing millions of people who have been
displaced from their homes and communities. It was
also a clear example of the consequences that manifest
themselves when international humanitarian law is not
respected. It is imperative that all who bear arms adhere
to their obligations and refrain from targeting civilians
or civilian objects. Likewise, the successful delivery of
aid requires the safety and protection of humanitarian
workers. We must all recommit to meeting the urgent
humanitarian needs of displaced persons and ensure
that they have access to basic services.
For the United Arab Emirates, the Security
Council’s visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
highlighted the work that remains to be done in order
8/23

29/03/2023

to consolidate peace in the country and the greater
engagement and cooperation among key stakeholders
necessary to achieve that objective. The Council must
continue to engage with all partners in promoting
efforts to achieve stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the wider region.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing today. I also thank her for hosting the
Security Council during its visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo earlier this month. The visit gave
us not only valuable insight into the important work of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
but also a deeper and more sobering understanding of
the deteriorating humanitarian and security situation in
the east.
The United States welcomes the initiative and
commitment of regional partners, specifically those
participating in the East African Community-led
Nairobi process and the Luanda process, and we
recognize the modest progress made to date towards
the implementation of the commitments agreed in prior
communiqués. The United States calls on all parties to
act expeditiously to meet those commitments in full.
The United States reiterates its call on Rwanda
to end support for the United Nations-sanctioned
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and urges Council
members to consider how that kind of support runs afoul
of the existing sanctions regimes. We remind all States
of the importance of the territorial integrity of States
as one of the founding principles of the Charter of the
United Nations — something that the Security Council
is working hard to protect. That is not to imply that
Rwanda is solely responsible for the conflict. Rather,
the M-23 and Rwanda’s actions have escalated an
already troubling humanitarian and security situation.
The United States has long been concerned by the
collaboration of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo with armed groups in the
east, especially the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda. Just as we stated on numerous previous
occasions, we reiterate our call on the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to fully
professionalize its security forces and immediately end
cooperation with armed groups.
It has become very clear that the level of
disinformation and hateful rhetoric directed towards
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Rwanda, minority groups and MONUSCO is
increasingly putting civilians and peacekeepers in
harm’s way. While in Kinshasa, I called on officials
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to denounce hate speech, hold individuals
accountable for inciting violence and correct such
damaging narratives. I repeat those messages today.
We also remain deeply troubled by the increasing
number of attacks by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham-Democratic Republic of the Congo, also known
as the Allied Democratic Forces, and the Coopérative
pour le développement du Congo against civilians. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its regional and international partners cannot
neglect that ongoing violence.
In that very difficult environment, MONUSCO
has been working to carry out its mandate,
including providing limited logistics support to the
Independent National Electoral Commission (CENI)
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as officially
requested. I was encouraged to learn that CENI had been
closely coordinating with MONUSCO. That partnership
will help to enable a timely and comprehensive voter
registration process in preparation for elections later
this year. The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo should ensure free and fair elections in
accordance with constitutional deadlines.
MONUSCO and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo also continue to work together on the Mission’s
benchmark-driven transition plan. I remind the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
of their responsibility to work closely with the United
Nations leadership to fulfil those benchmarks so that
MONUSCO can safely and responsibly withdraw at
an appropriate time. The Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the United Nations country team must work
together to ensure that essential functions, including
promoting human rights and ensuring accountability,
continue before, during and, most important, after
that transition.
Similarly, we remind the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo of the Security
Council’s request for a confidential report on weaponsand ammunition-management efforts following the
Council’s easing of sanctions in December of last
year. That report will provide valuable insight into the
Government’s capacities and enable the international
community to assist in the prevention of small-arms
trafficking and diversion.

S/PV.9298

The United States offers its full support to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita and her
team as they execute their mandate amid increasingly
difficult circumstances. MONUSCO will not resolve the
conflict on its own, and no one should expect as much.
But supported by, and in coordination with, the Nairobi
and Luanda processes, and alongside the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, neighbouring States
and the United Nations, MONUSCO can play an
important role. I thank Ms. Keita for her commitment
to bringing peace to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the broader Great Lakes region.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
three African members of the Security Council (A3),
namely, Ghana, Mozambique and my country, Gabon.
I take this opportunity to commend the significant
work of Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, which the Council witnessed
directly during its recent mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Her comprehensive briefing
provides us with additional information, which allows
for a better understanding of the activities of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the situation in the country. I also welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and the Republic of
Burundi at this meeting. Our statement will focus on
four points, namely, security, political, economic and
humanitarian issues.
The A3 is especially concerned about the
deteriorating security situation, particularly in the Ituri
and Kivu provinces, owing to the recurring attacks
by armed groups. The eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is continuously experiencing
an escalation in killings and unprecedented violence,
indiscriminately targeting children and women. That
violence, primarily perpetrated by the armed groups
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23), the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo (CODECO) and other rebel
groups, has brought back a climate of terror among
the population.
For 25 years, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been suffocating under the yoke of local and foreign
armed groups, with more than 10 million deaths. Young
Congolese have been sacrificed, deprived of education
and forcibly enrolled in armed groups, while women

23-089619/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

are regularly victims of sexual violence. Mass pillaging
and abuse in Kishishe in November 2022, and more
recently in Beni on 9 March, and the hostage-taking and
massacre of a dozen people near Bunia on 26 March are
prime illustrations of the notoriety of the armed groups
raging in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
population in the eastern provinces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who suffer an ongoing cycle of
brutality, seems to be destined to an ominous fate.
The taking over of part of the Congolese territory
by the M-23 and the resurgence in violence in the
occupied areas has resulted in the mobilization of
substantial Congolese resources and shaped the efforts
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo in trying to curb the activities of that vile
group. CODECO, the ADF and other armed groups
have therefore increased their attacks against civilians,
stepped up pillaging and intensified atrocities again
the population by using increasingly sophisticated
improvised explosive devices.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique condemn that
brutality and demand an end to abuses against
civilians, the withdrawal of all foreign armed groups
from the occupied areas, compliance by local armed
groups with the Nairobi process and the Disarmament,
Demobilization,
Community
Recovery
and
Stabilization Programme and an immediate end to all
external forces. The authority of the Congolese State
must be restored in the eastern part of the country.
We call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to continue its efforts for security sector reform. In that
regard, the support of MONUSCO is crucial to ensuring
a better protection of civilians. The A3 reiterates
the need to provide the Mission with the human and
material resources necessary to implement its mandate.
It is also important that MONUSCO’s mandate be
better understood, both by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and by the troop-contributing countries, with
a view to enhanced coordination on the ground. In this
regard, the A3 welcomes the invaluable contribution
made by MONUSCO to the Congolese defence
forces. We acknowledge its important contribution,
particularly in the protection of civilians and respect
for human rights.
We encourage efforts aimed at coordination,
communication and cooperation between the authorities
of the Democratic Republic and MONUSCO. We
denounce the campaigns of disinformation and
10/23

29/03/2023

misinformation directed in particular against
MONUSCO and the East African regional force. We
welcome the measures taken by MONUSCO to combat
these scourges, as well as the active support of the
International Organization of la Francophonie in
setting up partnership projects between civil society
organizations on such issues as fact-checking.
With regard to the MONUSCO transition, Gabon,
Ghana and Mozambique reiterate the imperative need
for an orderly gradual withdrawal in consultation
with the Congolese authorities. The A3 welcomes
the progress made by the Democratic Republic’s
Government in implementing the benchmarks defined
in the joint transition plan.
At the regional level, the Nairobi and Luanda
processes are African political solutions for ending
the crisis that deserve to be supported by the entire
international community. We welcome the visit by
the African Union Peace and Security Council to the
Democratic Republic, as well as the visit by the Security
Council, on which we were briefed this morning.
Ghana, Mozambique and Gabon remain convinced
that the political solution to the crisis in the Democratic
Republic must give priority to and be based on
regional processes. That is why the implementation
of the priority actions contained in the Nairobi and
Luanda agreements for the cessation of hostilities
and the immediate withdrawal of the M-23 must be
irreversibly implemented.
We welcome the deployment of the East African
Community regional force and the support of the
African Union Peace Fund, and we commend the
troop-contributing countries for their commitment to
promoting regional peace and security. The A3 believes
that there is still an opportunity for peace and friendly
relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, which can be facilitated by ongoing
regional initiatives supported by the international
community. We welcome the announcement of the
deployment of an Angolan contingent within the
framework of the verification mechanism and take note
of the preparations for the next meeting in Nairobi. In
this regard, we call on international partners to support
peacemaking efforts in the Democratic Republic by
providing financial, technical and material expertise to
the regional process.
On the political front, the A3 notes with satisfaction
the launch of the voter registration process and the
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

announcement on 13 March of the registration of 70 per
cent of the expected voters, at least half of whom are
women and youth. This high number of registered
voters demonstrates the interest of the Congolese
population in the electoral process. We also call on the
country’s authorities to do their utmost to hold peaceful,
inclusive and credible elections in accordance with the
Constitution and laws of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We call on all Congolese political actors to
participate in these elections in good faith.
Addressing the security crisis in the Democratic
Republic leads us to the issue of the plundering of
the country’s natural resources, which is the main
source of destabilization and the principal cause of the
abuses against the population. The A3 emphasizes the
importance of censuring all individuals and entities
involved in the illicit trafficking of resources, which
feeds the networks of armed groups and community
tensions. The international community must not remain
indifferent to the suffering of the Congolese people or
to the tears of distress of women and children in the
east of the country. For more than two decades, the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic has been prey
to the worst atrocities. It is time to end this chaotic
humanitarian situation. We must all commit ourselves
to this.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates our support for the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
and for MONUSCO. We also reaffirm our commitment
to respecting the territorial integrity, intangibility of
borders and sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative Keita for her insightful briefing. I
also thank her for her full support during the Security
Council’s visit to Kinshasa and Goma.
I welcome the delegations of Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
today’s meeting.
This is the first Council meeting on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
since our visit to the Democratic Republic following
a hiatus of more than four years. It was high time to
listen to the people on the ground in order to get a better
grasp of the enormity of the crisis that that country is
facing. I thank the Mozambican presidency and the

S/PV.9298

Permanent Representatives of France and Gabon for
their timely initiatives.
It is needless to repeat how large and varied a
country the Democratic Republic of the Congo is. It is
needless to insist on how far away the bustling streets
of Kinshasa seem from the mountains and lakes in the
east. The reality that the Council’s mission encountered
across the whole country is indirectly or directly
affected by the conflict in the eastern provinces.
Conflict not only destroys lives and livelihoods, but it
also drains resources that could be used for development
and social investments. Above all, conflict prevents the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from fully tapping
into its human and natural resources.
Naturally, the impact is greater in the areas where
illegal armed groups operate, such as North and South
Kivu and Ituri. The Security Council mission witnessed
the distress and despair of thousands of people displaced
by the Mouvement du 23 mars.
Brazil reiterates the Security Council’s call for
all armed groups to lay down their arms and disband.
Furthermore, all external support for illegal armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must stop.
Tackling security in its own territory and protecting
its population is primarily a responsibility of the
Congolese authorities. But the international community
can support — and has supported for years — those
efforts. During our visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, we witnessed the work of MONUSCO
and United Nations agencies on the ground. We bore
witness to the dedication and professionalism of people
from many different nationalities and backgrounds
working in difficult circumstances.
We remind the host country of its responsibility
to ensure a safe environment for peacekeepers. We
call in particular for an end to misinformation and
disinformation directed against the United Nations
presence, which can directly lead to acts of violence
against Blue Helmets and Blue Berets, and to restrictions
to their freedom of movement, without which it is
impossible for them to adequately fulfil their mandate.
This is not to reject out of hand any criticism of
the United Nations or of MONUSCO. On the contrary,
the Security Council visited the Democratic Republic
of the Congo precisely to hear what more can be done
for the country. And, from what we have heard and

23-0896111/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

have seen, it is clear that we cannot deal with the crisis
in the eastern part of the country in a business-asusual manner.
In that regard, I am glad to say that the new
MONUSCO Force Commander, Lieutenant General
Otávio Rodrigues de Miranda Filho, has already started
his new functions. At the same time, we have taken note
of the arrival of new contingents of the East African
Community regional forces. The constant diplomatic
efforts of the neighbours of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in the Nairobi and the Luanda processes
deserve the full support of the international community.
Those positive developments must not, however,
make us overlook the worrisome trend of rising tensions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda. We urge both parties to refrain from acts that
may exacerbate tensions and to commit to peaceful
dialogue to resolve differences between them, including
in the framework of the Luanda process.
After 30 years of the Organization’s presence,
MONUSCO’s transition cannot be postponed
indefinitely. But neither can it be rushed. The Mission’s
departure without meeting the benchmarks in the
transition plan would bring about even greater hardship
for the people in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I have in mind, in particular, the priority
benchmarks of the transition plan discussed by the
Mission and the Government representatives of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in the joint working
group on the transition plan.
As preparations for the upcoming elections gather
pace, the concerns of opposition parties must be
addressed in accordance with the law. We hope that
the elections will take place in an orderly and timely
manner. May they set a new milestone towards a more
stable and more prosperous future for the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita for her briefing, and I also welcome the
participation of representatives from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi.
Realizing sustainable peace and stability in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is essential for prosperity in the Great Lakes region
and, indeed, in the entire African continent. The recent
Security Council visit to the country was an opportunity
12/23

29/03/2023

to reaffirm that conviction. Extensive meetings and the
visit to Goma helped us understand the situation on the
ground. Continued brutal human rights violations and
abuses by numerous armed groups, the humanitarian
crises they create and heightened regional tensions are
our shared concern. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) has a vital role in alleviating
people’s suffering and facilitating the stabilization
process, and Japan commends its continued dedication
in volatile conditions.
To further our endeavour for sustainable peace in
the region, I would like to highlight the following points
relating to MONUSCO’s strategic priorities today.
First and foremost, a cessation of hostilities and of
any further advances by the Movement du 23 mars (M23) , as well as its withdrawal from all occupied areas,
are a prerequisite for laying the ground for stabilizing
this region. All external parties must immediately cease
their support to the M-23. Japan welcomes ongoing
regional initiatives such as the Nairobi process, led
by the East African Community (EAC), as well as
the Luanda process. The series of recent agreements
require sincere implementation by all stakeholders.
MONUSCO and EAC regional forces should closely
coordinate and continue to monitor the implementation
of those agreements.
Secondly, strengthening the rule of law is crucial.
Listening to horrific stories in Goma directly from
internally displaced persons (IDPs) fleeing from human
rights violations and abuses was simply heartbreaking.
The organized refugee and IDP camp has long
exceeded capacity, yet vulnerable people continue
to arrive. They should be able to settle in new camps
under the Government’s auspices. Regardless of the
future course of MONUSCO, national security forces
bear the primary responsibility for protecting civilians
and ensuring social order. Security sector reform must
proceed much more swiftly under national ownership
while MONUSCO maintains its substantial presence on
the ground.
Japan has been contributing to institution-building
for more than 20 years in that sector. Our experts
from the Japan International Cooperation Agency are
working side by side with national police officers at their
headquarters in Kinshasa. Our goal is to establish and
expand credible community police systems by assisting
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9298

with technical training, infrastructure development and
trust-building with local people.

integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo must
be respected.

Finally, solely military measures cannot break
the cycle of violence. Tackling the illegal exploitation
of the country’s rich natural resources is another key
challenge. We should further encourage regional and
international cooperation to promote legitimate trade
and tighten border controls to diminish the black market.

The Movement du 23 mars (M-23), the Allied
Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour le
développement du Congo and other armed groups keep
ravaging a land rich in resources that should be a source
of wealth for its people. It is crucial that efforts are
made to tackle the conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We urge authorities to continue
tackling corruption, engaging in holistic security sector
reform and doing their utmost to protect civilians.

The facilitation of free and fair elections is also a
vital step towards sustainable peace. Japan encourages
the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to
continue their efforts in the ongoing electoral process
and MONUSCO to provide the necessary supports.
Japan remains committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and we will continue working together with
MONUSCO and all the countries of the region to
achieve sustainable peace and stability.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I too thank Special
Representative Keita for her detailed briefing today.
I also welcome the representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi to
today’s meeting.
The recent visit of the Security Council to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was a tangible sign
of our collective commitment to peace and stability in
the eastern part of the country. The draft presidential
statement that we agreed to is a step in the right direction.
As the Council listened to the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the people in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
regional partners, it is clear that challenges continue.
Entire generations have experienced only conflict
and violence. We echo the Secretary-General’s
condemnation of the violence perpetrated by armed
groups against civilians and his call for them to lay
down their arms unconditionally.
We call on all parties to the conflict to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law. We also condemn all attacks against MONUSCO
peacekeepers and express our condolences to the
families of the victims. In the same vein, we urge all
State actors to stop backing armed groups. We also
underline the fact that the sovereignty and territorial

We commend the Congolese armed forces for
supporting age-verification assessments of more
than 7,000 candidates for the armed forces. Vetting
the codes of conduct is crucial for a professional and
accountable security sector. We commend the extensive
regional initiatives aimed at peace and stability in
the country. Coordination with regional players
remains key to ensure that all efforts to that end are
mutually reinforcing. The full, equal and meaningful
participation of women must also be supported at all
levels. Furthermore, their safe participation as voters,
candidates, observers and civil educators requires
monitoring and reporting of violations and reprisals.
Malta strongly condemns sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls, including abductions
and forced marriages. We urge the Government to
develop, operationalize and resource the reparations
fund for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
Meanwhile, 30 per cent of the population requires
humanitarian assistance and protection. We are
concerned that M-23 offensives have caused the
displacement of up to 800,000 people to Goma and its
surroundings since March 2022. Through the extensive
efforts of the European Union (EU), air bridges are
now able to assist in alleviating the situation, while
additional EU funds amounting to €47 million cover
immediate needs, such as nutrition, health, water,
sanitation, shelter and protection.
Malta commends the critical work of MONUSCO as
it operates in a increasingly challenging environment.
At the same time, the Mission continues to protect
civilians and assist the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on multiple fronts. Gender
must remain a cross-cutting consideration among the
Mission’s priority benchmarks. We also underline
the need to redouble efforts to combat disinformation
against MONUSCO. In view of the future Mission

23-0896113/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

reconfiguration and in order to ensure its success,
troops must be appropriately equipped and ready to
engage with a proactive and mobile posture. We also
emphasize the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
I conclude by highlighting the fact that the elections
scheduled to be held later this year are crucial and that
process should lead us all to invest in breaking the cycle
of violence. The people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo deserve an environment conducive to the
realization of their aspirations.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her briefing.
We also welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Permanent Representatives of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. We are grateful to
our colleagues, the Permanent Representatives of Gabon
and France, for their briefing (see S/PV.9297) on the
visit by the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo conducted from 9 to 12 March.
We thank the Secretariat and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for organizing
that important trip, which was extremely informative
with regard to the processes under way in the country.
We are grateful to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for their warm welcome and their
openness to holding frank and substantive discussions.
We believe that it was especially important to be able
to visit the eastern part of the country, in particular
the city of Goma, the provincial capital of North Kivu,
in the vicinity of which the situation remains tense.
The Council’s visit was particularly timely at this
difficult juncture.
We are carefully following developments in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
are deeply concerned about the most recent round of the
crisis involving the renewed activity of the Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23). Its offensives have exacerbated the
humanitarian crisis and have increased the number
of internally displaced persons and refugees, human
rights violations and the daily suffering of civilians.
We note with concern that as the Government forces,
MONUSCO and the East African Community (EAC)
regional force have had to concentrate on containing
the advance of the M-23, other groups, in particular
the Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo, the Mayi-Mayi, the
14/23

29/03/2023

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the
Résistance pour un État de droit au Burundi, are taking
advantage of the situation to strengthen their position
in the east. The risk of escalating tensions between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda is of
the utmost concern.
We are convinced that the current top priority
is to achieve a cessation of hostilities and launch an
inclusive dialogue among all parties to the conflict. In
that regard, we look forward to further effective steps
being taken by neighbouring States in the framework of
the Luanda and Nairobi processes, which seek to find
joint solutions and a sustainable solution to the crisis.
We welcome the commitment of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to conducting
negotiations with armed groups on the political track
of the Nairobi process, another round of which is
planned to be held in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We commend the efforts of the countries of
the East African Community and the countries that
have contributed troops to the EAC regional force. We
also note the importance of linking and effectively
coordinating the Nairobi and Luanda processes in
order to create conditions for inter-Congolese dialogue
and the restoration of relations between Kinshasa and
Kigali. We hope that the understandings reached at the
recent summits of the East African Community will
contribute to normalizing the situation in the region
and returning to the agreed framework, including the
implementation of the Luanda road map.
We believe that we must continue to work towards
the full implementation of the foundational 2013 Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes Region. We support the work of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Huang Xia, towards establishing inter-State
dialogue in order to reduce tensions in that part of
Africa. Political solutions will enable achieving a
comprehensive cessation of hostilities and create the
conditions necessary for sustainable stabilization.
At the same time, we are convinced that Kinshasa
must also redouble its efforts with regard to building
its own effective armed forces and the reform of the
country’s security sector and other State institutions.
Under the current challenging circumstances at both
the international and regional levels, such increased
efforts are critical for ensuring the country’s adoption
of its own independent foreign and domestic policy;
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9298

resolving its own complex national issues, which are to
a large extent the result of the country’s tragic history;
and ensuring its control over its own natural resources
for the benefit of the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, we welcome the lifting last
year of the notification requirement for arms imports
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita for her
briefing, efforts and leadership of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). We also thank her
for the excellent atmosphere during the Council’s visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We reaffirm our principled support for the efforts
of MONUSCO and its leadership and peacekeepers. We
thank them for their work under difficult conditions
and their commitment to the protection of civilians.
We offer our condolences to the Republic of South
Africa, which lost a peacekeeper in early February. We
strongly condemn all attacks and provocations against
Blue Helmets and United Nations civilian personnel.
We hope that all issues related to providing the Mission
with resources — especially logistical resources — will
be addressed swiftly and effectively.

As was mentioned by other colleagues, this month
the Security Council had the opportunity to see at firsthand the deep scars of the prolonged conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, one of the deadliest
in the world, and the persistent dire humanitarian costs
in a country blessed by nature but devastated by humanmade suffering. It is unfortunate that the much-needed
progress in many areas, including economic development
and preparations for elections, has been overshadowed
by the sound of the guns. Albania is horrified by the
deadly violence inflicted on the civilian population by
armed groups, mainly the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Coopérative pour le développement du Congo,
the Zaire, the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23). We
saw the consequences of the tragedy in the eyes of
the hundreds of thousands of people who have been
displaced, living in disheartening conditions and often
deprived of humanitarian assistance.

As a matter of principle, we regard the presence
of MONUSCO peacekeepers in the conflict zone as
an important stabilizing factor. We believe that the
Mission needs to focus on the main tasks under its
mandate. We look forward to greater coordination
between the armed forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Mission, as well as with other
regional and national institutions involved in resolving
the conflict, in order to work more effectively to
protect the population of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. With regard to the implementation of the
joint transition plan for the phased drawdown of the
Mission and its withdrawal from the country by 2024,
we believe that we must take into account above all
the development of the situation on the ground, and
react to that in a gradual and responsible manner.
We note the important role played in alleviating the
humanitarian consequences of the crisis by the entities
of the United Nations system, including the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and others.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the
continued work of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on its preparations for the
holding of general elections in December. We hope
that Kinshasa, with the support of MONUSCO and
regional assistance, will be able to ensure conditions
for elections that meet international standards and the
aspirations of all Congolese citizens.

War, conflict and hostilities with terrible
consequences for civilians and local populations have
lasted for far too long in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. All Congolese and foreign armed groups must
unconditionally lay down their arms and participate
in the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme. The progress
made in implementing the Programme in South Kivu
and Ituri is encouraging. Appropriate funding and a
community-based approach in support of reintegration
are essential tools that will encourage more fighters to
join it.
We unequivocally condemn the actions of the M-23,
which is mainly responsible for the renewed tragedy in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge
it to adhere to the ceasefire, in line with the decisions
of the Luanda mini-summit of 23 November, and
withdraw from all areas it currently controls, not just
some of them. To that end, it is crucial for the States
of the region to respect the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, stop providing any support for the M-23 or
other armed groups and halt the illegal exploitation of

23-0896115/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

29/03/2023

the country’s natural resources. The national wealth of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo belongs to the
Congolese. It should improve their lives and build their
future, not end up in the bloody hands of militias and
their supporters.

MONUSCO, in close cooperation with the Congolese
authorities, must be carried out expeditiously. However,
it must also be realistic, in order to ensure that when
the time comes, the drawdown of the Mission can take
place in a responsible and orderly manner.

The ongoing conflict in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo also represents a tangible regional
threat. The alarmingly increasing tensions between
it and Rwanda must be addressed through existing
conflict-resolution mechanisms and dialogue, based on
goodwill. War is never the solution and should not be
the choice in any case. Any deterioration in an already
volatile situation could trigger massive escalation, with
dire consequences that could threaten Governments and
populations across the Great Lakes region, contributing
to further insecurity, refugee movements and the
multiplication and growth of non-State military groups.
Needless to say, such an eventuality would undermine
gains made by the Government and further increase the
sacrifices made by the Congolese.

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Keita for her briefing. I also
thank the Permanent Representatives of France and
Gabon for their briefings on the Council’s visit to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.9297). I
welcome the Permanent Representatives of Burundi,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to
today’s meeting.

(spoke in French)
The electoral process under way is crucial to the
country’s future. It must exhibit transparency, credibility
and inclusivity, conditions that are prerequisites for the
holding of free and democratic elections, so that the
institutions that emerge reflect the aspirations of the
Congolese people and all segments of society, including
women and young people.
During the Council’s visit, it was striking to note
the widening gap between the expectations of the
authorities and the people with regard to MONUSCO
and its actual mandate. The tensions and hate speech
must cease. They simply make it more difficult for the
Mission to fully discharge its main mandate, which is
to protect civilians. There can be no doubt that the only
reason for the presence of the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is to help the people
and protect civilians. However, there should also be no
doubt that the primary responsibility for security falls
on the country itself and its institutions.
We hope to see the East African Community
regional force further strengthened and becoming
fully operational so that it can help the Congolese
forces establish State authority in North Kivu. Albania
supports MONUSCO’s work and appreciates the efforts
and sacrifices of the Blue Helmets, who are operating
in a complex and dangerous environment. In that
spirit, the re-evaluation of the joint transition plan for
16/23

The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has been working for some time now to
advance security-sector reform, combat armed groups,
promote economic development and prepare for general
elections. However, the security situation in the east of
the country has continued to deteriorate, exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis. The Council sent a mission to
visit the Democratic Republic of the Congo this month
to deepen its understanding of the situation on the
ground and hear the opinions and expectations of people
from all walks of life in the country. China thanks the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) for their work in hosting the mission and
supports the issuance of a presidential statement in the
light of the visit.
I would like to emphasize the following points.
First, a ceasefire and a cessation of the violence are
top priorities. The ongoing attacks by armed groups in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo are likely to
worsen the security situation in the area. With the help
of the African Union (AU) and countries of the region,
such as Angola, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
announced an agreement on a ceasefire and dialogue in
early March. China calls on the M-23 and other armed
groups to honour their commitments, cease all violent
activities and withdraw from the occupied areas. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
recently launched its Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
for 6,000 people in the three provinces in the east
of the country. China expects to see relevant plans
creating conditions there conducive to the programme’s
implementation and to the armed groups’ participation
in dialogue.
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Secondly, regional organizations are encouraged
to play an important role. We welcomed the recent AU
and East African Community (EAC) summits on the
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the active mediation efforts of the leaders
of Angola, Burundi and Kenya to de-escalate the
situation. We expect the Nairobi and Luanda processes
to continue to play an important role. This year marks
the tenth anniversary of the signing of the 2013 Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region. We hope that the countries of the region will
draw on their experiences, reinvigorate that important
process and commit to resolving differences through
dialogue and consultation to build a common future.
China encourages the Office of the Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes and MONUSCO to jointly support the
good-offices efforts in the region. The EAC and Angola
are carrying out peacekeeping and security operations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. All the parties
should strengthen coordination to ensure synergy.
Thirdly, MONUSCO should be supported in
providing targeted assistance. Special Representative
Keita has led MONUSCO in overcoming difficulties
and implementing its mandate and has done important
work in conducting joint patrols, supporting securitysector reform, advancing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) and supporting the general
elections. Given the current circumstances, MONUSCO
should fulfil its core mandates to protect civilians
and support the building of Government institutions
and DDR in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
MONUSCO, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and all sectors of society should
strengthen their communications, enhance mutual trust
and ensure the smooth performance of peacekeeping
operations. The Secretary-General will submit a report
to the Council in July on MONUSCO’s reconfiguration
of its uniformed personnel. China supports listening to
the opinions of the countries concerned in advancing
drawdown responsibility.
Fourthly, the international community should
firmly support humanitarian responses. The
deteriorating situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo has led to the displacement of
6 million people, resulting in enormous humanitarian
needs. The international community should provide
adequate resources for the humanitarian response plan
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The relevant

S/PV.9298

United Nations agencies and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should work together
to maximize the benefits of humanitarian assistance
and ensure the safe and smooth delivery of supplies.
While meeting short-term humanitarian needs, we
should also help the Democratic Republic of the Congo
strengthen its capacity for independent development,
based on its actual needs. China adheres to mutual
respect, mutual benefits and win-win results in its
cooperation with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and supports the country in transforming its
resource advantage into a development advantage. The
Chinese-Congolese cooperation project has achieved
remarkable results in supporting local industry
development, expanding employment and improving
people’s livelihoods, and has been welcomed by the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
China would like to work with the international
community to make further contributions to
establishing peace in, and supporting the development
of, the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing, as well as for all the work done by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
I welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi.
We thank the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for its welcome during the visit of the Security Council
to that country. The exchanges with the authorities,
MONUSCO and civil society enabled the Council to
gain a better understanding of the issues involved in
promoting peace and security in the region. We reiterate
our full solidarity with the Congolese people. I would
like to highlight three points.
First, the deterioration of the security, humanitarian
and human rights situations in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo is alarming. Since November
2021, the renewed Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
offensive has displaced hundreds of thousands of
people, exacerbating the already dire humanitarian
crisis. Attacks by the M-23 and other armed groups
on civilian populations and infrastructure, including
schools, hospitals and internally displaced persons

23-0896117/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

29/03/2023

sites, are unacceptable. We are also concerned about
the use and mass recruitment of children by various
armed groups. In that context, we call on all parties
to respect international law and to ensure unhindered
humanitarian access to the population in need. We recall
that the primary responsibility for protecting civilians
lies with the Government. Switzerland encourages
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue its
collaboration with MONUSCO in order to foster an
environment conducive to the implementation of its
mandate and to combat misinformation surrounding
the Mission.

presence in Kinshasa, in particular in the east of the
country with cooperation offices in Bukavu and Goma,
allows us to be as close as possible to the people and
their needs. Next month, the President of the Swiss
Confederation is due to visit the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, principally to express his support for the
political peace efforts. As the violence continues, there
is an urgent need to find a lasting solution. As a member
of the Security Council, Switzerland will strive to build
bridges, support humanitarian and development efforts
and contribute to peacebuilding in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Secondly, only a coordinated political solution can
contribute to peacebuilding. We welcome the diplomatic
efforts at the national and regional levels to address the
root causes of the conflict. In particular, we express
our support for the Nairobi and Luanda processes. Any
military action, including the deployment of the East
African Community regional force, must be undertaken
within the framework of the ongoing political processes
and lead the armed groups to lay down their arms. We
encourage the Government to continue to put in place
conditions conducive to the operationalization of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme. Furthermore, all parties
must immediately cease their collaboration with armed
groups. We call on Rwanda to halt all of its support
for the M-23. At the same time, we call for an end to
the support given to the armed groups by a number
of elements of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Thirdly, the rule of law and the fight against
impunity must be strengthened. The high level of
conflict-related sexual violence cannot continue to be
ignored. We are also concerned about intercommunal
violence and the spread of hate speech, especially
against the Rwandophone population. It is essential
that the Government ensure accountability and restore
trust between communities, as well as with the State.
As elections approach, we encourage the authorities
to protect civic space and ensure inclusive democratic
processes, including with the opposition. We welcome
President Tshisekedi Tshilombo’s statement on
International Women’s Day calling for an equal society.
In that respect, we hope that women candidates and
voters will be able to fully participate in the upcoming
electoral process.
Switzerland is committed to achieving lasting
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our
18/23

Mr. Nzongola-Ntalaja (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his commitment
to my country’s cause. I would also like to thank all
the members of the Security Council, in particular the
three representatives of the African continent in this
organ. My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2023/208), which was just
introduced by Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO,
whom I welcome. I had an opportunity to meet with
Ms. Keita yesterday, and as always she was full of
excellent advice. We fully support the work she is doing
in our country. Allow me to make a few comments on
the issues raised in that report and the various concerns
raised by the members of the Council.
The political situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as highlighted in the report, is dominated
by the ongoing registration process leading up to the
2023 elections and the regional and international efforts
to reverse the spiral of insecurity in the east of the
country. With regard to the elections, it is important to
emphasize that the registration operations, which began
on 24 December 2022, will continue both within the
national territory and abroad, in particular in France,
Belgium, Canada, the United States and South Africa.
I would like to reiterate my Government’s commitment
to the holding of credible, transparent and inclusive
elections. Moreover, in that spirit of constructive
partnership and at the request of the Head of State,
President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, the
Government launched an appeal to the European
Union and other partners, encouraging them to deploy
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.9298

observers during the elections. That request for support
in election observation at this stage of the process
could also contribute to the resolution of a number of
upstream challenges.

opportunity to see that reality with their own eyes. The
2023–2024 emergency humanitarian aid plan launched
in Kinshasa in an attempt to curb the crisis needs more
funding to ensure its implementation.

At the regional level, political, security and
diplomatic efforts are being centred around the Nairobi
and Luanda processes. As for the Nairobi process, the
preparations for the fourth phase have gone well, so that
it could be launched in early May this year. In short, the
fourth round of Nairobi process consultations will serve
to help those armed groups that have responded to the
call to lay down their arms to begin demobilization and
join the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme. The efforts
that my Government is undertaking with its own funds
to operationalize that structure deserve to be supported.
We are taking advantage of that platform to launch an
appeal to partners for a greater mobilization of funds as
a prelude to the more efficient implementation of such
a key institution.

MONUSCO remains an important partner of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. My Government
is currently engaged in a constructive dialogue with
the Mission on redefining the transition plan. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s vision for its future
partnership with MONUSCO will involve revisiting and
adjusting the plan. I ask the Council to take full account
of my Government’s deep and relevant concerns,
detailed in the memorandum transmitted to Council
members on 10 March during their visit to Kinshasa.
I continue to believe firmly that those elements will
go a long way to ensuring the clarity and transparency
of MONUSCO’s actions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As the host country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo also hopes that by the 2023
deadline the Council can transform MONUSCO from a
peacekeeping into a peacemaking force, or at the very
least, into a support force for the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC). In that
context, my Government calls for the reactivation of
the Force Intervention Brigade.

Concerning the security situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it clearly continues
to be dominated by the militant activities of the
terrorists of the Da’esh-affiliated Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the Coopérative pour le développement
du Congo (CODECO) and the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23), a proxy of Rwanda. The unforgivable massacres
carried out daily by those negative forces against the
women, young people and children of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must stop. As Pope Francis said,
the forgotten genocide that is openly taking place in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo must stop.
To return to the M-23 — which is so easily confused
with the Rwandan army — despite some indications
of its withdrawal, we want to draw the Council’s
attention to the number of ceasefires that it has already
violated. That speaks volumes about the fickleness of
the movement and its clearly identifiable sponsor. The
Council must be vigilant, and the multifaceted bilateral
and multilateral pressure must not stop until the group
surrenders completely and the troops of the Rwanda
Defence Force withdraw fully from the territory of our
country that they have invaded.
What is there to say about the intolerable
humanitarian situation of internally displaced persons,
which is largely the result of the militancy of armed
groups? During their visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo the members of the Council had the

Before I conclude, I would like to clarify two points
about which my country is often unfairly attacked. The
first is the allegations about ethnic hate speech directed
at Rwandophone people. The position of the President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Congolese
authorities, our civil society and the major Christian
churches, including both Catholic and Protestant, are
clear and unambiguous. They do not tolerate such
speech and condemn it regularly. The demagogues
who appear from time to time on social networks are
listened to by a minority of the population only, while
the majority rejects such divisive statements.
While intercommunal violence may occur from time
to time in disputes over land or access to waterways, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not seen episodes
of deadly violence based on xenophobia and ethnic
hatred since 1994. The Congolese people, who are made
up of 450 ethnic groups, are not divided into majorities
and minorities competing for hegemony. It is a fact that
intermarriage has become common in urban areas and
that discrimination on the basis of ethnicity is far less
prevalent today than it was during the colonial regime,
whose foundation was divide-and-rule. Moreover, we
should ask who is more hateful — is it someone who

23-0896119/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

spends most of their time demonizing Rwandophones
or someone who kills and maims innocent men, women
and children, or who rapes women and girls before
finally maiming or killing them? Or is it someone
who uses improvised explosive devices to kill people
who have done them no harm? Those who keep saying
that the Democratic Republic of the Congo is mired in
ethnic hate need to ask themselves that question.
As for the group of former genocides who make
up the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), it is clear that many of them are already too
old to pose a real threat to Rwanda’s territory. The
young people who succeeded their parents and uncles
and are haunted by Rwanda limit themselves to mafiastyle activities, like the other rebel groups in the region.
As I have already explained to the Council, Rwanda
has been at liberty to eliminate the group on several
occasions. The first was between September 1996
and July 1997, when Commander James Kaberebe
was the leader of the Rwandan expeditionary force
deployed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and later, when he was Chief of Staff of the Congolese
army — meaning that he, a Rwandan officer, was the
leader of the Congolese army. That decision — to put
a Rwandan at the head of the Congolese army — was
made by Laurent Kabila’s friends Presidents Kagame
and Museveni. So if he was in charge of the security
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for an entire
year, why did he not eradicate the FDLR?
The second time was during Uganda’s five-year
occupation of North Kivu, which lasted from August
1998 to 2003, after which the Sun City Agreement was
signed in South Africa. At the time Rwanda had control
of North Kivu through the Rassemblement Congolais
pour la Démocratie, a structure backed by Rwanda, just
as the M-23 is today.
The third such occasion, as indicated in the
10 March memorandum to the Security Council from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
was during a joint patrol with the FARDC under Joseph
Kabila’s regime when Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo were working together to combat
the FDLR. In fact, in the memorandum, Council
members can read that the FARDC did kill two major
FDLR leaders. The FDLR is therefore not our friend. It
is our enemy, because it is there to exploit our mineral
resources. That is why it is engaged in mafia activities
with those who want to buy our minerals, especially
our strategic minerals. They are raping women and
20/23

29/03/2023

exploiting our country’s territory as if it were their
own. And that essentially is why the FDLR is not our
friend, contrary to what many people seem to think.
What they should be asking is why the Rwanda Defence
Force did not eliminate the FDLR.
In reality, the Rwandan regime has in fact
succeeded in eliminating the FDLR as a military threat.
In order to achieve its main objective of looting the
strategic mineral resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda needs to keep the FDLR alive
as a necessary pretext for invading our country and
continuing to loot our resources such as coltan and gold,
as well as other mineral, animal and forestry resources.
While it is correct that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo needs to strengthen its State to better protect
its borders and its people, the Security Council has
the responsibility to maintain peace and security all
over the world and to do everything possible to ensure
that the States Members of the United Nations respect
international law, including the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all Member States.
For that reason, the Democratic Republic of Congo
requests the Security Council to take the following
actions. It should take into account the recommendations
contained in the memorandum of 10 March addressed
to it by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It should work to transform MONUSCO
into a genuine peacemaking force, revitalize the Force
Intervention Brigade by strengthening its equipment and
logistics and support the Luanda and Nairobi processes.
It should strengthen the sanctions against the ADF/
Madina Tawheed wal Muwahedeen, CODECO and the
M-23 terrorists and their leaders. It should demand
that all armed groups, without exception, lay down
their arms and join the Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme,
and it should provide more support to that Programme.
It should continue to exert and maintain strong pressure
on Rwanda, its forces and the M-23 until they have
fully and unconditionally withdrawn from the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. There was
a documented attack and the Charter of the United
Nations was violated; the report of the Group of Experts
is clear. The Democratic Republic of Congo asks those
Council members who continue to hesitate to render
justice to condemn Rwanda without ambiguity. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo demands that Rwanda
compensate the Congolese population for the damage
done in terms of loss of human life — 10,000 people is
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the figure we have — and in terms of the families torn
apart and the people displaced from their homes. There
should be targeted sanctions against Rwanda, Rwanda
Defence Force officers and those who have committed
violations and crimes for the aggression and support for
the terrorist M-23 movement.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou
Keita, for her briefing, and the members of the Security
Council for their remarks.
Let me start by commending the recent and ongoing
deployment of additional East African Community
regional force contingents to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo from Burundi and Uganda. In the
areas in which those contingents have assumed their
interposition and monitoring roles, the implementation
of the regional mechanisms is starting to bear fruit
thanks to those two countries. To that effect, Rwanda
encourages the parties to the conflict to strictly respect
the ceasefire agreements for a peaceful resolution.
Rwanda has repeatedly noted that the crisis in the
eastern Democratic Republic of Congo was started by,
and is the primary responsibility of, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Unfortunately,
the situation continues to deteriorate owing to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s leaders’ lack of
political will, urgency and inaction. It has become
evident that, even though the conflict continues to
inflict terrible suffering on the civilian populations, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
using the conflict as a political stunt to obtain domestic
support and silence opposition ahead of the upcoming
elections. However, scapegoating Rwanda does not
change the fact that the conflict stems from immense
governance failures in the sociopolitical, economic and
military arenas. Until the Democratic Republic of the
Congo acknowledges its own governance failure, we
will continue to have continuous political dialogues and
deliberations that yield no substantial results and are
ultimately inconsequential. Allow me to paint a clear
picture of our primary concerns regarding the situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
First, the Congolese Government has refused
to adhere to all the peace plans from the regional
processes, a fact that is evident to everyone. The Nairobi
and Luanda agreements, in particular, have 4 and 11

S/PV.9298

items, respectively. In both agreements, the first item
is the ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities. Instead
of implementing those agreements, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government is instead stoking
the conflict by encouraging hate speech and recruiting
local armed groups and mercenaries to fight alongside
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC). Those mercenaries and armed groups
show little regard for civilian welfare, and therefore
pose a major human rights challenge for the region and
the international community. By fighting alongside
the very armed groups it should be disarming, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is refuelling the
conflict and ensuring that any progress made is
quickly undone. For example, in the places in which
the unilateral withdrawal of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) has been conducted in the absence of the East
African Community regional force, the FARDC and
allied militias have repeatedly violated the terms of the
Luanda road map. They have moved to reoccupy the
positions vacated by the M-23, triggering a predictable
resumption of hostilities at the expense of the local
populations. On top of all that, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Government has also encouraged hostility
towards the East African Community regional force and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
itself. In the light of that, one wonders: What does the
Democratic Republic of the Congo actually want? One
evident answer is that it is not peace or security for the
people and the region.
Secondly, our concern pertains to the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the
genocidal militia sanctioned by the United Nations and
given free rein in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Even though MONUSCO and the Security Council have
full knowledge of the fact that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Government provides the FDLR with
weapons and allows it to fight alongside the FARDC,
no action has been taken. As a result of the FARDC
and FDLR alliance, Rwanda’s territorial integrity has
been violated multiple times over the years. Like all
States, Rwanda reserves the right to defend its borders
and citizens against cross-border attacks. As you heard,
my good friend says that FDLR members are too old,
and I wonder how the ideology they possess can also
become old.
Thirdly, but not least, we would like to reiterate
our concern over the ongoing targeting of Congolese

23-0896121/23

S/PV.9298

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Tutsi communities, which is on every form of social
media concerning the activities that they conduct. They
continue to endure hate speech and targeted killings
incited by the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
leaders, based solely on their ethnicity. We all know
that the sustained persecution of, and discrimination
against, a people is an early-warning sign for future
atrocity crimes and genocide. Rwanda’s concerns have
been echoed in a number of reports and statements,
including two statements by the Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in November 2022 and January
2023, the report of the 2022 Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and those of the
Human Rights Commission and the European Union and
many other statements delivered by Security Council
members present at this meeting today. Unfortunately,
while the hate speech and the subsequent human rights
violations have intensified, MONUSCO has chosen
to be a silent observer, which gives the impression
that the targeted killings of specific communities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are becoming
normal and acceptable. As the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide noted, the presence of
the FDLR and the genocide ideology are at the heart
of the atrocity crimes perpetrated against Congolese
Tutsi communities. Given all the reports expressing
concerns over the escalating hate speech, what is the
way forward for the Security Council? Is there going to
be an investigation? The reports should not be the end,
but should be a call for appropriate actions to be taken.
In conclusion, we object to the ongoing Democratic
Republic of the Congo campaign to characterize Rwanda
as the cause of its instability. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s undermining of peace efforts, its refusal
to repatriate Congolese refugees, its acquisition of
mercenaries, its recruitment of armed groups and its
alliance with FDLR demonstrate that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is using this crisis for shortsighted political gains, at the expense of the civilian
populations and diplomatic relations.
Rwanda once again appeals to the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to acknowledge
its obligation and implement the signed regional
agreements for peace and stability. As always, Rwanda
remains committed to the bilateral, regional and
international efforts to stabilize the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, and we look
forward to their materialization.
22/23

29/03/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Mozambique
presidency of Security Council for the month of March
on having convened this meeting. I welcome the
participation of, and briefing by, Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). I also welcome the participation in this
meeting of the Permanent Representatives to the United
Nations in New York of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda.
For more than a quarter of a century, the basic
norms of international law, international humanitarian
law and international human rights law have been
barely respected in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo due to a very fragile security situation as
a result of the presence of armed terrorist groups and
negative forces.
Peace in the Great Lakes region and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be an absolute
priority in view of the upcoming elections, which
require the restoration of lasting peace in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In an attempt to
address that, the international community has made
tremendous efforts through the MONUSCO mandate,
inter alia, to restore peace, security and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Several missions have been deployed to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and, as Council
members clearly noted during their visit to Kinshasa
and Goma in early March, it is evident that security
concerns remain, resulting in a humanitarian situation
that requires urgent action and an outcome.
In that regard, the deployment of the East African
Community (EAC) regional force in North and South
Kivu alongside the MONUSCO force and the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo in
recent months will significantly help to restore peace
and security, thereby alleviating the terrible suffering
of the civilian population in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly among women,
children and the elderly.
While many challenges remain in putting an end to
the ongoing hostilities and attacks by the Mouvement
23-08961

29/03/2023

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

du 23 mars (M-23) and effectively implementing the
Luanda and Nairobi directives, some positive results
can be reported.
First is the round of inter-Congolese dialogue,
launched under the mediation of the East African
Community, and which should continue with the
international community’s full support.
Secondly, there was the recent announcement of the
deployment of 500 Angolan troops in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Thirdly, there were field visits, particularly by the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which were highly appreciated.
Fourthly, a coordination meeting of the joint
mechanism for the implementation of the ceasefire
and the withdrawal of the M-23 was held on 2 March
under the chairmanship of His Excellency the President
of the Republic of Burundi and current Chairperson of
the EAC.
Fifthly, and lastly, a meeting of the Chiefs of
General Staff of the EAC armed forces took place in
Bujumbura on 23 and 24 March.
Owing to the complementary nature of the
mandates of MONUSCO and the EAC regional force, I
would now like to make some observations.
First, there is an urgent need to resolutely reactivate
all the previous decisions taken at the Nairobi, Luanda
and Bujumbura summits, but which have still not
been respected.
Secondly, it is necessary to ensure that the regional
force, the MONUSCO force and the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo work constructively

S/PV.9298

with the new Angolan contingent in order to avoid
several command centres.
Thirdly, there is an urgent need for the United
Nations and the African Union to provide financial
and logistical support to the East African Community
regional force.
Fourthly, there is a need to strengthen the
coordination mechanism established by the Bujumbura
meetings among the Chiefs of General Staff of the armies
of the regional force, in which MONUSCO participates.
Fifthly, there is also a need to strengthen the
communication and intelligence systems among all
forces in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, as the political agendas expected
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the end of
this year call for the substantial support of the regional
force and the coordination mechanisms, I would like
to reaffirm Burundi’s and the EAC’s commitment to,
and support for, the Nairobi, Luanda and Bujumbura
processes, which are complementary and crucial to
MONUSCO implementing its mandate.
The President: The Council has before it the text of
a statement by the President on behalf of the Council on
the subject of today’s meeting. I thank Council members
for their valuable contributions to the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2023/3.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

23-0896123/23
