262

General Assembh---Fort}-first Session

1977, 496 (1981) of 15 December 1981 and 507 ( 1982) ol
28 May 1982, in which the United Nat1ons denounced the
practice of using mercenanes. in particular against (kvel
oping countries and national liberation movemenh,
Recalling in particular 1ts resolution 40/74 ot
11 December 1985, by which it decided to renew the mandate ofthe Ad HocCommittee on the Draftingofan lnternational Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenanes and to hold the sixth
session of the Ad Hoc Committee for four weeks in 1986.
Bearing in mind its decision 40/ 4 72 of Q May 1986, a~
well as the report of the Secretary-General on the curren!
financia) crisis of the United Nations, 29 on the basis of
which the Ad Hoc Committee did not hold Jts sixth se-;sio11
in 1986,
Taking into account the statement made by the Chairman of the Sixth Committee on 28 October 1986 30 and the
views expressed by Member States during the considera
tion of the item at the current session, 11
Recognizing that the activ1ties of mercenanes are con
trary to fundamental principies of international law. -;uch
as non-interference in the interna] affairs of States, ter
ritorial integrity and independence, and seriously impede
the process of self-deterrnination of peoples struggling
against colonialism. racism ano apartheid and ali forrns ,if
foreign dornination,
Bearing in mind the pernic10us irnpact that the activitie,
of mercenaries have on international peace and security.
Considering that the progress1ve developrnent ami
codification of the rules of international law on mercenaries would contribute immensely to the implementat1011 of
the purposes and principies of the Charter,
Taking account of the progress achieved by the Ad Ho,
Committee al its previous sessiom.
Reaffirming the need for the elaborat10n. at t he earlie~t
possible date, of an international L"<.mvent1011 again,t the
recruitment, use, financing and trainmg of mercenaries.
l. Decides to renew the mandate of the Ad Hoc Com
mittee on the Drafting of an lnternat1onal Convention
against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Tram111g ol
Mercenaries to enable it to continuc lis work nn the draft
ingofan international co11vent1on agamst the recruitme11t
use, financing and training of mercenarie,;
2. Requests the Ad Hoc CommJttee, 111 the fulfilment ot
its mandate, to use the draft articles contamed in chapte1
V of its report on its fifth session, n entitled •·consolidated
negotiating basis of a convention agamst the recruitment
use, financing and training of rnercenaries". as a basis for
future negotiation on t he tex t of t he prnposed m terna
tional convention;
3. lnvites the Ad Hoc Committee to take mto account
the suggestions and proposals of Mernber Sta tes submitted
to the Secretary-General on the subJect and the views and
comments expressed at the fortieth- 3 and forty-first 11 sessions of the General Assernbly during the debate m the
Sixth Committee devoted tn 1he nrn-;ideration of the n·
port of the Ad /loe Comm1tt('t';

29 A/40/ 1102 and Corr.1 l Add I and /\dd 1 ''or r I l\dd 2 arnl
Add.2/Corr I and Add l 7
lO See Ojjícial Record, o} 1/w (ier-erul 411e111/J/1 1-,,,r,-j,nt '"""'"
\üt/¡ Cummiltee. 25th meet111g ami , "mgelllit1111. p,ua, 1 and '
11 !bid-, 25th, 26th, 46th an,1 471h mt'et1ng, and ,·orngendun,
12 !bid.. Fortieth Sernon. Supplemenr Vo 43 (A140;4J)
33 /bid., Fortieth Se'"'"'· Snth C ,,nm111e,. 1 1 1h 1<1 17th. 4.i,h arid
48th meetings

4 Decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall hold its
,1xth session for a peri<>d of three weeks. from 19 January
o t-, February J9X7.
A/so decides that the Ad Hoc Committee shall acccpt the participation of observers of Member States, in-.:1 uding participation in the meetings of its working
grnups
t,
Requests the Secretary-General to provide, on a pri,mty basis, the Ad Hoc Cornmittee with any assistance and
fanlities it may require to hold its sixth session in 1987;
Requests the Ad Hoc Committee to make every effort to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by the General As~ernbly and to prnceed with ali deliberate speed with the
drafting of a convention;
1\_ Decides to mclude in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second sess1on the itern entitled "Report of the
Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an lnternational
Convention against the Recruitrnent, Use, Financing and
rraining of Mercenaries"_
95rh p/enary meeting
3 Decemher 1986
41 /81.

Report of the International Law Commission

/'he General Assembly,
f-laving rnnsidered the report of the lnternational Law
( ·ommission on t he work of its thirty-eighth session, 16
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to rnake it
a more effective mea ns of implementing the purposes and
prmciples set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in the Declarat1on on Principies of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among
States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nat10ns 28 ami to givc increased importance to its role in relat 1ons among States.
Recugnizing the 1mportance of referring legal and draft111g questions to the Sixth Committee, including topics
1hat rn1ght be submitted to the International Law Comrmssion, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
(\immission further tn enhance their contributions to the
progressive developmenl of international law and its
,.., ,dification.
Recal/ing the need to keep under review those top1cs of
mternational la\\ which, given their new or renewed in1erest for the contemporary international community.
may be sullable for progressive development and codificat1nn ,if international law and therefore may be included 111
the future prograrnme of work of the International Law
( nm,msSHJll,
/'akes note of the report of the lnternational Law
',1mmiss1011 cm the work of its thirty-eighth session;
2 Expresses 11~ appreciation to the International Law
( ommission for the work accomplished at that session;
1.
Recummends that, taking into account the cornments of Governments, whether in writing or expressed
orally in debates in the General Assembly, the Internatinnal Law Comrnission should continue its work on the
iopics in 1ts current prograrnrne;
4. Expresse.1· lis satisfaction with the conclusions and
,ntentions of the International Law Commission concern111g its procedure~ and methods of work. as reflected 111
paragraphs 250 10 261 of its report; 16
Y Reque.~ts the lnternational Law Cornrnission:
1a)
Te> consider thoroughly

IX.

263

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(i)

The planning of its activities for the term of office
of its members, bearing in mind the desirability of
achieving as much progress as possible in the
preparation of draft articles on specific topics;
(ii) lts methods of work in all their aspects, bearing in
mind the possibility of staggering the consideration of sorne topics;
(b) To indicate in its annual report those subjects and
issues on which views expressed by Governments, either
in the Sixth Committee or in written form, would be of
particular interest for the continuation of its work;
6. Takes note of the comments of the International
Law Commission on the question of the duration of its sessions, as presented in paragraph 252 of its report, and expresses the view that the requirements of the work of
codification and progressive development of international
law and the magnitude and complexity of the subjects on
the agenda of the Commission make it desirable that the
usual duration of its sessions34 be maintained;
7. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
summary records and other documentation ofthe International Law Commission;
8. Urges Governments and, as appropriate, international organizations to respond in writing as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International
Law Commission for comments, observations and replies
to questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
9. Further urges Governments to give full attention to
the request of the International Law Commission, transmitted through the Secretary-General, for comments and
observations on the draft articles on jurisdictional immunities ofStates and their property 35 and on the status of
the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, 36 adopted on first reading
by the Commission;
10. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its
codification;
11. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions ofthe International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants from developing countries will be given the opportunity to attend those seminars, and appeals to States that
can do so to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently needed for the holding of the seminars;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the
forty-first session of the General Assembly 37 and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/82.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,38
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,39
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security ofthe missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those missions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities ofthe host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Considering the issues raised by certain States Members
ofthe United Nations in response to the request and to action by the host country to reduce the size of their missions,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States in participating in the work of the Committee,
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 87 of its report;38
2. Strongly condemns any criminal acts violating the
security ofmissions accredited to the United Nations and
the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to take all necessary measures without delay to continue to prevent criminal acts,
including harassment and violations of the security of missions and the safety of their personnel or infringements of
the inviolability of their property, in order to ensure the
existence and functioning of all missions, including practicable measures to prohibit illegal activities of persons,
groups and organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration of acts and activities
against the security and safety of such missions and representatives;
4. Urges the host country and the Member States that
raised the issues in response to the request and to action by
the host country to reduce the size of their missions to follow the path of consultations with a view to reaching solutions to this matter, in accordance with the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations; 40
5. Stresses the importance of a positive perception of
the work ofthe United Nations, expresses concern about a
negative public image and, therefore, urges that efforts be
continued to build up public awareness by explaining,
through ali available means, the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and the missions accredited
to it in the strengthening of international peace and
security;

34 See resolution 331 S (XXIX), para. 5.
35 See Official Records of the General Assembly,

Forty-first Session,
Suft'ement No. JO (A/41/10), chap. 11, sect D.
Ib,d., chap. lll, sect. D.
37 /bid., Forty-first Session, Sixth Committee, 27th to 34th, 36th to
44th and 51st meetings and corrigendum.

38 /bid., Forty-first Session.
39 Resolution 22 A (1).
40 Resolution 169 (11).

Supplement No. 26 (A/41/26).
