S/PV.9009

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9009th meeting

Thursday, 31 March 2022, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Figueiredo Sobral Torres
Mr. Dai Bing
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Nyarku
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. McSwiney
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-30542 (E)
*2230542*

S/PV.9009

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/277, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, China, France, Gabon, Ghana,
India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, Russian
Federation, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2628 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): The United
States was pleased to vote in favour of resolution 2628
(2022) today. We appreciate the extraordinary efforts
of our United Kingdom colleagues to produce a quality
mandate for the reconfigured mission in Somalia. We
would like to take a moment to recognize and honour
the sacrifices made by the forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) since its creation in
2007.
It is rare that the Council gets the opportunity to
help shape the transition of a mission. The United States
voted in favour of the resolution because it provides a
2/7

31/03/2022

vital opportunity to build on AMISOM’s efforts and
take the next steps to roll back Al-Shabaab, enabling
Somalia to provide the security and stability required
for the Somali people to achieve their aspirations.
We applaud the efforts of the federal Government of
Somalia, the African Union and other stakeholders to
develop a proposal and a concept of operations that
provide a credible, shared vision of how to more actively
counter Al-Shabaab and transition the responsibility
for security to the Somali security forces.
The United States supported the adoption of
this resolution because we appreciate and support
measures in the mandate to increase accountability,
transparency, command-and-control and mission
efficiency. Al-Shabaab is a formidable and adaptable
threat to Somalia and to East Africa more broadly.
As Al-Qaeda’s largest and best-financed affiliate,
Al-Shabaab represents a threat that requires a vigorous
and broad-based response. The mandate of the African
Union Transition Mission in Somalia provides the
opportunity to adapt and reinvigorate the African-led
international effort against Al-Shabaab.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has played an important
role in providing an enabling security environment
in Somalia, including in containing Al-Shabaab and
terrorist attacks. That remains important not just for
Somalia but for the wider Horn of Africa region.
India commends and pays tribute to all AMISOM
troop- and police-contributing countries for their
sustained commitment and the sacrifices they have
made. India has been a steadfast supporter of AMISOM
since its inception and has regularly contributed to the
trust fund. India has made a significant contribution
to peacekeeping in Somalia through its involvement in
the United Nations Operation in Somalia II in 1993 and
1994. Twelve Indian soldiers have laid down their lives
while keeping the peace in Somalia.
Resolution 2628 (2022), adopted today, has
set in motion the process of a phased handover
of responsibilities to Somalia’s security forces by
reconfiguring AMISOM as the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia. This is in line with the proposal
submitted to the Security Council by the SecretaryGeneral and produced jointly with the African Union,
in consultation with the federal Government of Somalia
and other stakeholders.
22-30542

31/03/2022

The situation in Somalia

The African Union Transition Mission in Somali
has several onerous responsibilities, primarily to
reduce the threat posed by the terror group Al-Shabaab.
Al-Shabaab remains largely responsible for numerous
civilian casualties and human rights violations,
including attacks on women and children. During the
transition, the Somali people need the international
community’s continued attention and support in dealing
with a terrorist group like Al-Shabaab. A zero-tolerance
approach to terrorism must guide our way forward.
However, with regard to climate change, we remain
fundamentally opposed to the persistent attempts in the
Security Council to link climate change to security. We
have repeatedly mentioned that the Security Council
is not the place to discuss climate change. By linking
it to security, a great disservice is being done to the
principles agreed in the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which remains the
primary intergovernmental forum to discuss all aspects
related to climate change.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Albania would like to thank
the United Kingdom, as penholder, for its hard work
in drafting the comprehensive resolution 2628 (2022)
and for leading the challenging negotiations. We
welcome the unanimous adoption of the resolution,
which authorizes the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS), the successor of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to carry out its
mandate to combat the threat posed by Al-Shabaab, to
support the capacity-building of the integrated Somali
security and police forces, and to conduct a phased
handover of security responsibilities to Somalia.
It is of absolute importance that the Security
Council succeed in demonstrating its renewed support
for Somalia by endorsing the decision to reconfigure
AMISOM into the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia. At the same time, we commend AMISOM for
its contribution and the sacrifice of its personnel, who,
along with their Somali partners, have fought to build
lasting peace and stability in Somalia for 15 years,
since the Mission was first authorized.
As we noted in the Council last week (see
S/PV.9001), the security situation is Somalia has
changed significantly through the years, but in a
dramatic turn of events Al-Shabaab has managed in
recent months to heighten its ability to commit repeated
attacks against security forces and, unfortunately,
against civilians and civilian infrastructure. In this

S/PV.9009

regard, we reiterate our call on the Government of
Somalia to complete the elections in a credible and
inclusive manner, guaranteeing women and youth the
right to participation and representation. It is crucial
that the newly-elected Government turn its focus on
the deteriorating security situation, to the undertaking
of reforms and to the humanitarian crisis caused by
unprecedented droughts, which threaten to plunge
the population into another famine. Further delays
will give Al-Shabaab more time to overshadow the
Government’s efforts to provide peace and prosperity
and will fuel Al-Shabaab’s propaganda as an alternative
to a democratically elected Government.
In the end, it is incumbent upon the Somalis
themselves to create the conditions for long-term
stability in their country. Albania stands by the Somali
people. We reiterate our full support for their efforts to
make Somalia safer, peaceful and prosperous.
Lastly, we welcome those partners and donors that
have shown their firm support for Somalia through
ATMIS. We reaffirm our commitment to ensuring that
the Mission has a sufficiently robust mandate to fulfil
its role and on the ground.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of resolution 2628 (2022).
The current situation in Somalia remains
challenging. The international community must
maintain its support to Somalia on the security front.
During its 15-year deployment in Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been an
important contributor to security and stability in the
country. China would like to pay tribute to the African
Union (AU) and the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their contributions and sacrifices.
Following a period of intensive consultations,
the stakeholders, including Somalia, the AU and the
United Nations, agreed on the future arrangements for
AMISOM, namely, for AMISOM to be replaced by the
African Union Transition Mission in Somalia (ATMIS).
China supports the Council’s development of a
mandate for ATMIS in accordance with the United
Nations-AU joint proposal and the AU Peace and
Security Council communiqué. We hope that all the
parties concerned will strengthen coordination in the
process of the ATMIS mandate implementation and
work closely with the Somali Government to help

22-305423/7

S/PV.9009

The situation in Somalia

it gradually assume the primary responsibility for
national security.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): We do not usually
make explanations of vote on resolutions adopted by
consensus. But in this case, I want to thank Security
Council members for their support in the adoption of
landmark resolution 2628 (2022). I want to pay tribute
to the troop- and police-contributing countries that
served in the African Union Mission in Somalia and
all those that paid with the ultimate sacrifice. I want
to thank in particular those partners — the Somali
Government, the United Nations, the African Union and
the European Union — that contributed to developing
the proposal for the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia and to continue the transition in the fight
against Al-Shabaab. And finally, I want to pay tribute
to my team and all the experts who worked tirelessly to
get us to where we are.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of today’s resolution
2628 (2022), which supports the resolution by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union to
reconfigure the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) into the African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia (ATMIS), while maintaining its important
work of providing security support to Somalia.
This resolution, which is the result of intense
consultations among the Somali Government, the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union, reflects significant consensus on the need to
reconfigure AMISOM so as to focus on supporting the
process of enabling the security transition in Somalia.
In that regard, we would like to commend the quartet
for its steadfast commitment and participation in the
reconfiguration of AMISOM. We also commend the
efforts by the United Kingdom, as the penholder, and
thank all the members of the Security Council for
proposing this resolution and adopting it.
However, we note the many security challenges
facing Somalia, mainly the recurrent attacks by the
terrorist Al-Shabaab movement, which also constitutes
to be a cross-border threat for the entire region. Therefore,
the reference in today’s resolution to the main Security
Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, including
resolution 1337 (2001), is important. In that context, we
4/7

31/03/2022

would like to stress the commitments by Member States
to prevent any activities by the Al-Shabaab movement
or other terrorist groups and to fight them wherever
they are in line with other counter-terrorism resolutions
where those commitments apply, even if those groups
are not listed on the sanctions regime list concerning
the Da’esh and Al-Qaida organizations.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates supports
promoting the capacities of the security institutions
of Somalia to address the Al-Shabaab movement and
other challenges. We hope that, with the adoption of this
mandate, ATMIS will be able to provide the necessary
support for Somalia in order to better address the
security challenges and achieve stability in line with
the needs and aspirations of the people.
In conclusion, we would like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation for the efforts and sacrifices
of AMISOM, which contributed with its personnel over
the previous 15 years to making Somalia more secure
and stable. We join colleagues in the Security Council
in stressing our shared commitment to achieving peace
in Somalia.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): I would like to extend
to you, Madam President, and to the United Arab
Emirates delegation our best wishes and warmest
congratulations on the success of your presidency of
the Security Council for this month.
The Federal Government of Somalia acknowledges
the receipt of the final draft of resolution 2628 (2022),
on the mandate of the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia (ATMIS). The Federal Government
of Somalia expresses its concern over the decision to
disregard some important inputs and suggestions made
by Somalia during the negotiation phase of the new
ATMIS resolution.
Despite negotiating in good faith and formally
transmitting Somalia’s technical and tactical inputs
on the modalities of the new Mission in Somalia, in
particular on the logistical support plan, the need for
unified and centralized command and control and the
exclusion of the agreed enhanced civilian component
and modality, it is with deep regret that those three
issues were disregarded by the drafters this resolution.
22-30542

31/03/2022

The situation in Somalia

From the outset, it is worth noting that the purpose
and the objective behind the Federal Government
of Somalia’s call for the proposed change in the
previous mandate. Through various independent and
impartial assessments conducted jointly by the Federal
Government of Somalia, the African Union (AU) and
the United Nations, we collectively recognize that
Al-Shabaab is a terrorist group that has evolved into an
organized criminal enterprise.
The insurgent and terrorist threat in Somalia is
consistently evolving and at an unprecedented pace.
Al-Shabaab continues to rely on asymmetrical warfare
tactics, attacking the Somali national armed forces,
allied and friendly forces and civilians with tactical
agility and mobility.
Over the past 15 years, Al-Shabaab has continued
to pose a significant threat through the groups Amniyat
units, increasingly responding to the changes and
specializing in suicide attacks, which comprise the most
prominent type of improvised explosive device attacks.
However, in the past decade or so, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has been conducting
joint operations with the Somali security forces across
vast areas in the scattered forward operating bases,
with limited tactical cooperation and without the
immediate and available agile forces required to join
the operation. That has impeded the Somali forces’
operational capability and tactical agility, hindering the
holding of locations cleared of Al-Shabaab. To address
this evolving threat, especially over the long-term,
the Federal Government of Somalia decided to take
action and respond to the evolving threat by calling for
a change in the modalities and operations of the new
Mission and calling for a new Mission that focuses on
conducting effective, agile and mobile operations.
Somalia welcomed resolution 2568 (2021), whereby
AMISOM was mandated to provide mobile capabilities
to assist the Somali security forces’ posture in becoming
more offensive with one designated AMISOM mobile
reserve forces per sector, capable of acting as a quickreaction force and operating across sector boundaries
with other forces, by the end of August 2021. However,
upon closer scrutiny, we noted that only one sector was
successfully mobilized. Moreover, AMISOM’s delay
in generating the expected number of mobile reserve
forces hindered the consolidation of the gains that had
already been made in joint operations, increasing the
threat posed by Somalia’s adversary.

S/PV.9009

In addition, the threat posed by Al-Shabaab has
been further exacerbated by the limited movement
between forward operating bases (FOBs), which has
given Somalia’s adversaries the freedom of movement
and ability to disrupt free passage on the main
supply routes, especially in the supply route between
Mogadishu and Baidoa and the supply route between
Jowhar and Jalalaqsi. The limited movement between
the FOBs has increased the already significant threat to
progress that there had been in key strategic locations.
This was further worsened by the lack of centralized
command and control within AMISOM, with sectors
taking decisions based on their respective troopcontributing countries’ directions, which increased the
susceptibility of some contingents to volatile political
dynamics that are hindering Somalia’s stabilization
efforts, further undermining the United Nations
mandate requirement for an apolitical centralized
AMISOM command and control.
To appropriately meet the evolving threat, especially
over the long term, the Federal Government of Somalia
decided to address the recurring and persistent failures
to replace AMISOM with the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia, by duly articulating in the guiding
strategic document of the security transition plan,
the joint Federal Government of Somalia-AU concept
of operation (CONOPS) in bilateral and multilateral
negotiations and agreements and in several official
communiqués to both the Security Council and AU
Peace and Security Council. The effective execution
of the Somali transition plan and the joint Federal
Government of Somalia-AU CONOPS requires a new
mission that plays a supporting and enabling role
through specialized training, provisions of mobile
forces and high-end capability, notably in engineering,
countering improvised explosive devices, casualty
evacuation, logistics and intelligence, and surveillance
and reconnaissance. It is worth noting that, as the
new Mission assumes a supporting and enabling role
under the new mandate, the Somali security forces
will be conducting both independent and simultaneous
operations in addition to the planned joint operations
with ATMIS as the new Mission embarks on its
supporting and enabling role.
I would like to remind the Council members that
this leaves the Somali security forces, which are indeed
conducting independent and simultaneous operations
with ATMIS, with little to no logistical support. This
should be a cause for concern for us all.

22-305425/7

S/PV.9009

The situation in Somalia

Resolution 2628 (2022) takes note of the exit
strategy and the end state articulated in the joint Federal
Government of Somalia-AU CONOPS and security
transition plan and the gradual and conditions-based
transfer of the security responsibility from ATMIS to
the Somali security forces. However, it is necessary to
note the contradiction in setting forth an exit strategy
without properly addressing the logistical support that
is required to fully realize this objective. We all have
the collective responsibility to ensure that the Somali
security forces are well equipped and resourced in
order to undertake the activities outlined in the joint
Federal Government of Somalia-AU CONOPS and the
Somali transition plan. I would like Council members
to recognize this important contradiction and ensure
that the dearth of support for Somali security forces
neither hampers the planned military and non-military
operations and activities nor results in undoing the
gains we have already made.
Currently, the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia (UNSOS) is mandated to provide
non-lethal support to 13,900 Somali security forces
personnel — 12,900 of whom are in the National
Army and 1,000 of whom are in the Somali National
Police. Somalia appreciates the general support from
our partners that have made voluntary contribution to
the dedicated United Nations trust fund in support of
the Somali security forces. Somalia calls on the entire
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to ensure that the support for the Somali
security forces is sustainable and predictable.
Nevertheless, in the light of the changes addressed
in the mandate of the new Mission, it is important that
we address the three key challenges that our security
forces are facing under the technical arrangement of the
UNSOS trust fund. First, the logistical tempo has been
remarkably slower than the operational requirements.
Secondly, there is no logistical support other than
designated and allocated support for the Somali
security forces. Thirdly, and finally, the depletion of
the UNSOS trust fund remains a cause for concern in
terms of the ability of UNSOS both to sustain the scope
of support that is needed and to provide sustainable and
predictable funding for the supported personnel.
Moreover, Somalia urges the Security Council to
consider increasing non-lethal support for the number
of Somali security forces personnel who are eligible to
receive support under the UNSOS trust fund pursuant to
the requirement that the forces be integrated, mobilized
6/7

31/03/2022

and generated and that they realize the drawdown of
ATMIS personnel. Somalia stresses that the lack of
predictable and sustainable funding for its security
forces will hamper the delivery on and implementation
of the Somali transition plan and the joint Federal
Government of Somalia-AU CONOPS.
A second issue we wish to address is the exclusion
of the agreed enhanced civilian component, which was
supposed to have Somali nationals comprise 30 per
cent of the new mission staff in all categories, which
had been agreed by the Federal Government and the
AU with a view towards an effective security transition
in Somalia.
Allow me also to address a third issue that Somalia
takes note of in resolution 2628 (2022) on the mandate
of the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia.
Somalia believed that a Security Council resolution
should recognize the importance of the new Mission
having a clear command-and-control structure, with
an empowered force headquarters having operational
command over forces so as to ensure strategic coherence
in implementation of the Somali transition plan and the
joint CONOPS. In order to facilitate effective operation,
all troop-contributing countries in the ATMIS structure
should formally agree for their troops to be under the full
operational command of the ATMIS force commander.
Having reflected on the command-and-control issues
that marked the outgoing African Union Mission in
Somalia, the Federal Government of Somalia agreed in
good faith with the AU that the force commander shall
hail from the country contributing the largest number
of troops. This approach is based on our 15 years of
experience and contextual lessons learned concerning
the shortfalls of the past Mission. We must address
this issue in order to effectively execute the planned
military operation across Somalia and ensure that the
conflict in Somalia is not subject to politicization as a
result of lack of command and control in the African
Union force and the troop-contributing countries.
Notwithstanding the authority of the force
commander in relation to the various ATMIS
contingents, the planning and execution of the
operation should be guided, monitored and evaluated
by the Somali Transition Plan Strategic Steering
Committee, as noted in resolution 2628 (2022). This is
to ensure that such efforts are in line with the strategic
objectives, priorities and end state of the Mission as
agreed jointly between the Federal Government of
22-30542

31/03/2022

The situation in Somalia

Somalia, the African Union and more broadly the wider
international community.
Somalia requested the Security Council to
appropriately address these three issues in the
resolution on the ATMIS mandate so as to realize a
successful achievement of the end state and ultimately
for effective change to materialize through this new
Mission. In so doing, the Council will also ensure
that the resolution is aligned with Somalia’s guiding
strategic document on security, the Somali transition
plan and the joint Federal Government of Somalia-

S/PV.9009

AU CONOPS. In this regard, and finally, we want to
acknowledge and express appreciation for the fact that
some of our suggestions have already been considered
and thank the cooperation and the engagement of the
penholder and other Council members for the breadth
of their support for the Federal Government of Somalia.
The Federal Government of Somalia looks forward
to closely working with the AU and the United Nations
in ensuring effective establishment of ATMIS in the
next two years.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-305427/7
