United Nations

1487th

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Friday, 9 December 1966,
at 10.30 a.m.

TWENTY-FIRST SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK
Barbadian people. Amongst their most famous distinctions are their leadership in sound education and their
world-wide reputation for good sportsmanship, and
their long experience in representative government and
democratic principles.

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United
Nations (concluded). . . • • . . . • . • •
Agenda item 23:
Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples: report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with Regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples (continued). . • • • . •

1

6. It is unnecessary to refer to those qualities again
now since we are all delighted to see that we have with
us a delegation from Barbados led by their distinguished Prime Minister, and Barbadians are very well
capable of speaking for themselves. Let me merely say,
on this happy occasion, that Barbados is especially well
qualified for the independence which it has attained. The
people of Barbados have shown that size of territory
and population are not tests of the quality of a people:
they· know that justice and compassion and freedom
are far more important than wealth and size and power.
They have shown that free government is not a luxury
to be enj oyed only by large nations; indeed, democracy
has often flourished best in smaller countries, and
Barbados boasts one of the oldest electectparliaments
in the world.

7

President: Mr. Abdul Rahman PAZHWAK
(Afghanistan).
AGENDA ITEM 20
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(concluded)*

7. The people of Barbados have shown that security
and tranquillity do not depend on armed might. The
safety of Barbados depends not on force but on friendship; it is fortunate in having so many friends, and no
enemies, They have shown how much good can be done
when people of different racial origin work together in
joint constructive endeavour; they have shown that
racial discrimination, even in its most extreme and
evil form, can be overcome and replacedbya growing
understanding and a generous tolerance.

1. The PRESIDENT: The first item this morning is

the admission of Barbados to membership of the United
Nations. The recommendation of the Security Council
has been circulated [AI 6559]. In this connexion a draft
resolution [A/L-505] has been submitted for consideration by the General Assembly. In the absence of a request for a vote, may I take it that the General Assembly decides by acclamation to admit Barbados as a
Member of the United Nations?

,,

f

t

2. The PRESIDENT: I declare Barbados admitted to
membership of the United Nations.

s

-

,200

8. These are the qualifications which Barbados brings
to the United Nations. There could be none better. The
United Nations will, I have no doubt, profit by the
presence here of representatives of this proud people,
the twenty-sixth member of the Commonwealth, who,
by their sturdy independence of spirit and their confident self-reliance, have long justified and earned
their national independence.

It was so decided.

Y
.t

The delegation of Barbados was escorteJ t6 its
place In the General Assembly Hall.

I

3. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I am very happy to welcome Barbados as a
Member of the United Nations, and I wish to extend to
its Government and people the warm congratulations of
the Assembly on this happy occasion, together with our
best wishes for the future.

9. Mr. CORNER"(New Zealand): By the alphabetically
acquired virtue of my current charmanship of the
Commonwealth group of States, I have the honour to
speak on an occasion which, while a source of happiness to all, is of special moment to those delgations
of the Caribbean and of the Americas which have
neighbourly ties with the new State of Barbados, and
those African and Caribbean states which have ethnic
ties with its proud people. The pride which the United
Kingdom has already expressed at the advent to United
Nations membership of yet another State which has attained its sovereignty through orderly constitutional
processes is felt by my delegation also.

4. I now call on the representative ofthe United Kingdom, who has asked to make a statement.
5. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): On Wednesday,
in another place, I had the honour, in association with
other representatives of the Commonwealth and also
with the representatives of Argentina and Uruguay, to
sponsor a resolution that Barbados should be welcomed
to membership of the United Nations. We had the opportunity then to refer to the characteristic qualities of the

10. Speaking in the Security Council on this application, I suggested that it was probably not too great an

*Resumed from the 1444th meeting.

1

AjPV.1487

,

Ij

2

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

historical fancy to see in the attainment of independence by the people of Barbados the culmination of a
process which stretches back through the development
of truly representative institutions in this century to
the adoption by an enlightened British Parliament, in
1833, of the Emancipation Act. The great Barbadian
slave revolt of 1816 was an important contributing
factor to the passage of that Emancipation Act. Thus,
the Barbadians have played a notable part in winning
freedom for others, as well as for themselves.
11. Barbados has problems common to many an
emerging State: a rapid population growth, dependence
on a narrow range of export commodities highly vulnerable to changes in the world market, and rising
expectations among a literate and able people. The
problem created by the population growth rate is
compounded by a difficulty which not all the new States
face-the small confines of the Island. Without becoming overly dependent on help from outside, the
enterprising and confident people of Barbados have,
however, succeeded in recent years in overcoming
these restrictions and have achieved an impressive
rate of economic development.
12. I would not like the Prime Minister or the people
of Barbados to think that the very formal-indeed,
cryptic-language of the re solution admitting Barbados
to membership of the United Nations is intended adequately to reflect the warmth with which we greet the
Island's representatives here. As representatives of a
Commonwealth country with parliamentary traditions
stretching back centuries beyond our own, we welcome
the Barbadians to our midst with some deference, and
we look forward to co-operating with them in furthering
the constructive work of this Organization.
13. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): On behalf of Canada,
it is a very special pleasure for me to welcome the
representatives of Barbados to this Assembly.
Canada's relations with Barbados are marked by a
genuine spirit of friendship and even affection arising
from close ties, which Canada has had with Barbados
for many years. The Atlantic provinces of Canada in
particular have traditionally had a wide range of contacts with Barbados and other West Indian islands in
commercial and other fields. In recent years, the increased availability of air transport has enabled many
thousands of Canadians to enjoy the opportunity of
Visiting Barbados and getting to know its people at
first hand.
14. Now that Barbados is an independent nation
sharing with Canada membership in the Commonwealth and location in the Western Hemisphere, we
are confident that the additional bonds between us will
be strengthened. An important step in achieVing this
goal was the holding in ottawa, last July, of the Commonwealth Caribbean Canada Conference, at which
Canada and the Barbadian Prime Ministers, and their
colleagues from other Commonwealth Caribbean countries, discussed ways of increasing and enhancing
practical co-operation in matters of mutual interest.
Canada is confident that Barbados. with its longtradition of parliamentary institutions and its experience
with peaceful evolution to full independence, will be
able to make a useful and effective contribution in the
deliberations of this Assembly and the United Nations,
and we: look forward with pleasure to collaborating

with the representatives of Barbados in our work
here.
15. Mr. LICHTVELD (Netherlands): The delegation
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands desires to be among
those who extend today a warm welcome to Barbados
in the family of free nations of the world. It wishes to
do so especially on behalf of the two partners of our
Kingdom, near to Barbados, namely, Surinam and the
Netherlands Antilles. They have maintained many
friendly and close contacts with the island of Barbados
during centuries in the past, and they are looking forward to even more friendly relations in the near future.
16. All over the West Inclies, the "Badians" are wellknown as a warm-hearted open-minded and active
people. Often they tried to emigrate to areas neighbouring their small territory, but generally they were
drawn back to their land of origin. In the long run,
love for their country exceeded their need to seek a
livelihood abroad. Such feelings are not only understandable, but even laudable. All over the West Indies,
we encounter a strong awareness of nationalism and
of democracy, and Barbados is one of the first territories where this sentiment has expressed itself fully
and factually. This was proved when it created its
Parliament, one of the oldest in the Western Hemi-.
sphere. Even more so, when, during the civil war in
England, in the first half of the seventeenth century,
Barbados resisted the forces of the Commonwealth
and, in fact, stood on its own with a remarkable
sense of independence which lasted until after the
Restoration.
17. The "Badians" have reason to be proud of their
history, their education system and their sportsmanship. They will now find ample occasion to play the
game on the political greens of the United Nations,
with its many hidden holes and tricky obstacles. We
may be sure, however, that they will often make the
wickets and be the winners.
18. We sincerely hope that Barbados' presence among
us will also contribute to cultural and economic intercourse, so much needed in the Caribbean area with its
far-dispersed islands and countries. There exists
among us a necessity for more co-operation, more
interchange, more mutual assistance. This applies
especially to the former We st Indies with four different
languages, for they have much in common ethnologically, historically, economically. and most certainly as regards their future.
19. To sum up, the delegation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands has very special reasons to welcome this
newly independent country, and to congratulate its
people and Government on their recent admission to
the United Nations. We also wish to congratulate and
commend the United Kingdom which is realiZing uninterruptedly its task of decolonizingits former territories without forsaking them. On the contrary. it
continues to assist them in overcoming the drawbacks
of their long state of dependence, which is now coming
to an end.
20. Mr. BEN-HORIN (Israel): The delegation ofIsrael
is happy to join in welcoming Barbados to membership
in the United Nations. Those of us who have been fortunate to come into contact with Barbados and its people
are qUite aware of the considerable capacities of this

1487th meeting - 9 December 1966
newest of independent nations. Optimistic and forwardlooking, full of goodwill towards all, articulate and
responsible, Barbados has even, in past years, shown
its constructive approach to the challenge of broad
co-operation among countries and peoples in its own
immediate region.
21. In bringing Israel's sincere and fraternal good
wishes to the Government and to the delegation of
Barbados, let me express the conviction that in this
world body, where the value of a country's contribution is measured not alone by the weight of its land
mass or the number of its inhabitants, a worthy role
awaits them.
22. Mr. MORALE (Lesotho): Six weeks ago, my
country was admitted to the United Nations, and, as
the l21st Member, it also became the youngest of
this family of nations.
23. At moments like this, we are glad to see some
of the changes we have been hoping for, working for
and, sometimes, even fighting for, materialize. One
of our greatest wishes has always been to see
Barbados represented in this Assembly. I am therefore very pleased to congratulate the representatives
of Barbados, not only upon the attainment of their
independence but also upon their membership of
this Organization. Barbados now becomes the youngest
Member of the United Nations family. We have therefore lost our title.
24. One cannot help thinking that the seat that the
representatives of Barbados are now going to occupy
in this Organization has long been waiting for them.
It is therefore fitting and proper that they should
occupy it. The representatives of Barbados will find
that they have a great deal in common with the Members of this Organization, not only in their concern
for world peace but also in respect of some other
problems and responsibilities which, no doubt, they
found awaiting them at the moment of independence.
25. On behalf of the independent African States, we
extend to them an offer of assistance, for, after all,
we share common aims. It is one of the functions of
this Organization to bring us together in the struggle
for the attainment of common goals. In the same
breath that I offer them the assistance of the Members of this Organization, I must also tell the representatives of Barbados that we are looking foward
to their contribution to, and participation in, the
great aims that this ,Organization has set for itself.
26. One of the present coincidences, for my delegation, is that Barbados, like Lesotho, belongs to
that category of States in the United Nations that has
sometimes been referred to as "mini-States". It is
true that both our countries, simply on the ground
of their size and wealth, can manage to make only
very limited material contributions to the United
Nations. But that is not nearly everything.
27. In this connexion, I should like to refer to the
words of my Prime Minister when he spoke on the
role of the small nations in this Organization. He
said:
"The most important contributions to world peace
and harmony are not measured in material terms

3

alone but also, and even more important, in terms
of goodwill towards all the nations of the world."
This is the heart of our role here. and I wish you well
in your efforts towards its fulfilment.
28. Mr. MALECELA (United Republic of Tanzania):
The delegation of Afghanistan has done us the honour
of asking us to speak on its behalf. Therefore. on
behalf of the United Republic of Tanzania and Afghanistan. -we, wish to tender our salutations to the
Government and people of Barbados upon the attainment of their nationhood and their admission to
the community of"independent sovereign States.
29. This happy event marks the termination of
:350 years of British domination and exploitation;
for. over this long period of British imperialism,
this small island has managed to survive the gravest
injustices imposed upon it by the British absentee
sugar planters and, indeed, British slave traders.
If the gallant people of thi s small island, who are
mainly direct descendents of Africa, methodically
transported by the British to the West Indies for
work on the sugar plantations, have succeeded in
finally breaking the shackles of British colonialism,
they have done so due to a stern and stubborn inherent discipline which marks the resourcefulness
of their forefathers. For it was the immediate forebears of the present generation who staged the revolt
in the first few years of the nineteenth century in
protest against the oppressive devices of the British
colonizers and the inhuman conditions of sweated
labour on the sugar plantations.
30. Today, then, We' salute the proud Sons of
Barbados and welcome them to the community of
nations. The hardy regimen of education for which
the people of Barbados are renowned, their industry
and their devotion to honesty and hard work, their
undisputed desire for and love of peace-these makethem eminently suitable to walk the hallows of the
halls of this institution, bent on a quest for international peace and security.
31. The motto of the new island State is "Pri.de
and industry", which speaks eloquently of the inherent characteristics of the people that have distinguished them over the years. We in Tanzania and
Afghanistan rejoice' on this occasion, not only because it marks the driving of another nail into the
coffin of British colonialism, but also because it
brings into the ranks of free men a significant element of our African heritage and, indeed, experience.
32. We feel entitled to unshakable confidence in the
Government of Prime Minister Errol Barrow, who
has engineered the independence of his country, and
we make bold to declare that, under this undoubted
leadership and statesmanship, his Government and
people will attain the commanding heights of success
to which their industry entitles them.
33. If I were to add that Tanzania and Afghanistan
are both members of the Committee of Twenty-four,
which deals mainly with the problem of decolonization, I would say that we have even more reason to
be pleased by the admission of Barbados, because,
in a way, it marks the modest contribution that the
Committee of Twenty-four is making in the field of
decolonization. However, on such occasions as this,

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings
when'we welcome new Members, we take it that we
are welQoming new fighters against the remaining
colonized, territories in Africa and other places of
the world. It is-at this time that we take the opportunity
to warn those colonial Powers who still pursue the
ostrich mentallity of not allowing people in Africa or
elsewhere in the world to be indepe.nQent.
34. Finally, I want to pledge the co-operation of the
delegations of the United RepUblic of Tanzania and
Afghanistan to the new delegation and people of
Barbados. It will be our endeavour to work close in
hand with them in order to fulfil the lofty ideals that
the United Nations stands for. And. perhaps above all,
we hope that this new soldier, Barbados, who has been
admitted to our ranks today, will help UB in fighting the
remaining remnants of colonialism so that, in the
near future, we may have another occasion to welcome
new members to our Organization.
35. Mr. DESOUZA (JamaiCa): It is a great honour and
a special pleasure for the Jamaican delegati,m to Welcome the admission of the new State of B.arbados to
membership of the United Nations.
36. In supporting the resolution just adopted by the
General Assembly, I am in the company partiCUlarly
of our fellow Commonwealth members; and, as someone from the sister island of Jamaica, I am full of
admiration for the excellent qualities of the Barbadian
people and conscious of the contribution they have
made, not only to West Indian fellowship, but also to
international sportsmanship and, above all, to the
high standard of literaoy in the Caribbean.
37. In the independence ceremonies, my country was
represented by a Member of the Cabinet, who conveyed
the goodwill and the best wishes of the Jamaican
people and who assured Barbados of the warm and
friendly feelings with which the Jamaican Government
and people greet its independence. This I do again.
I support, with great warmth, its admission as another
independent State which has progressed thl'ough orderly constitutional processes into the ranks of the
community of nations.
3B. We particularly welcome Barbados as another
member of the growing group of Caribbean States
with ethnic links with AfrLca, draWing cultural inspiration from Europe, Africa and the Americas.
39. I wish to convey, on behalf of the Government
and people of Jamaica, our sincere congratulations
to the Prime Minister of Barbados, Mr. ErrolBarrow,
for the part he has played in the peaceful transition
to independence. I wish to associate myself with the
sentiments that have been expressed by representatives and with the pleasure one feels at this historic
event of Barbados having formally achieved the sta.tus
of a fully sovereign State within the Commonwealth.
40. My delegation is conficlent that the spirit in which
independence was a.cllieved is a manifestation of the
true spirit and wisdom with which Barbados will
continue to meet its challenges and obligations in the
future.
41. The accession to independence of this beautiful
island, with its increasingly strong economy and
democratic conscience, constitutes another decisive
step towards the abolition of colonialism in the

western hemisphere. Three centuries agao I Barbados
held an eminent position, not only in the Caribbean,
but also in the western hemisphere. And it is good to
hear representatives welcome it with great joy and,
indeed. with hemispheric solidarity. It is my delegation's view that the people of Barbados, with their
qualities of industry, hospitality and charm which
characterize them, have a positive contribution to
make to the international community.
42. We would assure the delegation of Barbados of
our sincere desire to co-operate with it and look
forward to Barbados contributing to the tranquillity
and strengthening of peace in that region and, therefore, to the strengthening of peace. throughout the
world. We welcome independent Barbados with its
proud heritage and democratic traditions and express
our best wishes and hope for its full enjoyment of its
freedom, for its economic prosperity and social
well-being. The Jamaican delegation pledges the
Barbadian delegation its close. harmonious and cordial
co-operation in furthering the work and purposes of
the United Nations.
43. Sir John CARTER (Guyana): My delegation has
asked for the floor in order to perform the very
pleasant duty of welcoming the new State of Barbados,
Which has just been admitted to membership of the
United Nations.
44. The links and ties offriendship betweenBal'bados
and Guyana go back deeply into the history of our two
countries. We have a common heritage and, although
separated in space by a few hundred miles, the people
and Government of Bal'bados share with the people and
Government of Guyana the same aspll'lltions and the
same determination to improve the standards of living
of all the people in order to ensure a better life.
45. It is in keeping with those aspirations and this
determination that, earlier this year. representatives
of my Government met with representatives of the
Government of Barbados to sign the Caribbean Free
TraBe Agreement which provides for the economic cooperation of our two countries. My delegation wishes
to add that the signing of this Agreement by my Government represents one aspect of its total commitrnent to
the strengthening of Caribbean unity, to the development and maintenance of regional co-operation and
integration at all levels and to the building of a strong,
viable Caribbean community.

(

I
)

V

~

46. The delegation of Guyana is confident that Barbados will play its full part in the affairs of this Organization and that it will add the charm and warmth of
its people to the process of our deliberations.
47. In extending the warmest of welcomes to the
Prime Minister of Barbados, Mr. Errol Barrow, who
has led his delegation into thi& session, and to the
other members of the delegation of Barbados, my
delegation, on behalf of the Government and people
of Guyana, wishes to assure them of our full cooperation at all times in our joint work at tile United
Nations.
4B. Ml'. SOLOMON (Trinidad and Tobago): This is
the second occasion during the course of this twentyfirst session of the General Assembly that I have had
the opportunity as head of the Trinidad and Tobago
delegation to welcome to membership of the United

a
th

,
,

1487th meeting - 9 December 1966
Nations a country with which we have very close ties
indeed. In welcoming Guyana a few months ago, I"
made mention of the ties of history, of culture and
of commerce that join our two peoples and our two
nations. In the case of Barbados, these ties are just
as broad and just as deep. Indeed, since both of us
are island nations in close proximity to each other
in the Caribbean Sea, and since we are so much
smaller physically than many of the States Members
of this Organization, we feel that the ties which join
us are of a very special and a very intimate kind.
49. Our history and the history of Barbados have
grown and evolved over a long period of years. OUr
peoples have grown up together; our institutions have
evolved together; and it is with the greatest feeling
of fraternal pride that we see today this particular
stage of Barbados' history reach its culmination,

e
s
s
s

J

50. We are confident in that feeling of pride, because
to the extent one is able to ascribe an objective value
to peoples and nations, to that extent do we know with
certainty that Barbados' worth is beyond challenge.

e

.1
,f

s

y

;,

is

lS

le
le
)-

lS
I-

ta
l-

Id
~,

l'-

r-

()f
le

la
le
ly
le
)-

ld
is
~­

Id
~o

~d

51, Her value stands, in a sense, in inverse ratio
to her physical sizej and she is one of the smallest
countries; Her history is a long and a heroic one.
Her institutions and her way of life have been built
up slowly, and perhaps painfully, over many centuries
and they are profoundly engrained in the totality of
the people. This factor has given her the attributes
of political, social and economic stability. Her people
are highly educated and they are naturally very gifted.
As her neighbour, we have hada very rich relationship
with her; as colleagues in the United Nations, we know
that that relationship will grow in richness and in
strength.
52. In speaking today, I speak not only on behalf of·
Trinidad and Tobago. but also on behalf ofthe Central
American and the other Latin American states, which
·already include in their number three Caribbean countries: Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana.
They too express their tremendous feeling of pride
and happiness in welcoming Barbados to this Organiza~
tion and are looking forward with eagerness, and almost anxiety, to the day which we hope will not be far
distant, when Barbados will become a full member of
that very friendly "association of Latin American
States.
53, It is with pleasure, that we add our voices to
those that have gone before in saying welcome to
Barbados.

54, Mr, NABRIT (United States of America): The
United states takes special pleasure in welcoming
Barbados as the twenty-sixth independent nation in
the western hemisphere to membership in the United
Nations. This new nation has a tradition of parliamentary representation which goes back more than
300 years and it has practised full self-government
in internal matters for five years now.

55. Though small in size, Barbados is strong in those
elements so important to truly independent statehood:
free democratic government, a Vigorous economy,
and progressive social policies. These elements and
these qualities will be utilized by Barbados in the new
and wider role it now assumes upon its admission to
the United Nations.

5

56. The people of that country can certainly be proud
of their new nation. and we extend our congratulations
once again to its Prime Minister, Mr. Barrow. As
Ambassador Goldberg stated in the Security Council
last Wednesday: "The United States welcomes the
application of Barbados and looks forward to close
association with its representatives here," Y

57. Mr. MENDELEVICH (Union of Soviet Socialist
Bepublics) (translated from Russian): Allow me, on
behalf of the delegations of the Soviet Union. the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, to greet and to congratulate the new Member of the United Nations, the
youngest independent Stat~ in the Caribbean. the
youngest independent state in the world-Barbados.
58. Only a few days ago, the Chairman ofthe Council
of Ministers of the USSR, Mr. KoSygin, in a cable
addressed to the Prime Minister of Barbados, Mr.
Errol Barrow, said: "On theoccasionoftheproclamation of the independence of Barbados, accept, Mr.
Prime Minister, our sincere congratulations and
wishes for the prosperity and progress of Barbados
on the path of independent development, The Soviet
Union declares that it recognizes Barbados as an independent and sovereign State and expresses its readiness to establish diplomatic relations with it."
59. Today, as we admit Barbados to membership in
the United Nations, we can repeat over andover again
that the process of decolonization-the great historical
process of the liberation of peoples who had been enslaved by the colonialists-is continUing and going
forward.

60. More and more of the peoples of Africa, Asia,
America and Oceania are casting offthe colonial yoke.
Great peoples and small peoples, large colonial countries and small ones-all are equally entitled to freedom, the independence and the bUilding of their own
national life. This is the march forward of the historical process of ridding our planet of colonialist slavery.
It is a complicated and difficult process because it is
linked with struggle that calls for efforts, energy and
sometimes sacrifice. But this struggle will surely be
crowned with success if the colonial peoples exhibit
steadfastness, determination and consi stency in their
struggle. All the progressive forces of mankind support
the colonial peoples in their demand for freedom and
independence.

61. We can note with satisfaction that the United
Nations is making its positive, political contribution
to the struggle of peoples for freedom. for independent
existence and the building of their own national life.
And here is still another result of this struggle. We
have today admitted to the United Nations a new state
whose people for three and a half centuries were oppressed by the British colonialists. It is noteworthy,
too, that Barbados has been admitted to membership in
the United Nations on the day when the General Assembly is discussing the question ofthe implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples. This, too, is areflection of our remarkable era-the era ofthe liberation of
peoples.
11 Official

Records 01 the security Council. Twenty-first Year.

1330th meeting.

6

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

62. Permit me, on behalf of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, to
wish every success to the people and Government of
Barbados in their great task of building a new, independent life.
63. We hope to collaborate with Barbados in the
United Nations and outside the United Nations in the
solution of the major international problems which
confront all peoples and the whole of mankind-the
problems ofthe strengthening of peace, nationalliberation and social progress.
64. Mr. ALJUBOUBI (Iraq): On this auspicious day of
the independence of Barbados, and on behalf of the
delegations of Kuwait, Jordan, Lebanon and my own
delegation, I take great pleasure in ex~ending my
warmest congratulations. The attainment of independence by Barbados is an occasion for rejoicing, not
only for the people of Barbados themselves, but also
for all mankind, and particularly for the Afro-Asian
peoples.
65. Along with other free nations of the world, the
people of Barbados, we are confident, will play an
active role in the United Nations; contributing to
world peace and to the welfare of all mankind.
66. As a member of the Committee of Twenty-four,
my delegation takes particular pleasure in welcoming
Barbados to our midst. We wish the people of Barbados
good luck in their independence and lookforward to cooperating with them in the achievement of the lofty
ideals of the United Nations, We are confident, too,
that the nation of Barbados will discharge its responsibilities as a full-fledged Member ofthe United Nations
competently, and will spare no efforts in the great work
of nation-building and economic development that lies
ahead.
67. Once again, we sincerely wish the people of
Barbados well, and assure them of our sympathy and
co-operation.
68. Mr. VINCI (Italy): On behaif of the Italian delegation and the delegation of Nepal, I should like to
extend a heartfelt welcome to the new state of Barbados
to the United Nations family.
69. Italy, which takes pride in having established.the
first contact between Europe and the Caribbean Isles.
and afterwards with the whole western hemisphere.
and which has contributed to the movement for independence in this part of the world, is happy to see as
a new and resourceful Member of theUnitedN:ations a
country which will certainly contribute to our work.
70. We wish the Government and people of Barbados
well, and we look forward to the opportunities we
shall have to co-operate with the delegation of Barbados in this Organization.
71. The PR ESIDENT: I take pleasure in inViting His
Excellency, Mr. Errol Barrow, Prime Minister of
Barbados, to address the General Assembly.
72. Mr. BARROW (Barbados): IHumility must be the
most appropriate feeling for theleader of a state admitted to membership of this illustrious Assembly on
the basis of sovereign equality.

73. The people of Barbados, even before their emergence into nationhood, have always tried, not Without
some success, to arrange their affairs in accordance
with the principles of the Charter to which I have, in
their name. subscribed their unstinting allegiance:j
Despite the limitation of their territory, the paucity
of their numbers, the slenderness of their resources,
the inhibiting atmosphere of three centuries of colonialism, they have provided for themselves stable
political institutions and economic activities which
will better stimulate their future development.
,!

74. ,11'\ their name, we wish to thank the Governments
of Argentina, New Zealand, Nigeria, Uganda, the
United Kingdom and Uruguay for their prompt and
generous sponsorship of our country. We also thank
the distinguished delegates here assembled for the
warm and courteous greeting accorded to our delegation. We should like to record our profound appreciation to all the members of the Security Council for
the alacrity with which they processed our application
to make it possible for us to secure membership in
the same year that we achieved nationhood:-)
75. The people of Barbados do not draw a -clividing
line between their internal affairs and their foreign
policy. They strive in their domestic arrangements to
create a just society for themselves. In their Constitution they affirm respect for the rule of law; they
also declare their intention to establish and maintain
the kind of society which enables each citizen, to the
full extent of his capacity, to play his part in the
national life. They further resolve thattheireconomic
system, as it develops, must be equitably administered
and enjoyed and that undeviating recognition should be
paid to ability, integrity and merit.
76. In thus charting our domestic course, we canhave
no interest in a foreign policy which contradicts our
national goals. On the contrary. we will support genuine
efforts at world peace, because our society is stable.
We will strenuously assist in the uprooting of vestigial
imperialism, because our institutions are free. We
will press for the rapid economic growth of all underdeveloped countries, because we are busily engaged ir.
building up our own. In fine, our foreign and domestic
policies are the obverse and reverse sides of a single
coin.
77, We have devised the kind of foreign policy which
is consistetlt with our national situation and which is
also based on the current realities of international
politics.
78. We have no quarrels to pursue and we particularly
insist that we do not regard any Member state as our
natural opponent. We shall not involve ourselves in
sterile ideological wranglings because we are exponents, not of the diplomacy of power, but of the diplomacy of peace and prosperity. We will not regard any
great Power as necessarily right in a given dispute
unless we are convinced of this, yet at the same time
we will not view the great Powers with perennial suspicion merely on account of their Size, their wealth,
or their nuclear potential. We will be friends of all,
satellites of none.
79. A disquieting feature of the world situation is the
frequent allusion made to the alleged proliferation of
small states in this Assembly. Attempts are made

7

1487th meeting - 9 December 1966

f

from time to time to devise schemes to give the larger
countries more voting power in the Assembly. The
principle of "one State, one vote". Whereby all Member
states are equal under the Charter. is becoming unfashionable, and the proponents of the new theory wish
to render some States more equal than others.

poverty, without the tools of modern production, with
meagre educational facilities, with little expertise in
the arts of public administration, with driblets of
financial and technical assistance. with population
explosion and with a cataraot of gratuitous advice on
how to govern themselves.

80. The General Assembly should know that the
Barbados delegation will not support any formula
based on such a·preposterous bit of special pleading.
To accept it, at any time, even for the narrow purposes of discussion, would be to connive at the negation of democratic principle. The whole basis on which
this Organization rests is that of equality. If size,
wealth or capacity to destroy mankind were the basis
for membership, the Organization would not exist in
its present form, and its Security Council would consist of a mere handful of mutually suspicious countries.

85. The stark realitY of the international situation
is not the possibility of nuclear destruction but the
certainty of dissolution, if this mass misery continues
beyond this current decade. When 65 per cent of the
world's population can enjoy only 19 per cellt of the
world's wealth, a diplomacy based on power cannot
withstand the explosive anger of upheaval ba.sed on
poverty. Two thirds of the world's people do not fear
a nuclear holocaust because they literally have nothing
to live for. The irony of their situation is that they hold
the key to'the world's prosperity, but that the doors are
bolted against them by the participants of proSl?el'ity.
\;
86. This is the background against which my small
country enters upon its international obligations. It
belongs to the submerged seven-tenths of the world.
It sees no hope for itself or for its companions in
misery except in the efforts made in this Assembly
to work out with speed the new conditions of human
progress. The Barbados delegation pays its tribute
to the specialized agencies of this body for the solid
contribution made, both in the past and now, to human
well-being in many parts of the globe. But this delegation feels., nevertheless, that the eradication of
world poverty is a function which cannot be discharged
by delegation, but must engage the United Nations at
the highest levels;]

81. It seems strange to small countries to find their
equality challenged by these mutterings of discontent
with the form of the Charter. Perhaps the mightier
nations genUinely fear that their influence will be
swamped in the majority votes now recorded in this
Assembly. This fear can be real only if the mighty are
pursuing aims inimical to the interests of the smaller
ones. So long as their own national interests and their
international commitments can be identified With those
of the smaller countries, they have no reason to fear
the admission of small States to this Assembly. Democratic societies owe the stability of their institutions
to the participation of the masses in the political life
of their countries. In like manner, the emergence of
small States into full sovereignty increases the chances
of peace.
82. Even in this Assembly it is not always or not fully
appreciated that the tensions of the cold war have been
lessened by the mere existence of nearly forty newly
independent States in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean.
United Nations opinion is now more often to be found
in Delhi, Addis Ababa and Port-of-8pain than it is in
London, Moscow and Washington. No longer is there
that unique and frightening confrontation of rival power
blocs snarling at and scuffling with each other in the
ruins of their respective policies. The independent
countries of Africa, Asia and the Caribbean, and the
other uncommitted countries, are making, by their
existence alone, an outstanding contribution to international stability.

.
, 'L.

83. If the larger countries wish to earn or to retain
the confidence and respect of small countries, there
will have to be a rapid change of values. They must no
longer enjoy squatters' rights in the volume and arrangement of world trade. New concepts of distribution
and exchange will have to be worked out, because emergent countries will no longer be content to be hewers
of wood and drawers of water while the wealth of the
world flows past them into the coffers of some twenty
nations.
4 {'In a world population of 2,400 million, only 375
8.
million-or slightly less than one sixth-enjoy the best
standards of living. In another segment of the world
population. some 425 million, or slightly more than
one sixth, enjoy fairly tolerable standards of living.
The remainder of mankind, some 1,600 million souls
in Asia, Africa, south-€astern Europe, LatinAmerica

87. The obligation laid on the Security COUllcil to
preserve world peace ought to be amplified by an
equally solemn commitment to prevent world poverty.
It is not a coincidence that the explosive areas of the
world are precisely those areas in which ignorance
and poverty most abound.
88. ~e people of Barbados will support and uphold
the efforts of this Organization to the limit of their
moral and physical resources, and would wish to
record their profound gratitude to the Assembly for
this first great privilege of expre.ssing their hopes
and aspirations for the unity and progress of mankind.
They could best sum up their attitude at this moment
of their history in the words of Mr. Valiant for Truth,
an interesting character in John Bunyan ' s famous
book: "Thougn- with much difficulty I have got hither.
yet I do not repent me of the trouble I have takel1.,j
89. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly, I wish to thank His Exoellency the Prime
Minister of Barbados. The flag of Barbados will be
raised during the course of a ceremony to be held at
2.55 this afternoon in front of the delegates' entrance.

AGE NDA I T EM 23
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colon ia I Countr ies and Peop les:
report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Decloration on the Granting of Independence to Colonia I
Countries and Peoples (continued)
90. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now resume

a_n_d_~_e_c_a_r_i_bb_e_a_n_sw_e_a_t_o_u_t_t_he_i_r_l_i_ve_s_i_n_u_n_r_e_m_i_tt_i_n_g_ _c_o_n_S_id_e_r_a_t_io_n_O_f_a_ge_n_d_a_i_te_m__2_3.

-2'1:

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

8

91. Before I call on the first speaker on the list, I
should like to inform Members of the Assembly that
unless the Assembly decides otherwise, we shall proceed as follows: we have more than twenty speakere
inscribed for the general debate. and also we shall have
a draft resolution before the plenary this afternoon.

On the other hand, it has to be admitted that,
after the vigorous impetus of the first years. when a
large number of colonial peoples won independence
and joined our ranks, the process of independence
has slowed down to a halt. In the general part of the
Special Committee's report we read:

92. Those representatives who wish to speak in the
general debate when the resolution is before the Assembly will be able also to co-operate in making their
observations, if they wish, on the resolution. After
consultations with delegations and particularly in view.
of the great importance of item 23. I have agreed that
if certain Members wish to make some general observations on the item when they speak on the draft resolution they will also have the opportunity to do so.

"At the beginning of its work in 1966, many members of the Special Committee expressed the feeling
that progress in the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples has fallen far short of the
expectations aroused by its adoption nearly six:
years ago." [A/6300/Rev.l, chap. 1, para. 310.]

93. After we have heard all the speakers in this
manner, we shall proceed to listening to those delegations wishing to explain their vote before the vote.
94. At this stage. however, I should like to suggest
Monday, 12 December, at noon. as the time-limit for
the submission of new proposals or amendments under
this item.
95. If there is no objection to the procedure I have
explained, I shall take it that the General Assembly
approves of these suggestions.

It was so deoided.
96. Mr. MOD (Hungary) (translated from French): It
has become a tradition-not only an appropriate but
also a very valuable one-for the General Assembly,
after a whole year of hard work by the Special Committee and two months of debate in the Fourth Committee. to meet in plenary session to examine the
situation regarding the attainment of the objectives
laid down in the 1960 Declaration and confirmed and
enlarged upon, year after year in further re solutions.
J

97, The first question I want to deal with refers to
the balance-sheet for the year that has elapsed since
the last session of the General Assembly. ThiS is the
balance-sheet which should serve as a basiS for
evaluating the work done and deciding what has still
to be done.

98. The picture of the situation has two aspects. On
the one hand. we have to accept as an undeniable fact
that we have made a thorough analysis and denounced
in the United Nations the nature and practices of
colonialism and neo-colonialism. We have made a
detailed analysis of the actiVities of the international
monopolies in three territories of capital importance: South West Africa, Southern Rhodesia and the
Portuguese colonies. We have drawn therefrom the
logical conclusion that the activities of these foreign
interests constitute one of the greatest obstacles hindering the peoples of these territories from exercising their inalienable right to national independence.
We have pointed out many of the links of the "Unholy
Alliance", as well as other aspects of neo -colonialism.
We have condemned them and we have invited certain
Powers opposing the abolition of the colonial system to
put an end to their nefarious activities and to implement the resolutions of the General Assembly~.

Mr. Khalaf (Iraq). Vice-President, took the Chs.1r.

99.

100. It is a sad but undeniable fact that in the terri~ories of capital importance, in southern Africa, apart
from the lack of progress, last year there Was a definite deterioration in the situation-for example, in
Southern Rhodesia. In other words, the balance-sheet
debits exceed the credits. The debit balance reSUlting
is not merely a serious statement of fact here; it has
cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of innocent
people, women, children and old people who, had the
situation taken a different turn, might have still been
alive and some of them would ultimately have joined
us here as representatives of some new State.

I

(

B

1

I1

)

1

1
v

When we look for the reasons for the halt in
progress, we are motivated not merely by scientific
curiosity or abstract politics. The blood of millions
of innocent people falls upon those at whom world pUblic opinion points an accusing finger.
101.

o

11

C

C

B

102. The reasons for the maintenance at all costs of
the colonial system may be classified in three groups.

11

103. Firstly, the Special Committee's reports have
analysed the activities of foreign monopolies in three
territories of decisive importance. The three reports
point to the same conclusions: international monopolies
convert the sweat and blood of the colonial peoples into
"the language" of milliards of dollars, pounds sterling
and West German marks. Certain countries are pecuniarily interested in maintaining colonial conditions.
The first group of reasons, therefore. is economic.
104. Secondly, the second group of arguments favouring the maintenance of colonial conditions is political:
Portugal affirms: "We are one single nation With our
overseas provinces". The fascists of South Africa and,
tacitly but effectively backed by the British, IanSmith,
the fascist rebel of Southern Rhodesia, declare: "We
are predestined to govern the inferior black rat:e".
The United Kingdom tells the world: "We support the
Government of the Federation in the interests of the
people of Southern Arabia" and goes on to explain:
"The sovereignty of Mauritius and the Seychelles is
not infringed by our having detached the 'British
Indian Ocean Territory' for Anglo-American military
purposes". "In the long run we are preparing the
population of the island of Guam for American nationality", a United states Senator declared with regard to
the island that has been converted into an aircraftcarrier for American aggression in Viet-Nam.
105. All these allegations-and I have quoted only a
few examples as an "inalienable right" of the co10nialists the violation of the sovereign right of other
peoples or of a majority and to declare the mainte-

TI
dc
a~

le

th
VE
11
Wf
r~

thr
co
in;
th
11
Inl

na
m:

se

1487th meeting - 9 December 1966
nance of the status quo as a political right. As can
be seen, the second group of reasons is political.
106. The third group of reasons is strategic or
militarY. One of the important features of the presentday world is that it has shrunk because of the expansion of transport and communications and of military
technology. That is why colonial territories are part
and parcel of the "global" military policy of the colonial Powers.
107. South Africa, South West Africa and the Portuguese colonies in southern Africa can justly be compared to an international military fortress; the small
islands and the lesser colonial territories are a veritable superstructure of Anglo-American global strategy. Here are a few examples, taken at random, of
the use made of some territories: Ascension-attack
made in 1964 against the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; Guam-aggression against Viet-Nam; Adenaggression against the Arab countries; Angola and
Mozambique-numerous acts of aggression against the
neighbouring independent African countries (Tanzania,
Zambia, Demooratic Republic of the Congo and
Malawi).
lOB. Before drawing a conclusion from this, I would
like to point out that, in order to avoid being controvers i aI, I have only quoted examples that have a beari~g
on actual past events, soasnottobe charged with talking about "theoretical" dangers. What is more, I do not
claim any copyright and I leave the formulation of a
conclusion to the author of a pamphlet issued by the
British Institute for Strategic Studies on 26 March
1966 who writes:

"British bases and commitments in Southern
Arabia and the Persian Gulf help to promote
Western influence in the Middle East and to deter
any local belligerence .•. They help to keep open a
strategic route to British positions in the Indian
Ocean and South-East Asia, and may thus be said
to contribute to the containment of any advance by
a communist Power into those areas. But their
primary purpose is to sa,feguard the flow of Middle
East oil, to prevent or check conflict in their own
immediate area and to provide a base for British
military intervention in other areas close at hand."
[A/6300, part Il, para. 323.]
The third reason is thus the maintenance of military
domination, of the "global" strategy of aggression
against the Third World and the socialist countries.
109. The three 'causes I have just described form.
the principal feature of the forces which are preventing the abolition of the colonial system.
110. From whatever angle we examine colonialism,
we find foreign interests pocketing profits, racist
r~gimes and those who make political profit out of
them, the forced labour system in the Portuguese
colonies and those who have an interest in maintaining it, the aggressive network of military bases and
those whose armed forces use these bases.
111. There are three conclusions here which immediately strike one: all this has beencreatedagainst
national independence and progress-to ensure the
maintenance of the status quo; all this definitely
serves to maintain the material, political or military

9

interests of a group of industrially developed countries; and, lastly, this state of affairs has no basis
in international law and is founded on the use of brute
force.

112. The members of the group struggling to maintain colonialism have two important characteristics
in common: they are. one way or another, individually
or collectively, military allies of the United States.
They live in the social system of capitalism, which is,
historically speaking, the creator and, nowadays, the
bastion of colonialism. Those are the facts.
113. Although the distribution of roles, the dramatis
personae, has remained the same as time goes on,
the methods followed in the interest of maintaining
domination have become more varied and more subtle.
I feel that, before tackling the question of the tasks to
be accomplished, a few words should also be said of
the methods employed.
114. At the moment, the territories which have not
yet attained independence consist of the bloc in
southern .Africa and of the numerous islands scattered
over the oceans and a few less important territories.
At the same time, the anti-colonialist forces have
recently expanded well beyond the geographical boundaries of the eXisting colonial territories. I am referring to the indepEm~ent countries ~f Asia, Africa and
Latin America and to the socialist countries, as well
as to the regional organizations, the international conferences and their pe'rmanent organs. A leading personality of the African continent, a man of international
authority. the Presidentofthe Republic of Zambia, said
in an address to th,e General Assembly on 15 November
1966:
"My Government and people have not been preoccupied with stability and progress for Zambia
alone. We are conscious and mindful of our international obligations not only as a member of the
United Nations, but also as a participant in other
international and regional organizations which together form, in our view, a huge complex machinery
for the preservation of stability, peace and security
the world over, and for the promotion of genuine
understanding. co-operation and :progress in the international community." [1464th meeting, p. 6.]
115. Similar importantprogresshasbeenmade within
the colonial territories through the growth of nationalliberation movements and fronts. International law is
constantly being enriched by the recognition of the
legitimacy of the moral and material assistance given
to this struggle, to mention only these essential quasilegislative functions of the General Assembly.
116. This is the changed situation to which the new
strategy of the forces of colonialism has to adapt itself. I shall refer only to a few of its elements, those
that are most typical. I shall classify them under one
common denominator, namely, the fundamental rights
and interests of the colonial pecples which the colonial
Powers attack by this means. In this enumeration 1
shall proceed from the particular to the general.
11 i. The offensive itself is directed against the
personal living conditions of the majority of the inhabitants of the colonial territory, as can be seen,
for instance, from the system of forced production

10

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

of coffee and sugar in the Portuguese territories. In
defiance of the Charter, the Universal Declaration of
Human R'ights and of all international instruments concerning the rights of man, it is directed against the
rights and the human dignity of each of the inhabitants
of the colonies. The President of Zambia, in his speech
already quoted, put it quite correctly when he said:
"In Rhodesia, a lunatic fringe has taken over the
administration; more than four million people are
held as hostages; the Smith regime can mete out any
measures to Africans: detain, restrict, imprison with
impunity. World reaction, partiCUlarly that of certain
Western Powers, shows little or no understanding. If
they understand, then they show little or no inclination to take as positive a stand as that taken during
the incident in Kisangani in 1964. Are 200,000 white
people better citizens of Rhodesia than the four mil.,.
lion black people?
"Are we to believe now that human rights are indivisible, except in southern Africa? Are we to accept that equality, of human beings before law is
true, but not in southern Africa?" [1464th meeting,
pp. 28-30.]
118. The offenSive is directed against the majority
inside the country and its collective interestsj it may
take the form of overt oppression, as in South Africa
or Southern Rhodesia, orofthe imposition on the population of a puppet government that is not at all representative, as, for instance, in Aden. It is, therefore,
directed against the political and economic independence of the colonial territory.
119. It is directed against the military independence
of the colonial territory, either by the enforced installation of military bases, as in Guam, Aden, etc., or by
the dismemberment of a national territory, as in the
case of Mauritius and the Seychelles islands. It is
directed, therefore. against the unity of the colonial
territory.
120. Lastly, it is directed-remember my reference
to the "Unholy Alliance It -against the unity of Afric a as
a continent. And this· is being done -as I ha ve already
pointed out and I could even quote Salazar himselfby adopting the slogan which fascism discredited in the
Second World War: the defence of Western civilization,
or, as President Kaunda so pertinently remarked:
"An appeal to race superiority, to the concepts of
master and slave, and of Christian and heathen,
Western civilization and its undefined opposite-all
these form rallying-points in the maintenance of the
status-quo in that area." [1464th meeting, p. 17.]
That is what the colonialists are doing-individually,
if that seems more appropriate, or in overt or covert
co-operation, if they feel that is more suitable-as
witness the relations of Smith with South Africa and
Portugal.
121. NATO is the military organ and the symbol of
this activity, with its wealth of new subtleties, which
is called neo-colonialism.
122. I am sincerely sorry that the events of these last
few days compel me to pause in giving expression to
my thoughts. We are all aware of what is going on at
the moment in Southe rn Rhode sia and around that territory. It is regrettable, but, after all, logical, that the

events of these last days provide proof of all the assertions made in my speech. Mr. Wilson, Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom, has assured Smith
in advance that he would not use force against him.
Fortified by this assurance and certain of the support
of South Africa and Portugal, Smith is defying the
British Government which, on the one hand, is prevented from taking strong action by the powerful United
Kingdom monopolies and, on the other hand, wants to do
nothing which might irritate one of the most important
of its economic and tr ading partners, the Republic of
South Africa., There you have striking new evidence
against neo-colonialism and an outstanding refutation
of any bogus indignation.

\

j

~.

123. It is not respect for the rights of man, for the
noble ideals of the General Assembly's resolutions or
of world opinion, but the inexhaustible lust for profit
and political and military domination over other
peoples which is the driving force behind the scenes.
124. I believe that we all agree that the process of
deco10nization has reached a very difficult and very
complicated phase. Let us take the smaller territorie s;
application of the fundamental principles is not quite
the same in Southern Rhodesia with its 4 million inhabitants as in an island with a popUlation of only a few
thousand and which is, at the same time, part of an
archipelago.
125. Moreover, a relatively new situation has arisen
also inside the, world Organization. Since the 1960
Declaration was adopted, the General Assembly has
done an enormous job. May I add that that is not simply
due to the changed membership of the Assembly, although it was a primary condition for the adoption of
correct resolutions, In this connexion, may I mention
how glad we are to see these changes continuing this
very day when we welcome Barbados to our membership. Having said that, Ibelievethatthe great majority
in the General Assembly will agree with me when I say
that the Special Committee, too, deserves the greatest
praise both from within and from outside the United
Nations.
126. We must, however, accept the situation as it is,
because only in such case can we find proper solutions,
To complete the picture. however, we must not forget
what I said at the outset, namely, that the process of
decolonization has been slowed down. I have endeavoured in my speech to establish some of the most
important reasons for this slow-down.
12'7. Before formUlating my suggestions for certain
tasks that await us, I would like to describe briefly
the existing situation. First, the situation within the
United Nations, which contains two fundamental
factors.
128. On the one hand, the General Assembly. Year
after year the Assembly adopts appropriate resolutions
on each particular item. Taken separately, the resolutions provide, year after year, an analysis of the
situation in the particular colonial territories and
define the tasks to be accomplished. Subsequently,
however, the parties more directly concerned. on
whom succes s in execution depends, sabotage. also
year after year the implementation of the resolutions,
arguing that the resolutions of the General Assembly
have the character of recommendations.

I,
.1

i
p
1

1487th meeting - 9 December 1966
129. The other factor in the work ofthe United Nations
is the Security CounciL The number of colonial questions discussed by the Security Council increases from
year to year. The tone of the resolutions grows
stronger from year to year. In the case of Southern
Rhodesia, for instance, we have now reached the level
of a partial embargo.
130. Outside the United Nations, however, because
of enormous moral pressure, the colonialists find
themselves obliged to pursue quasi-clandestine operations. Nevertheless, we have not yet managed to get
to the root of the evil in the "difficult" territories.
131. In these circumstances, and because of the
numerous implications of the question, I think it a
good idea to affirm in principle that we must begin
by discussing urgently the mqst important aspects of
the problem. On the basis of the foregoing, my delegation is of the opinion that the General Assembly
should bear the following considerations in mind.
132. Firstly, there exists in southern Africa a compiex which is resisting the pressure of the times and
which, some years ago, was dubbed the "Unholy Alliance". 'The time has come to consider, from both
the political and the military and economic standpoints, not only its separate members but also the
whole combination with all its characteristics. To
this end, it would be appropriate to ask the Special
Committee to stUdy this complex, both from the angle
of its internal political, economic and military relations and also from that of its external relations.
133. When a very important question is involved the
members of this alliance always act together. We, too,
should examine them from this angle. It would be a
good idea to ask the Secretariat to start immediately
preparing the documentation needed for such a study,
134. Secondly, the Special Committee has already
studied the operations of the international monopolies
in three territories. The results of this stUdy are at
our disposal. I think that by proceeding, in this connexion also, from the particular to the general-as we
certainly will do on the basis of the Special Committee's recommendations-we may uncover a number of
new elements which will facilitate our later work. A
study of the general operations of the international
monopolies in the colonies would, therefore, be a
proper and necessary step.
135. Thirdly, still on the basis of the considerations
mentioned, and regarding the examination of the tasks
in a different field, I would like to quote operative·
paragraph 14 of resolution 2105 (XX) adopted at the
last session of the General ASl;embly:
"The General Assembly,
"Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to promote the large-scale dissemination of the Declaration and of the work of the
Special Committee, in order that world opinion may
be sufficiently informed of the serious threat to
peace posed by colonialism and apartheid, and calls
upon all administering Powers to co-operate with
the Secretary-General in his efforts."

11

136. I think that the resolution is fairly clear. Accordingly, I would, on the one hand, like to make an
observation and, on the other, submit a request.
137. First, the observation: one of the important
characteristics of the United Nations is that it is an
international forum in the general sense and, from the
standpoint of the agenda, the most important international forum of the anti-colonial1st struggle. That
means, in other words, that it provides an immense
international forum for the representatives of the
national-liberation movements. The important point
about this forum is that the world Press assures
enormous publicity for United Nations proceedings and,
besides, the resolutions adopted become important
moral assistance weapons for national-liberation
struggles. Lastly, and this is the la st element in the
observation, the United Nations discharges its task
only if it, too, does everything possible to ensure
that-as the resolution provides-world opinion is
sufficiently informed on the important aspects of its
proceedings. Further, the paragraph quoted from the
resolution is also addressed to the competent department of the Organization-naturally, through the intermediary of the Secretary-General.
138. My request-one which my delegation submitted
once, in part, to the Fourth Committee but which received no reply-is the follOWing: my delegation officially and formally requests the Secretal'y-General to
instruct the Office of Public Information to present to
the General Assembly, as early as possible during the
discussion, a detailed report on the application of
paragraph 14 of resolution 2105 (XX) andon the means
envisaged in this connexion.
139. Fourthly, my last suggestion refers to the work
of the Security Council. I think, in the first place, that
it is not enough for it to follow the work of the General
Assembly. I feel sure that the majority in the General
Assembly agrees that, in the south of the African continent, it is not only the individual members of the
Unholy Alliance, but also the whole complex which
threatens peace on the African continent and, therefore, international peace and security. Moreover, this
state of affairs will sooner or later reach the point
where not only certain aspects of the colonial system
but also the very existence of colonialism will threaten
peace and security. It can, at the same time, be noted
that by itself the General Assembly is n.ot going to defeat the colonialists. The Security Council, the only
United Nations body which is authorized to use force,
must associate itself more actively than hitherto with
the anti-colonialist struggle. I therefore recommend
proposing to the Security Council on the one hand, to
examine, not only from the standpoint of the topical
questions raised on specific occasions but in a general
and systematic manner, the situation in the territories
where peace and security are threatened and, furthermore, to draw conclusions, proceedin.g from the particular to the general, for instance, in the case of the
Unholy Alliance. A proper and complete examination
could lead to a series of well-considered enforcement
measures that might break the resistance of the last
bastions of colonialism.
140. In conclusion, I wish to express mydelegation's
extreme appreciation to the Special Committee,' its
sub-committees and all those who have assisted them

12

Getleral Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

in their work. For our part, we approve the conclusions
and the recommendations of the Special Committee on
the particular territories and on the general questions.
141. We are convinced that, on the basis of the just
resolutions of the General Assembly, the Special Committee will next year accomplish even more effective
work. On our part, we have endeavoured in this statement to suggest a few ideas that will contribute to the
success of its future work.
142. Mr. BUSHNYAK (Czechoslovak Socialist Republic) (translated from Russian): The Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples which was adopted by the fifteenth session of
the General Assembly and the implementation ofwhich
we are discussing here, is undoubtedly one of the
most important documents of the United Nations. The
Declaration is based on the fact that colonialism, as
the crudest form of exploitation of entire peoples, is
one of the most shameful and most anachronistic
phenomena of the twentieth century, a century in
which there opened up before mankind previously
unimaginable prospects of scientific and technological
revolution and of penetration into outer space, prospects of radical social and· cultural changes and of
the realization of new relationships between nations
and peoples.
143. The extent to which colonialist regimes have
compromised themselves and are condemned by the
widest circles of world public opinion and by all
peoples is clearly confirmed by the fact that not a
single colonial Power felt it possible to raise its
voice against the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and that-possibly with the exception of
Portugal only-all the metropolitan countries found
it necessary-though only in theory-to agree to
recognize the lawful rights of peoples to self-determip.ation and independence.·
144. The fact that has to be regarded as disturbing
is that, in spite of the definite Demand in the Declaration for bringing to a speedy and unconditional end
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations, six
years after the adoption of the Declaration the twentyfirst session of the General Assembly has to discuss
the problem of decolonization with even greater insistence than in previous years.
145. It is an actual fact-one of which we are all
witnesses-that in a number of countries on our planet
there are millions of people liVing who have never
known what it is to be free and independent, have never
had an opportunity of exercising their right to sel£determination. And all this is happening in spite of
the fact that the whole contemporary international
community, figuratively speaking, is riddled with
solemn international undertakings and lofty declarations about the freedom and dignity of man, that the
United Nations exists and operates, and that there is
a United Nations Charter and a Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.

146. Southern Rhodesia, the apartheid policy operated
by the RepUblic of South Africa, South West Africa,
Angola, so-called Portuguese Guinea, Mozambique,
Aden, Oman and a number of other territories are

---"-----------

now merely classical terms in all our discussions on
the problem of decolonization which, in concentrated
form, express the whole intensity and fightfulness of
crude colonialist oppression and exploitation.
147. In the south of the African continent, more
especially, the racist and colonialist regimes which
control extensive geographical areas with millions
of African inhabitants are continUing to intensIfy their
opposition to the process of decolonization. Their
attitude to the Declaration, to the efforts ofthe United
Nations and to the deciSions which we are adopting
here, shows merely their contempt for the United
Nations, its purposes and programme. Last year
these regimes established and strengthened their
links with one another and helped one another by openly
boycotting United Nations decolonization measures.
Their increasing economic and political link-up in the
south of the African continent creates a real danger
of the formation of an alliance of colonial1st and racist
regimes ready to wage a fight not only to stop decolonization in Africa but even to turn in the direction
of re-colonizing previously dependent territories.

~

fJ

I:

148. The General Assembly has a sufficient amount
of material at its disposal confirming this conclusion.
At this sel3sio,n Portugal has once again declared that
it will not grant independence to the African colonies
under its rule and refuses to implement General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV). Smith recently asserted
that the racist regime will fight to the end for its
existence and the RepUblic of South Africa has also
blatantly refused to end the policy of apartheid and
attempts to annex the Territory of South West Africa.

a
s
tl
S

e
1
A

It
pJ

150. The United Nations cannot do other than take
account of the great importance of this fact. The demand for a ~ealistic approach to the situation in this
part of the world, appropriately named "Africa south
of the Zambezi", makes it necessary for the United
Nations to mUltiply its efforts and achieve definitive
co-ordination of actions and measures, which would
result in ending this intolerable state of affairs. The
Security Council, in particular, can and ought to play
an important role in this direction.

151. A specific feature ofthe hold-up in implementing
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples at this stage is the
fact that the States stubbornly opposing the elimination
of colonialism do not consist only of the metropolitan
countries but that ever greater activity is being shown
also by other Powers, which are formally standing
in the background but which wholeheartedly support a
colonialist policy-Powers, without whose support this
policy and the vestiges of the colonialist system would

HI
te

J

149. It is, moreover, oommon knowledge that it is
not a question merely of declarations, since these
regimes are implementing the policy in practice in
the form of specific repressive actions, extraordinary
measures, accentuated colonialist terror and the
strengthening and development of a system of racial
discrimination. In Africa, in fact,a front of reactionary, colonialist and racist forces is being created
whose programme actually consists in using force to
suppress the national-liberation movement, thereby
creating a constant threat to international peace and
security.

of

1'€

Sf

dr
th

se
15

so
th
an
W

,
.'

of
of
an
qll
fill

Im
an
fel
151
to

J
;1
j

of
In
anc
wh
sh!

at
der

:Y

E!!!!

1487th meeting - 9 December 1966
long ago have finally collapsed. The widespread and
essentially aggressive alliance of Western Powers
forms a rear-guard for the colonialist and racist
regimes on which they can fUlly rely in their military
and strategic plans.
152. Decolonization is an integral part of the development of mankind on the path of progress, equality of
rights and the estal;llishment of friendly relations between peoples and is a condition of their free life, as
stated in the preamble to the Declaration. It is in this
context that we have to consider the policy of the
colonizers and all those who support them.
153. With your permission I would like to cite a few
examples to indicate the groupings which. even here
in our Organization, are fQrmed when questions connected with the elimination of colonialism are
discussed,
154. A group of the following States: Australia, New
Zealand, Portugal, South Africa, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America. voted last year
against resolution 2105 (XX), in which the twentieth
session of the General Assembly stated its position
on the question we are discussing and whose original
sponsors were, almost without exception, States with
the bitterest experience of colonialist enslavement.
still another episode that once again offered telling
evidence of this confraternity occurred on 23 May
1966 in the Security Council during the vote on the
African States' draft resolution in Southern Rhodesia,
It was on this very occasion that the Western alliance
prevented the adoption of the important draft resolution tabled by Mali, Nigeria and Uganda. V A characteristic feature of the African sessionofthe Committe·e
of Twenty-Four was that, in the voting on the draft
resolutions regarding decolonizations, the United
States delegation supported only one out of the seven
drafts adopted-and that was a draft with which even
the Administering Authority itself had agreed at that
session.

13

157. A number of colonial and aggressive wars have
been waged with the full support of NATO. The NATO
Treaty is arbitrarily motivated by the doctrine that
any sllccess gained by the national-liberation movement represents a threat to its military and strategic
positions and it treats colonies as a kind of economic
and military rear base for the conduct of aggressive
and interventionist acts of Violence, directed against
peoples who are fighting for their liberation.
158. It cannot be sufficiently stressed that the United
States, for instance, uses its colonial territories in
the Pacific for waging an aggressive warin Viet-Nam.
159. The Declaration is also not being implemented
in this sense that the Western Powers refuse to give
effect to the measures set forth in the specific resolutions adopted by our Organization in implementation
of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) or on individual colonial questions. The United Kingdom, in
partiCUlar, bears a serious responsibility towards the
United Nations and the whole world for its systematic
manreuvring and its evasiveness in implementing the
resolutions of the United Nations, thus, infact, directly
helping to create a second racist regime in Africa.
160. Another serious circumstance is the non-implementation of United Nations measures regarding South
Africa, Southern Rhodesia and Portugal'by the United
States, the United Kingdom, the Federal Republic of
Germany and other States. Particularly dangerous for
the future development of the situation inAfrica is the
increasing economic and military co-operation of the
Federal Republic of Germany with the racist regimes
in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia and with the
Salazar regime in Portugal. The Western States are
even urging the Federal Republic of Germany to carry
out this policy, a continuation of the traditions of
German colonialism. on the assumption that the
Federal Republic of Germany, as a State which is not a
Member of the United Nations, will escape criticism
and action by the latter.

155. This is precisely where the answer must be
sought to the question: why is the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples not being implemeilted? Rere I would
like to stress the point that this is not just a question
of a voting attitude or of expressing specific points .
of view, but of the confraternity of the oolonialists
and their protectors that is determined also by the
quantity and the types of arms being supplied, the
financial and economic assistance given, the capital
investments made, the material supplies furnished
and. above all, unfor:tunately I the indescribable sufferings and the lives of the enslaved colonial peoples.

161. The States mentioned are helping the monopollsts
to increase their investments in the colonies, to grab
the natural wealth and exploit local manp.0wer in the
most flagrant fashion. There is ev~ry ground for
asserting that economic and financial interests are the
reason why the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, the Federal Republic of Germany and othe!
Western Powers·· are interested in maintaining the
colonial system in Africa, in the south of the Arabian
Peninsula and in other places. The activity of foreign
monopolies in coloni.al countries has become the.main
obstacle to the progress of peoples on the path to
freedom and independence.

156. In this connexion I cannot but refer, for examplE}.
to the evidenoe and information brought to the notice
of the Committee of Twenty-Four during its meetings
in Algel'ia by petitioners from the Portuguese colonies
and a former office of the Portuguese colonial army,
which could not fail to evoke feelings of horror at the
shameless way in which colonial wars are being waged
at the present time, They were really shocking evidence of our times.

162. One of the principal conditions for consistent
decolonization is also the abolition of all military bases
on colonial territories. We consider that there is no
longer any need to prove here how well-founded this
requirement is. The question is clear, and this was
proved both by the twentieth session of the United,
Nations General Assembly and by the Committee of
Twenty-Four, There is no need to comment in detail
on the purposes for which military bases in Aden,
Guam and other territories have been and are still
being used or on the way in which intervention was
practised in the Congo .

.:Y Official Records of the Security Council. TwentY-first year. SUp:
. plement for April. May and June 196~. document S(l285/Add,l.

14

General Assembly - Twenty-first Session - Plenary Meetings

163. The theory has been fully confirmed that colonialism is unthinkable without a colonial al'my and
without military bases. All the more alarming, therefore, is it to be told that the number of military bases
in colonial territories has not only not decreased but
that, in a number of cases, existing bases are even
being expanded and new ones also are being built.

170. The fact that the existence of colonialism is
based on the constant use of force and continuous
aggression against the oppressed peoples of the
colonies fully entitles the latter to resort to selfdefence by evel'y means, inclUding armed struggle,
which should give them the right to self-determination
and independence.

164. ,Particularly dangerous, too, are the attempts
that are more and more frequently being made by
Western Powe:rs, even after the granting of formal
independence, to secure for themselves the further
continuance of bases by means of "defence agreements"-unequal agreements that are concluded while
colonialist conditions still prevaiL

171. This right of peoples still living under colonialist
domination has again found expression in the resolution
of the present General Assembly sessionon the prohibition of the use of force in international relations and
respect for the principle of self-determination of
peoples-this time with a direct reference to the United
Nations Charter.

165. The twenty-first session of the United Nations
General Assembly must resolutely condemn these
attempts to impose an outsider's will upon peoples
which have not yet attained full independence and
recommend the Committee of Twenty-Four to make a
thorough study of the problem of military bases on
colonial territories and work out measures for the
speediest possible implementation of the provisions of
paragraph 12 of General Assembly resolution 2105

172. Resolution 2160 (XXI) of the current session, to
which I have just referred, has again affirmed the
right of peoples under colonial rule to exercise their
right to self-determination and independence and the
right of every nation, large or small, to choose freely
and without any external interference its political,
social and economic system.

(XX).

166. I consider it necessary also to draw attention to
the fact that recently the metropolitan territories have
shown an increasing tendency to establish in colonial
territories, by means' of the most varying forms of
colonial self-government and semi-self-government,
unrepresentative regimes designed to maintain the dependence of the territories on the metropolitan country,
even after formal independence has been granted.
167. Statements recently made by the United Kingdom
in the Fourth Committee about the Aden questionhave
failed to dispel doubts and fears that the administering
Power will continue, in the future also, to carry out its
plans to convert Aden and other parts of South Arabia
into a nea-colonial formation which would enable it to
retain its position of military and politi~al domination.
168. The 1966 discussions in the Fourth Committee
have stressed the need for paying proper attention to
all the neo-colonialist manceuvres, both as regards
circumventing resolution 1514 (XX) by setting up ,dependent, though formally independent regimes, and also
as regal'ds the activities of foreign monopolies and
finance capital that creates a material basis for neocolonialist dependence and subordination and for the
establishment and maintenance of military bases and
the violation by force of the territorial integrity of
colonial countries.
169. The United Nations General Assembly, which
has described colonialism, apartheid and all manifestations of racial discrimination as a threat to international peace and security and a crime against humanity, dl'ew an important logical conclusion when it
recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
suffering under the colonial yoke to attain self-determination and independence and when it called on States
to extend to the national-liberation movement every
kind of material and moral assistance.

Litho in U.N.

173. On that basis, and with referenceto the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, as well as to the Declaration on
non-interference, the present session of the General
Assembly has formulated an important thesis, namely,
that any direct or indirect coercive action, which deprives peoples under foreign domination of their right
to self-determination, freedom and independence, and
also their right freely to determine their political
status and carry 'out their economic, social and cultural development, constitutes an infringement of
the United Nations Charter. In this context, too, it
will be necessary in future to analyse in every specific fashion all the actions of the colonialists and of
those who support them.
174. The delegation of Czechoslovakia feels bound,
in conclusion, to say a few words about the Committee of Twenty-Four. We believe that it is a really
business-like body which has done much useful work.
At its African session, especially, held in May and
June 1966, it adopted a number of important decisions
which must be given all possible support [A/6300,
chap. V (part 1), paras. 649-676]. And, although the
CzechOSlovak Socialist Republic is not a member of the
Committee, it will continue in future also to follow
its work attentively and, within the limits ofits possibilities, to collaborate in its work.
175. Permit me, in concluding my statement, to assure this plenary meeting of our Organization that the
struggle for the speediest and complete elimination of
coloni~lism will continue in future also to be one of
the main component parts of Czechoslovakia's foreign
policy and that our country, in uccordance with all its
activities, will in future also support in every way the
struggle of all oppressed peoples for their emancipation from the colonial yoke, and for consistent respect
for the right of peoples to self-determination and
independence.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

77001-May 1968-2,200
