A/RES/S-23/3

United Nations

Distr.: General
16 November 2000

General Assembly
Twenty-third special session
Agenda item 10

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole of the Twenty-third Special Session
of the General Assembly (A/S-23/10/Rev.1)]

S-23/3. Further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action
The General Assembly
Adopts the further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration1
and Platform for Action, 2 annexed to the present resolution.

10th plenary meeting
10 June 2000
Annex
Further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action
I.

Introduction

1.
The Governments which came together at the special session of the General
Assembly have reaffirmed their commitment to the goals and objectives contained in
the Beijing Declaration 1 and Platform for Action 2 adopted at the Fourth World
Conference on Women in 1995 as contained in the report of the Conference. The
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action set as goals gender equality,
development and peace and constituted an agenda for the empowerment of women.
The Governments reviewed and appraised progress and identified obstacles and
current challenges in the implementation of the Platform for Action. They
recognized that the goals set and commitments made in the Platform for Action have
not been fully achieved and implemented, and have agreed upon further actions and
initiatives at the local, national, regional and international levels to accelerate the
implementation of the Platform for Action and to ensure that commitments for
gender equality, development and peace are fully realized.

1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4-15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.

00-65205

A/RES/S-23/3

2.
The Beijing Platform for Action identified twelve critical areas of concern for
priority action to achieve the advancement and empowerment of women. The
Commission on the Status of Women has reviewed progress in each of the twelve
critical areas of concern and since 1996 has adopted agreed conclusions and
recommendations for accelerated implementation. The Platform for Action, together
with these agreed conclusions and recommendations, forms the basis for further
progress towards the achievement of gender equality, development and peace in the
twenty-first century.
3.
The objective of the Platform for Action, which is in full conformity with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, is
the empowerment of all women. The full realization of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of all women is essential for the empowerment of women.
While the significance of national and regional particularities and various historical,
cultural and religious backgrounds must be borne in mind, it is the duty of States,
regardless of their political, economic and cultural systems, to promote and protect
all human rights and fundamental freedoms. The implementation of the Platform for
Action, including through national laws and the formulation of strategies, policies,
programmes and development priorities, is the sovereign responsibility of each
State, in conformity with all human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the
significance of and full respect for various religious and ethical values, cultural
backgrounds and philosophical convictions of individuals and their communities
should contribute to the full enjoyment by women of their human rights and the
achievement of equality, development and peace.
4.
The Platform for Action emphasizes that women share common concerns that
can only be addressed by working together and in partnership with men towards the
common goal of gender equality around the world. It respects and values the full
diversity of women’s situations and conditions and recognizes that some women
face particular barriers to their empowerment.
5.
The Platform for Action recognizes that women face barriers to full equality
and advancement because of such factors as their race, age, language, ethnicity,
culture, religion or disability, because they are indigenous women or of other status.
Many women encounter specific obstacles related to their family status, particularly
as single parents, and to their socio-economic status, including their living
conditions in rural, isolated or impoverished areas. Additional barriers also exist for
refugee women, other displaced women, including internally displaced women, as
well as for immigrant women and migrant women, including women migrant
workers. Many women are also particularly affected by environmental disasters,
serious and infectious diseases and various forms of violence against women.
II.

Achievements in and obstacles to the implementation of the twelve critical
areas of concern of the Beijing Platform for Action

6.
Assessment of achievements and obstacles must be made in relation to the
commitments made in the Beijing Platform for Action and its twelve critical areas of
concern, namely by looking into the actions taken and the results attained, as
indicated in national reports, as well as by taking note of the reports of the
Secretary-General and of the results, conclusions and agreements of the five
regional meetings held in preparation for the special session of the General
Assembly and other relevant sources. Such assessment shows that, even though
significant positive developments can be identified, barriers remain and that the

2

A/RES/S-23/3

goals set and commitments made in Beijing need to implemented further. The
summary of achievements and of persistent or new obstacles can therefore constitute
a global framework for the identification of further actions and initiatives to
overcome obstacles and to achieve the full and accelerated implementation of the
Platform for Action at all levels and in all areas.
A.

Women and poverty

7.
Achievements. Considerable progress has been achieved in increasing
recognition of gender dimensions of poverty and in the recognition that gender
equality is one of the factors of specific importance for eradicating poverty,
particularly in relation to the feminization of poverty. Efforts have been made to
integrate a gender perspective into poverty eradication policies and programmes by
Governments, in cooperation with non-governmental organizations. Multilateral,
international and regional financial institutions are also giving increased attention to
the incorporation of a gender perspective into their policies. Progress has been made
by pursuing a two-pronged approach of promoting employment and incomegenerating activities for women and providing access to basic social services,
including education and health care. Microcredit and other financial instruments for
women have emerged as a successful strategy for economic empowerment and have
widened economic opportunities for some women living in poverty, in particular in
rural areas. Policy development has taken account of the particular needs of femaleheaded households. Research has enhanced the understanding of the differing
impacts of poverty on women and men and tools have been developed to assist with
this assessment.
8.
Obstacles. Many factors have contributed to widening economic inequality
between women and men, including income inequality, unemployment and the
deepening of poverty levels of the most vulnerable and marginalized groups. Debt
burdens, excessive military spending, inconsistent with national security
requirements, unilateral coercive measures at variance with international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, armed conflict, foreign occupation, terrorism, low
levels of official development assistance and the unfulfilled commitment to strive to
fulfil the yet to be attained internationally agreed target of 0.7 per cent of the gross
national product of developed countries for overall official development assistance
and 0.15 to 0.2 per cent for the least developed countries, as well as the lack of
efficient use of resources, among other factors, can constrain national efforts to
combat poverty. In addition, gender inequalities and disparities in economic powersharing, unequal distribution of unremunerated work between women and men, lack
of technological and financial support for women’s entrepeneurship, unequal access
to, and control over, capital, particularly land and credit and access to labour
markets, as well as all harmful traditional and customary practices, have constrained
women’s economic empowerment and exacerbated the feminization of poverty.
Fundamental economic restructuring experienced by the countries with economies in
transition has led to lack of resources for poverty-eradication programmes aimed at
empowerment of women.
B.

Education and training of women

9.
Achievements. There is an increased awareness that education is one of the
most valuable means of achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women.
Progress was achieved in women’s and girls’ education and training at all levels,
especially where there was sufficient political commitment and resource allocation.

3

A/RES/S-23/3

Measures were taken in all regions to initiate alternative education and training
systems to reach women and girls in indigenous communities and other
disadvantaged and marginalized groups to encourage them to pursue all fields of
study, in particular non-traditional fields of study, and to remove gender biases from
education and training.
10. Obstacles. In some countries, efforts to eradicate illiteracy and strengthen
literacy among women and girls and to increase their access to all levels and types
of education were constrained by the lack of resources and insufficient political will
and commitment to improve educational infrastructure and undertake educational
reforms; persisting gender discrimination and bias, including in teacher training;
gender-based occupational stereotyping in schools, institutions of further education
and communities; lack of childcare facilities; persistent use of gender stereotypes in
educational materials; and insufficient attention paid to the link between women’s
enrolment in higher educational institutions and labour market dynamics. The
remote location of some communities and, in some cases, inadequate salaries and
benefits make attracting and retaining teaching professionals difficult and can result
in lower quality education. Additionally, in a number of countries, economic, social
and infrastructural barriers, as well as traditional discriminatory practices, have
contributed to lower enrolment and retention rates for girls. Little progress has been
made in eradicating illiteracy in some developing countries, aggravating women’s
inequality at the economic, social and political levels. In some of these countries,
the inappropriate design and application of structural adjustment policies has had a
particularly severe impact on the education sector since they resulted in declining
investment in education infrastructure.
C.

Women and health

11. Achievements. Programmes have been implemented to create awareness among
policy makers and planners of the need for health programmes to cover all aspects
of women’s health throughout women’s life cycle, which have contributed to an
increase in life expectancy in many countries. There is: increased attention to high
mortality rates among women and girls as a result of malaria, tuberculosis, waterborne diseases, communicable and diarrhoeal diseases and malnutrition; increased
attention to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights of women as
contained in paragraphs 94 and 95 of the Platform for Action, as well as in some
countries increased emphasis on implementing paragraph 96 of the Platform for
Action; increased knowledge and use of family planning and contraceptive methods
as well as increased awareness among men of their responsibility in family planning
and contraceptive methods and their use; increased attention to sexually transmitted
infections, including human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (HIV/AIDS) among women and girls, and methods to protect against such
infections; increased attention to breastfeeding, nutrition, infants’ and mothers’
health; the introduction of a gender perspective in health and health-related
educational and physical activities, and gender-specific prevention and rehabilitation
programmes on substance abuse, including tobacco, drugs and alcohol; increased
attention to women’s mental health, health conditions at work, environmental
considerations and recognition of the specific health needs of older women. At its
twenty-first special session, held in New York from 30 June to 2 July 1999, the
General Assembly reviewed achievements and adopted key actions 3 in the field of
3

4

See resolution S-21/2, annex.

A/RES/S-23/3

women’s health for the further implementation of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development. 4
12. Obstacles. Worldwide, the gap between and within rich and poor countries
with respect to infant mortality and maternal mortality and morbidity rates, as well
as with respect to measures addressing the health of women and girls, given their
special vulnerability regarding sexually transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS
and other sexual and reproductive health problems, together with endemic,
infectious and communicable diseases, such as malaria, tuberculosis, diarrhoeal and
water-borne diseases and chronic non-transmissible diseases, remains unacceptable.
In some countries, such endemic, infectious and communicable diseases continue to
take a toll on women and girls. In other countries, non-communicable diseases, such
as cardiopulmonary diseases, hypertension and degenerative diseases, remain among
the major causes of mortality and morbidity among women. Despite progress in
some countries, the rates of maternal mortality and morbidity remain unacceptably
high in most countries. Investment in essential obstetric care remains insufficient in
many countries. The absence of a holistic approach to health and health care for
women and girls based on women’s right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health throughout the life cycle has constrained
progress. Some women continue to encounter barriers to their right to the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health. The predominant
focus of health-care systems on treating illness rather than maintaining optimal
health also prevents a holistic approach. There is, in some countries, insufficient
attention to the role of social and economic determinants of health. A lack of access
to clean water, adequate nutrition and safe sanitation, a lack of gender-specific
health research and technology and insufficient gender sensitivity in the provision of
health information and health care and health services, including those related to
environmental and occupational health hazards, affect women in developing and
developed countries. Poverty and the lack of development continue to affect the
capacity of many developing countries to provide and expand quality health care. A
shortage of financial and human resources, in particular in developing countries, as
well as restructuring of the health sector and/or the increasing trend to privatization
of health-care systems in some cases, has resulted in poor quality, reduced and
insufficient health-care services, and has also led to less attention to the health of the
most vulnerable groups of women. Such obstacles as unequal power relationships
between women and men, in which women often do not have the power to insist on
safe and responsible sex practices, and a lack of communication and understanding
between men and women on women’s health needs, inter alia, endanger women’s
health, particularly by increasing their susceptibility to sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV/AIDS, and affect women’s access to health care and
education, especially in relation to prevention. Adolescents, particularly adolescent
girls, continue to lack access to sexual and reproductive health information,
education and services. Women who are recipients of health care are frequently not
treated with respect nor guaranteed privacy and confidentiality, and do not receive
full information about options and services available. In some cases, health services
and workers still do not conform to human rights and to ethical, professional and
gender-sensitive standards in the delivery of women’s health services, nor do they
ensure responsible, voluntary and informed consent. There continues to be a lack of
information on availability of and access to appropriate, affordable, primary health4

Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

5

A/RES/S-23/3

care services of high quality, including sexual and reproductive health care,
insufficient attention to maternal and emergency obstetric care as well as a lack of
prevention, screening and treatment for breast, cervical and ovarian cancers and
osteoporosis. The testing and development of male contraceptives is still
insufficient. While some measures have been taken in some countries, the actions
set out in paragraphs 106 (j) and (k) of the Platform for Action regarding the health
impact of unsafe abortion and the need to reduce the recourse to abortion have not
been fully implemented. The rising incidence of tobacco use among women,
particularly young women, has increased their risk of cancer and other serious
diseases, as well as gender-specific risks from tobacco and environmental tobacco
smoke.
D.

Violence against women

13. Achievements. It is widely accepted that violence against women and girls,
whether occurring in public or private life, is a human rights issue. It is accepted
that violence against women, where perpetrated or condoned by the State or its
agents, constitutes a human rights violation. It is also accepted that States have an
obligation to exercise due diligence to prevent, investigate and punish acts of
violence, whether those acts are perpetrated by the State or by private persons, and
provide protection to victims. There is increased awareness of and commitment to
preventing and combating violence against women and girls, including domestic
violence, which violates and impairs or nullifies the enjoyment of their human rights
and fundamental freedoms, through, inter alia, improved legislation, policies and
programmes. Governments have initiated policy reforms and mechanisms, such as
interdepartmental committees, guidelines and protocols, national, multidisciplinary
and coordinated programmes to address violence. Some Governments have also
introduced or reformed laws to protect women and girls from all forms of violence
and laws to prosecute the perpetrators. There is an increasing recognition at all
levels that all forms of violence against women seriously affect their health. Healthcare providers are seen to have a significant role to play in addressing this matter.
Some progress has been made in the provision of services for abused women and
children, including legal services, shelters, special health services and counselling,
hotlines and police units with special training. Education for law enforcement
personnel, members of the judiciary, health-care providers and welfare workers is
being promoted. Educational materials for women and public awareness campaigns
have been developed as well as research on the root causes of violence. Research
into and specialized studies on gender roles are increasing, in particular on men’s
and boys’ roles, and all forms of violence against women, as well as on the situation
of and impact on children growing up in families where violence occurs. Successful
cooperation has been achieved between governmental and non-governmental
organizations in the field of preventing violence against women. The active support
of civil society, in particular women’s organizations and non-governmental
organizations, has had an important role, inter alia, in promoting awareness-raising
campaigns and in the provision of support services to women victims of violence.
Efforts towards the eradication of harmful traditional practices, including female
genital mutilation, which is a form of violence against women, have received
national, regional and international policy support. Many Governments have
introduced educational and outreach programmes, as well as legislative measures
criminalizing these practices. In addition, this support includes the appointment of
the Special Ambassador for the Elimination of Female Genital Mutilation by the
United Nations Population Fund.

6

A/RES/S-23/3

14. Obstacles. Women continue to be victims of various forms of violence.
Inadequate understanding of the root causes of all forms of violence against women
and girls hinders efforts to eliminate violence against women and girls. There is a
lack of comprehensive programmes dealing with the perpetrators, including
programmes, where appropriate, which would enable them to solve problems
without violence. Inadequate data on violence further impedes informed policymaking and analysis. Sociocultural attitudes which are discriminatory and economic
inequalities reinforce women’s subordinate place in society. This makes women and
girls vulnerable to many forms of violence, such as physical, sexual and
psychological violence occurring in the family, including battering, sexual abuse of
female children in the household, dowry-related violence, marital rape, female
genital mutilation and other traditional practices harmful to women, non-spousal
violence and violence related to exploitation. In many countries, a coordinated
multidisciplinary approach to responding to violence which includes the health
system, the workplace, the media, the education system, as well as the justice
system, is still limited. Domestic violence, including sexual violence in marriage, is
still treated as a private matter in some countries. Insufficient awareness of the
consequences of domestic violence, how to prevent it and the rights of victims still
exists. Although improving, the legal and legislative measures, especially in the
criminal justice area, to eliminate different forms of violence against women and
children, including domestic violence and child pornography, are weak in many
countries. Prevention strategies also remain fragmented and reactive and there is a
lack of programmes on these issues. It is also noted that, in some countries,
problems have arisen from the use of new information and communication
technologies for trafficking in women and children and for purposes of all forms of
economic and sexual exploitation.
E.

Women and armed conflict

15. Achievements. There is a wider recognition that the destructive impact of
armed conflict is different on women and men and that a gender-sensitive approach
to the application of international human rights law and international humanitarian
law is important. Steps have been taken at the national and international levels to
address abuses against women, including increased attention to ending impunity for
crimes against women in situations of armed conflict. The work of the International
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia 5 and Rwanda 6 has been an important
contribution to address violence against women in the context of armed conflict.
Also of historical significance is the adoption of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, 7 which provides that rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and other forms of sexual
violence are war crimes when committed in the context of armed conflict and also
under defined circumstances, crimes against humanity. The contribution of women
in the areas of peace-building, peacemaking and conflict resolution is being
increasingly recognized. Education and training in non-violent conflict resolution
have been introduced. Progress has been made in the dissemination and
5

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991.
6
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994.
7
A/CONF.183/9.

7

A/RES/S-23/3

implementation of the guidelines for the protection of refugee women, and in
addressing the needs of displaced women. Gender-based persecution has been
accepted as a basis for refugee status in some countries. There is recognition by
Governments, the international community and organizations, in particular the
United Nations, that women and men experience humanitarian emergencies
differently, and there is a need for a more holistic support for refugee and displaced
women, including those who have suffered all forms of abuse, including genderspecific abuse, to ensure equal access to appropriate and adequate food and
nutrition, clean water, safe sanitation, shelter, education, social and health services,
including reproductive health care and maternity care. There is greater recognition
of the need to integrate a gender perspective in the planning, design and
implementation of humanitarian assistance and to provide adequate resources.
Humanitarian relief agencies and civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, have played an increasingly important role in the provision of
humanitarian assistance, as well as in the design, where appropriate, and
implementation of programmes to address the needs of women and girls, including
refugee and displaced women and girls in humanitarian emergencies, and in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
16. Obstacles. Peace is inextricably linked to equality between women and men
and development. Armed conflicts and conflicts of other types, wars of aggression,
foreign occupation, colonial or other alien domination, as well as terrorism, continue
to cause serious obstacles to the advancement of women. The targeting of civilians,
including women and children, the displacement of people, and the recruitment of
child soldiers in violation of national or international law, by State and/or non-State
actors, which occur in armed conflicts, have had a particularly adverse impact on
gender equality and women’s human rights. Armed conflict creates or exacerbates
the high level of female-headed households, which in many cases are living in
poverty. The underrepresentation, at all levels, of women in decision-making
positions, such as special envoys or special representatives of the Secretary-General,
in peacekeeping, peace-building, post-conflict reconciliation and reconstruction, as
well as lack of gender awareness in these areas, presents serious obstacles. There has
been a failure to provide sufficient resources, to distribute adequately resources and
to address the needs of increasing numbers of refugees, who are mostly women and
children, particularly in developing countries hosting large numbers of refugees;
international assistance has not kept pace with the increasing number of refugees.
The growing number of internally displaced persons and the provision for their
needs, in particular women and children, continue to represent a double burden to
the affected countries and their financial resources. Inadequate training of personnel
dealing with the needs of women in situations of armed conflict or as refugees, such
as a shortage of specific programmes that address the healing of women from trauma
and skills training, remains a problem.
17. Excessive military expenditures, including global military expenditures, trade
in arms and investment for arms production, taking into consideration national
security requirements, direct the possible allocation of funds away from social and
economic development, in particular for the advancement of women. In several
countries, economic sanctions have had social and humanitarian impacts on the
civilian population, in particular women and children.
18. In some countries, the advancement of women is adversely affected by
unilateral measures at variance with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations that create obstacles to trade relations among States, impede the full

8

A/RES/S-23/3

realization of social and economic development and jeopardize the well-being of the
population in the affected countries, with particular consequences for women and
children.
19. In situations of armed conflict, there are continued violations of human rights
of women, which are violations of fundamental principles of international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. There has been an increase in all
forms of violence against women, including sexual slavery, rape, systematic rape,
sexual abuse and forced pregnancies, in situations of armed conflict. Displacement
compounded by loss of home and property, poverty, family disintegration and
separation and other consequences of armed conflict are severely affecting the
populations, especially women and children. Girls are also abducted or recruited, in
violation of international law, into situations of armed conflict, including as
combatants, sexual slaves or providers of domestic services.
F.

Women and the economy

20. Achievements. There is increased participation of women in the labour market
and subsequent gain in economic autonomy. Some Governments have introduced a
variety of measures that address women’s economic and social rights, equal access
to and control over economic resources and equality in employment. Other measures
include the ratification of international labour conventions as well as enacting or
strengthening legislation to make it compatible with these conventions. There is
increased awareness of the need to reconcile employment and family responsibilities
and of the positive effect of such measures as maternity and paternity leave and also
parental leave, and child and family care services and benefits. Some Governments
have made provisions to address discriminatory and abusive behaviour in the
workplace and to prevent unhealthy working conditions, and have established
funding mechanisms to promote women’s roles in entrepreneurship, education and
training, including scientific and technical skills and decision-making. Research has
been conducted on barriers to economic empowerment faced by women, including
the relationship between remunerated and unremunerated work, and tools are being
developed to assist with this assessment.
21. Obstacles. The importance of a gender perspective in the development of
macroeconomic policy is still not widely recognized. Many women still work in
rural areas and the informal economy as subsistence producers, and in the service
sector with low levels of income and little job and social security. Many women
with comparable skills and experience are confronted with a gender wage gap and
lag behind men in income and career mobility in the formal sector. Equal pay for
women and men for equal work, or work of equal value, has not yet been fully
realized. Gender discrimination in hiring and promotion and related to pregnancy,
including through pregnancy testing, and sexual harassment in the workplace
persist. In some countries, women’s full and equal rights to own land and other
property, including through the right to inheritance, is not recognized yet in national
legislation. Progression in the professions, in most cases, is still more difficult for
women, due to the lack of structures and measures that take into account maternity
and family responsibilities. In some cases, persistent gender stereotyping has led to
a lower status of male workers who are fathers and to insufficient encouragement for
men to reconcile professional and family responsibilities. Lack of family-friendly
policies regarding the organization of work increases these difficulties. Effective
implementation of legislation and practical support systems is still inadequate. The

9

A/RES/S-23/3

combination of remunerated work and caregiving within families, households and
communities still leads to a disproportionate burden for women since there is
insufficient sharing of tasks and responsibilities by men. It is still also women who
perform the larger part of unremunerated work.
G.

Women in power and decision-making

22. Achievements. There has been growing acceptance of the importance to society
of the full participation of women in decision-making and power at all levels and in
all forums, including the intergovernmental, governmental and non-governmental
sectors. In some countries, women have also attained higher positions in these
spheres. An increasing number of countries applied affirmative and positive action
policies, including quota systems or voluntary agreements in some countries and
measurable goals and targets, developed training programmes for women’s
leadership, and introduced measures to reconcile family and work responsibilities of
both women and men. National mechanisms and machineries for the advancement of
women as well as national and international networks of women politicians,
parliamentarians, activists and professionals in various fields have been established
or upgraded and strengthened.
23. Obstacles. Despite general acceptance of the need for a gender balance in
decision-making bodies at all levels, a gap between de jure and de facto equality has
persisted. Notwithstanding substantial improvement of de jure equality between
women and men, the actual participation of women at the highest levels of national
and international decision-making has not significantly changed since the time of
the Fourth World Conference on Women in 1995, and gross underrepresentation of
women in decision-making bodies in all areas, including politics, conflict prevention
and resolution mechanisms, the economy, the environment and the media, hinders
the inclusion of a gender perspective in these critical spheres of influence. Women
continue to be underrepresented at the legislative, ministerial and sub-ministerial
levels, as well as at the highest levels of the corporate sector and other economic
and social institutions. Traditionally assigned gender roles limit women’s choices in
education and careers and compel women to assume the burden for household
responsibilities. Initiatives and programmes aimed at women’s increased
participation in decision-making have been hindered by a lack of human and
financial resources for training and advocacy for political careers; gender-sensitive
attitudes towards women in society; awareness of women to engage in decisionmaking in some cases; accountability of elected officials and political parties for
promoting gender equality and women’s participation in public life; social
awareness of the importance of balanced participation of women and men in
decision-making; willingness on the part of men to share power; sufficient dialogue
and cooperation with women’s non-governmental organizations, along with
organizational and political structures, which enable all women to participate in all
spheres of political decision-making.
H.

Institutional mechanisms for the advancement of women

24. Achievements. National machineries have been instituted or strengthened and
recognized as the institutional base acting as catalysts for promoting gender
equality, gender mainstreaming and monitoring of the implementation of the
Platform for Action and in many instances of the Convention on the Elimination of

10

A/RES/S-23/3

All Forms of Discrimination against Women. 8 In many countries, progress has been
achieved in terms of the visibility, status, outreach and coordination of activities of
these machineries. Gender mainstreaming has been widely acknowledged as a
strategy to enhance the impact of policies to promote gender equality. The goal of
the strategy is to incorporate a gender perspective in all legislation, policies,
programmes and projects. These machineries, despite their limited financial
resources, have made a significant contribution to the development of human
resources in the field of gender studies and have also contributed to the growing
efforts for the generation and dissemination of data disaggregated by sex and age,
gender-sensitive research and documentation. Within the United Nations system,
much progress has been made in the mainstreaming of a gender perspective,
including through the development of tools and the creation of gender focal points.
25. Obstacles. In a number of countries, inadequate financial and human resources
and a lack of political will and commitment are the main obstacles confronting
national machineries. This is further exacerbated by insufficient understanding of
gender equality and gender mainstreaming among government structures, as well as
prevailing gender stereotypes, discriminatory attitudes, competing government
priorities and, in some countries, unclear mandates, a marginalized location within
the national government structures, lack of data disaggregated by sex and age in
many areas and insufficiently applied methods for assessing progress, in addition to
paucity of authority and insufficient links to civil society. The activities of the
national machineries have been also hindered by structural and communication
problems within and among government agencies.
I.

Human rights of women

26. Achievements. Legal reforms have been undertaken to prohibit all forms of
discrimination and discriminatory provisions have been eliminated in civil, penal
and personal status law governing marriage and family relations, all forms of
violence, women’s property and ownership rights and women’s political, work and
employment rights. Steps have been taken to realize women’s de facto enjoyment of
their human rights through the creation of an enabling environment, including the
adoption of policy measures, the improvement of enforcement and monitoring
mechanisms and the implementation of legal literacy and awareness campaigns at all
levels. The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women 8 has been ratified or acceded to by one hundred and sixty-five countries and
its full implementation has been promoted by the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women. At its fifty-fourth session, the General Assembly
adopted the Optional Protocol to the Convention, 9 allowing women claiming to be
victims of a violation of any of the rights set forth in the Convention by a State party
to submit their claims to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women, to which non-governmental organizations contributed by raising
awareness and generating support for its adoption. Women’s non-governmental
organizations have also contributed to raising awareness that women’s rights are
human rights. They also generated support for the inclusion of a gender perspective
in the elaboration of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.7 Progress
has also been made to integrate the human rights of women and mainstream a
gender perspective into the United Nations system, including into the work of the
8
9

Resolution 34/180, annex.
Resolution 54/4, annex.

11

A/RES/S-23/3

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and of the
Commission on Human Rights.
27. Obstacles. Gender discrimination and all other forms of discrimination, in
particular racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance continue
to cause threat to women’s enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms. In situations of armed conflict and foreign occupation, human rights of
women have been extensively violated. Even though a number of countries have
ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women,8 the goal of universal ratification by the year 2000 has not been achieved,
and there continue to be a large number of reservations to the Convention. While
there is an increasing acceptance of gender equality, many countries have not yet
implemented fully the provisions of the Convention. Discriminatory legislation as
well as harmful traditional and customary practices and negative stereotyping of
women and men still persist. Family, civil, penal, labour and commercial laws or
codes, or administrative rules and regulations, still have not fully integrated a gender
perspective. Legislative and regulatory gaps, as well as lack of implementation and
enforcement of legislation and regulations, perpetuate de jure as well as de facto
inequality and discrimination, and in a few cases, new laws discriminating against
women have been introduced. In many countries, women have insufficient access to
the law, resulting from illiteracy, lack of legal literacy, information and resources,
insensitivity and gender bias, and lack of awareness of the human rights of women
by law enforcement officials and the judiciary, who in many cases fail to respect the
human rights of women and the dignity and worth of the human person. There is
insufficient recognition of women’s and girls’ reproductive rights, as well as barriers
to their full enjoyment of those rights, which embrace certain human rights as
defined in paragraph 95 of the Beijing Platform for Action. Some women and girls
continue to encounter barriers to justice and the enjoyment of their human rights
because of such factors as their race, language, ethnicity, culture, religion, disability
or socio-economic class or because they are indigenous people, migrants, including
women migrant workers, displaced women or refugees.
J.

Women and the media

28. Achievements. The establishment of local, national and international women’s
media networks has contributed to global information dissemination, exchange of
views and support to women’s groups active in media work. The development of
information and communication technologies, especially the Internet, has provided
improved communication opportunities for the empowerment of women and girls,
which has enabled an increasing number of women to contribute to knowledge
sharing, networking and electronic commerce activities. The number of women’s
media organizations and programmes has increased, facilitating the aims of
increased participation and promotion of positive portrayals of women in the media.
Progress has been made to combat negative images of women by establishing
professional guidelines and voluntary codes of conduct, encouraging fair gender
portrayal and the use of non-sexist language in media programmes.
29. Obstacles. Negative, violent and/or degrading images of women, including
pornography and stereotyped portrayals, have increased in different forms using new
communication technologies in some instances, and bias against women remains in
the media. Poverty, the lack of access and opportunities, illiteracy, lack of computer
literacy and language barriers, prevent some women from using the information and
communication technologies, including the Internet. Development of and access to

12

A/RES/S-23/3

Internet infrastructure is limited, especially in developing countries and particularly
for women.
K.

Women and the environment

30. Achievements. Some national environment policies and programmes have
incorporated gender perspectives. In recognition of the link between gender equality,
poverty eradication, sustainable development and environment protection,
Governments have included income-generating activities for women, as well as
training in natural resource management and environmental protection in their
development strategies. Projects have been launched to preserve and utilize
women’s traditional ecological knowledge, including the traditional ecological
knowledge of indigenous women, in the management of natural resources and the
preservation of biodiversity.
31. Obstacles. There is still a lack of public awareness about environmental risks
faced by women and of the benefits of gender equality for promoting environmental
protection. Women’s limited access to technical skills, resources and information, in
particular in developing countries, due to, inter alia, gender inequality, has impeded
women’s effective participation in decision-making, regarding the sustainable
environment, including at the international level. Research, action, targeted
strategies and public awareness remain limited regarding the differential impacts
and implications of environmental problems for women and men. Real solutions to
environmental problems, including environmental degradation, need to address the
root causes of these problems, such as foreign occupation. Environmental policies
and programmes lack a gender perspective and fail to take into account women’s
roles and contributions to environmental sustainability.
L.

The girl child

32. Achievements. Some progress was made in primary and, to a lesser extent,
secondary and tertiary education for girls, owing to the creation of a more gendersensitive school environment, improved educational infrastructure, increased
enrolment and retention, support mechanisms for pregnant adolescents and
adolescent mothers, increased non-formal education opportunities and enhanced
attendance at science and technology classes. Increased attention was given to the
health of the girl child, including the sexual and reproductive health of adolescents.
An increasing number of countries introduced legislation to ban female genital
mutilation and imposed heavier penalties on those involved in sexual abuse,
trafficking and all other forms of exploitation of the girl child, including for
commercial ends. A recent achievement has been the adoption of the optional
protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on involvement of children in
armed conflict 10 and on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. 11
33. Obstacles. The persistence of poverty, discriminatory attitudes towards women
and girls, negative cultural attitudes and practices against girls, as well as negative
stereotyping of girls and boys, which limits girls’ potential, and inadequate
awareness of the specific situation of the girl child, child labour and the heavy
burden of domestic responsibilities on girls, inadequate nutrition and access to
10
11

Resolution 54/263, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.

13

A/RES/S-23/3

health services, and lack of finance, which often prevent them from pursuing and
completing their education and training, have contributed to a lack of opportunities
and possibilities for girls to become confident and self-reliant, and independent
adults. Poverty, lack of parental support and guidance, lack of information and
education, abuse and all forms of exploitation of, and violence against, the girl child
in many cases result in unwanted pregnancies and transmission of HIV, which may
also lead to a restriction of educational opportunities. Programmes for the girl child
were hindered by a lack of or an insufficient allocation of financial and human
resources. There were few established national mechanisms to implement policies
and programmes for the girl child and, in some cases, coordination among
responsible institutions was insufficient. The increased awareness of the health
needs, including the sexual and reproductive health needs, of adolescents has not yet
resulted in sufficient provision of necessary information and services. Despite
advances in legal protection, there is increased sexual abuse and sexual exploitation
of the girl child. Adolescents continue to lack the education and service needed to
enable them to deal in a positive and responsible way with their sexuality.
III. Current challenges affecting the full implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action
34. The review and appraisal of the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action occurred in a rapidly changing global context. Since 1995, a
number of issues have gained prominence and acquired new dimensions which pose
additional challenges to the full and accelerated implementation of the Beijing
Platform for Action and the realization of gender equality, development and peace
by Governments, intergovernmental bodies, international organizations, the private
sector and non-governmental organizations as appropriate. Continued political
commitment to gender equality at all levels is needed for the full implementation of
the Platform for Action.
35. Globalization has presented new challenges for the fulfilment of the
commitments and the realization of the goals of the Fourth World Conference on
Women. The globalization process has, in some countries, resulted in policy shifts in
favour of more open trade and financial flows, privatization of State-owned
enterprises and in many cases lower public spending, particularly on social services.
This change has transformed patterns of production and accelerated technological
advances in information and communication and affected the lives of women, both
as workers and consumers. In a large number of countries, particularly in developing
and least developed countries, these changes have also adversely impacted on the
lives of women and have increased inequality. The gender impact of these changes
has not been systematically evaluated. Globalization also has cultural, political and
social impacts affecting cultural values, lifestyles and forms of communication as
well as implications for the achievement of sustainable development. The benefits of
the growing global economy have been unevenly distributed, leading to wider
economic disparities, the feminization of poverty, increased gender inequality,
including through often deteriorating work conditions and unsafe working
environments, especially in the informal economy and rural areas. While
globalization has brought greater economic opportunities and autonomy to some
women, many others have been marginalized and deprived of the benefits of this
process, owing to deepening inequalities among and within countries. Although in
many countries the level of participation of women in the labour force has risen, in
other cases the application of certain economic policies has had such a negative

14

A/RES/S-23/3

impact that increases in women’s employment often have not been matched by
improvements in wages, promotions and working conditions. In many cases, women
continue to be employed in low-paid part-time and contract jobs marked by
insecurity and by safety and health hazards. In many countries, women, especially
new entrants into the labour market, continue to be among the first to lose jobs and
the last to be rehired.
36. Increasing economic disparities among and within countries, coupled with a
growing economic interdependence and dependence of States on external factors as
well as financial crises have, in recent years, altered prospects for growth and
caused economic instability in many countries, with a heavy impact on the lives of
women. These difficulties have affected the ability of States to provide social
protection and social security as well as funding for the implementation of the
Platform for Action. Such difficulties are also reflected in the shift of the cost of
social protection, social security and other welfare provisions from the public sector
to the household. The decreasing levels of funding available through international
cooperation has contributed to further marginalization of a large number of
developing countries and countries with economies in transition within which
women are among the poorest. The agreed target of 0.7 per cent of the gross national
product of developed countries for overall official development assistance has not
been achieved. These factors have contributed to the increasing feminization of
poverty, which has undermined efforts to achieve gender equality. Limited funding
at the State level makes it imperative that innovative approaches to the allocation of
existing resources be employed, not only by Governments but also by nongovernmental organizations and the private sector. One such innovation is the
gender analysis of public budgets, which is emerging as an important tool for
determining the differential impact of expenditures on women and men to help
ensure equitable use of existing resources. This analysis is crucial to promote gender
equality.
37. The impact of globalization and structural adjustment programmes, the high
costs of external debt servicing and declining terms of international trade in several
developing countries have worsened the existing obstacles to development,
aggravating the feminization of poverty. Negative consequences of structural
adjustment programmes, stemming from inappropriate design and application, have
continued to place a disproportionate burden on women, inter alia, through budget
cuts in basic social services, including education and health.
38. There is a greater acceptance that the increasing debt burden faced by most
developing countries is unsustainable and constitutes one of the principal obstacles
to achieving progress in people-centred sustainable development and poverty
eradication. For many developing countries, as well as countries with economies in
transition, excessive debt servicing has severely constrained their capacity to
promote social development and provide basic services and has affected full
implementation of the Platform for Action.
39. In countries with economies in transition, women are bearing most of the
hardships induced by the economic restructuring and are the first to lose jobs in
times of recession. They are being squeezed out from fast-growth sectors. Loss of
childcare facilities due to elimination or privatization of State work places,
increased need for older care without the corresponding facilities and continuing
inequality of access to training for finding re-employment and to productive assets

15

A/RES/S-23/3

for entering or expanding businesses are current challenges facing women in these
countries.
40. Science and technology, as fundamental components of development, are
transforming patterns of production, contributing to the creation of jobs and new job
classifications, and ways of working, and contributing to the establishment of a
knowledge-based society. Technological change can bring new opportunities for all
women in all fields, if they have equal access and adequate training. Women should
also be actively involved in the definition, design, development, implementation and
gender impact evaluation of policies related to these changes. Many women
worldwide are yet to use effectively these new communications technologies for
networking, advocacy, exchange of information, business, education, media
consultation and e-commerce initiatives. For instance, millions of the world’s
poorest women and men still do not have access to and benefits from science and
technology and are currently excluded from this new field and the opportunities it
presents.
41. The patterns of migratory flows of labour are changing. Women and girls are
increasingly involved in internal, regional and international labour migration to
pursue many occupations, mainly in farm labour, domestic work and some forms of
entertainment work. While this situation increases their earning opportunities and
self-reliance, it also exposes them, particularly the poor, uneducated, unskilled
and/or undocumented migrants, to inadequate working conditions, increased health
risk, the risk of trafficking, economic and sexual exploitation, racism, racial
discrimination and xenophobia, and other forms of abuse, which impair their
enjoyment of their human rights and, in some cases, constitute violations of human
rights.
42. While recognizing that Governments have the primary responsibility to
develop and implement policies to promote gender equality, partnerships between
Governments and different actors of civil society are increasingly recognized as an
important mechanism to achieve this goal. Additional innovative approaches can be
further developed to foster this collaboration.
43. In some countries, current demographic trends show that lowered fertility
rates, increased life expectancy and lower mortality rates have contributed to the
ageing of the population, and increase in chronic health conditions has implications
for health-care systems and spending, informal care systems and research. Given the
gap between male and female life expectancy, the number of widows and older
single women has increased considerably, often leading to their social isolation and
other social challenges. Societies have much to gain from the knowledge and life
experience of older women. On the other hand, the current generation of young
people is the largest in history. Adolescent girls and young women have particular
needs which will require increasing attention.
44. The rapid progression of the HIV/AIDS pandemic, particularly in the
developing world, has had a devastating impact on women. Responsible behaviour
and gender equality are among the important prerequisites for its prevention. There
is also the need for more effective strategies to empower women to have control
over and decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, to
protect themselves from high risk and irresponsible behaviour leading to sexually
transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS, and to promote responsible, safe and
respectful behaviour by men and to also promote gender equality. HIV/AIDS is an
urgent public health issue, is outstripping efforts to contain it and, in many

16

A/RES/S-23/3

countries, is reversing hard-won gains of development. The burden of care for
people living with HIV/AIDS and for children orphaned by HIV/AIDS falls
particularly on women as infrastructures are inadequate to respond to the challenges
being posed. Women with HIV/AIDS often suffer from discrimination and stigma
and are often victims of violence. Issues related to prevention, mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, breastfeeding, information and education in particular of youth,
curbing high-risk behaviour, intravenous drug users, support groups, counselling and
voluntary testing, partner notification and provision and high cost of essential drugs
have not been sufficiently addressed. There are positive signs in the fight against
HIV/AIDS in some countries that behavioural changes have occurred among young
people, and experience shows that educational programmes for young people can
lead to a more positive view on gender relations and gender equality, delayed sexual
initiation and reduced risk of sexually transmitted infections.
45. Growing drug and substance abuse among young women and girls, both in
developed and developing countries, has raised the need for increased efforts
towards demand reduction and fight against illicit production, supply and trafficking
of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
46. The increase in casualties and damage caused by natural disasters has raised
awareness of the inefficiencies and inadequacies of the existing approaches and
intervention methods in responding to such emergency situations, in which women,
more often than men, are burdened with the responsibility of meeting the immediate
daily needs of their families. This situation has raised awareness that a gender
perspective must be incorporated whenever disaster prevention, mitigation and
recovery strategies are being developed and implemented.
47. The changing context of gender relations, as well as the discussion on gender
equality, has led to an increased reassessment of gender roles. This has further
encouraged a discussion on the roles and responsibilities of women and men
working together towards gender equality and the need for changing those
stereotypical and traditional roles that limit women’s full potential. There is a need
for balanced participation between women and men in remunerated and
unremunerated work. Failure to recognize and measure in quantitative terms
unremunerated work of women, which is often not valued in national accounts, has
meant that women’s full contribution to social and economic development remains
underestimated and undervalued. As long as there is insufficient sharing of tasks and
responsibilities with men, the combination of remunerated work and caregiving will
lead to the continued disproportionate burden for women in comparison to men.
IV.

Actions and initiatives to overcome obstacles and to achieve the full and
accelerated implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action

48. In view of the evaluation of progress made in the five years since the Fourth
World Conference on Women in implementing the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, as contained in section II above, as well as the current challenges
affecting its full realization, as outlined in section III above, Governments now
recommit themselves to the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and also
commit themselves to further actions and initiatives to overcome the obstacles and
address the challenges. Governments, in taking continued and additional steps to
achieve the goals of the Platform for Action, recognize that all human rights —
civil, cultural, economic, political and social, including the right to development —

17

A/RES/S-23/3

are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated, and are essential for
realizing gender equality, development and peace in the twenty-first century.
49. Organizations of the United Nations system and the Bretton Woods
institutions, as well as the World Trade Organization, other international and
regional intergovernmental bodies, parliaments and civil society, including the
private sector and non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other
stakeholders, are called upon to support government efforts and, where appropriate,
develop complementary programmes of their own to achieve full and effective
implementation of the Platform for Action.
50. Governments and intergovernmental organizations recognize the contribution
and complementary role of non-governmental organizations, with full respect for
their autonomy, in ensuring the effective implementation of the Platform for Action,
and should continue to strengthen partnerships with non-governmental
organizations, particularly women’s organizations, in contributing to the effective
implementation of and follow-up to the Platform for Action.
51. Experience has shown that the goal of gender equality can be fully achieved
only in the context of renewed relations among different stakeholders at all levels.
The full, effective participation of women on the basis of equality in all spheres of
society is necessary to contribute to this goal.
52. Achieving gender equality and empowerment of women requires redressing
inequalities between women and men and girls and boys and ensuring their equal
rights, responsibilities, opportunities and possibilities. Gender equality implies that
women’s needs, interests, concerns, experiences and priorities as well as men’s are
an integral dimension of the design, implementation, national monitoring, and
follow-up and evaluation, including at the international level, of all actions in all
areas.
53. By adopting the Platform for Action, Governments and the international
community agreed to a common development agenda with gender equality and
women’s empowerment as underlying principles. The efforts towards ensuring
women’s participation in development have expanded and need to combine a focus
on women’s conditions and basic needs with a holistic approach based on equal
rights and partnerships, promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Policies and programmes should be formulated to achieve
the goal of people-centred sustainable development, secure livelihoods and adequate
social protection measures, including safety nets, strengthened support systems for
families, equal access to and control over financial and economic resources, and to
eliminate increasing and disproportionate poverty among women. All economic
policies and institutions as well as those responsible for resource allocation should
adopt a gender perspective to ensure that development dividends are shared on equal
grounds.
54. Given the persistent and increasing burden of poverty on women in many
countries, particularly in developing countries, it is essential to continue from a
gender perspective to review, modify and implement integrated macroeconomic and
social policies and programmes, including those related to structural adjustment and
external debt problems, to ensure universal and equitable access to social services,
in particular to education and affordable quality health-care services and equal
access to and control over economic resources.

18

A/RES/S-23/3

55. Increased efforts are needed to provide equal access to education, health and
social services and to ensure women’s and girls’ rights to education and the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health and wellbeing throughout the life cycle, as well as adequate, affordable and universally
accessible health care and services, including sexual and reproductive health,
particularly in the face of the HIV/AIDS pandemic; they are also necessary with
regard to the growing proportion of older women.
56. Given that a majority of the world’s women are subsistence producers and
users of environmental resources, there is a need to recognize and integrate women’s
knowledge and priorities in the conservation and management of such resources to
ensure their sustainability. Programmes and infrastructures that are gender-sensitive
are needed in order to respond effectively to disaster and emergency situations that
threaten the environment, livelihood security, as well as the management of the
basic requirements of daily life.
57. Sustaining the livelihoods of populations in States with limited or scarce
resources, including small island developing States, is critically dependent on the
preservation and protection of the environment. Women’s customary knowledge,
management and sustainable use of biodiversity should be recognized.
58. Political will and commitment at all levels are crucial to ensure mainstreaming
of a gender perspective in the adoption and implementation of comprehensive and
action-oriented policies in all areas. Policy commitments are essential for further
developing the necessary framework which ensures women’s equal access to and
control over economic and financial resources, training, services and institutions as
well as their participation in decision-making and management. Policy-making
processes require the partnership of women and men at all levels. Men and boys
should also be actively involved and encouraged in all efforts to achieve the goals of
the Platform for Action and its implementation.
59. Violence against women and girls is a major obstacle to the achievement of the
objectives of gender equality, development and peace. Violence against women both
violates and impairs or nullifies the enjoyment by women of their human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Gender-based violence, such as battering and other domestic
violence, sexual abuse, sexual slavery and exploitation, international trafficking in
women and children, forced prostitution and sexual harassment, as well as violence
against women resulting from cultural prejudice, racism and racial discrimination,
xenophobia, pornography, ethnic cleansing, armed conflict, foreign occupation,
religious and anti-religious extremism and terrorism are incompatible with the
dignity and worth of the human person and must be combated and eliminated.
60. Women play a critical role in the family. The family is the basic unit of society
and is a strong force for social cohesion and integration and, as such, should be
strengthened. The inadequate support to women and insufficient protection and
support to their respective families affect society as a whole and undermine efforts
to achieve gender equality. In different cultural, political and social systems, various
forms of the family exist and the rights, capabilities and responsibilities of family
members must be respected. Women’s social and economic contributions to the
welfare of the family and the social significance of maternity and paternity continue
to be inadequately addressed. Motherhood and fatherhood and the role of parents
and legal guardians in the family and in the upbringing of children and the
importance of all family members to the family’s well-being are also acknowledged
and must not be a basis for discrimination. Women also continue to bear a

19

A/RES/S-23/3

disproportionate share of the household responsibilities and the care of children, the
sick and the elderly. Such imbalance needs to be consistently addressed through
appropriate policies and programmes, in particular those geared towards education,
and through legislation where appropriate. In order to achieve full partnership, both
in public and in private spheres, both women and men must be enabled to reconcile
and share equally work responsibilities and family responsibilities.
61. Strong national machineries for the advancement of women and promotion of
gender equality require political commitment at the highest level and all necessary
human and financial resources to initiate, recommend and facilitate the
development, adoption and monitoring of policies, legislation, programmes and
capacity-building for the empowerment of women and to act as catalysts for open
public dialogue on gender equality as a societal goal. This would enable them to
promote the advancement of women and mainstream a gender perspective in
policies and programmes in all areas, to play an advocacy role and to ensure equal
access to all institutions and resources, as well as enhanced capacity-building for
women in all sectors. Reforms to meet the challenges of the changing world are
essential to ensure women’s equal access to institutions and organizations.
Institutional and conceptual changes are a strategic and important aspect of creating
an enabling environment for the implementation of the Platform for Action.
62. Programme support to enhance women’s opportunities, potentials and
activities need to have a dual focus: on the one hand, programmes aimed at meeting
the basic as well as the specific needs of women for capacity-building,
organizational development and empowerment, and on the other, gender
mainstreaming in all programme formulation and implementation activities. It is
particularly important to expand into new areas of programming to advance gender
equality in response to current challenges.
63. Girls and women of all ages with any form of disability are generally among
the more vulnerable and marginalized of society. There is therefore need to take into
account and to address their concerns in all policy-making and programming.
Special measures are needed at all levels to integrate them into the mainstream of
development.
64. Effective and coordinated plans and programmes for the full implementation of
the Platform for Action require a clear knowledge of the situation of women and
girls, clear research-based knowledge and data disaggregated by sex, short- and
long-term time-bound targets and measurable goals, and follow-up mechanisms to
assess progress. Efforts are needed to ensure capacity-building for all actors
involved in the achievement of these goals. Efforts are also needed at the national
level to increase transparency and accountability.
65. The realization and the achievement of the goals of gender equality,
development and peace need to be supported by the allocation of necessary human,
financial and material resources for specific and targeted activities to ensure gender
equality at the local, national, regional and international levels as well as by
enhanced and increased international cooperation. Explicit attention to these goals in
the budgetary processes at the national, regional and international levels is essential.

20

A/RES/S-23/3

A.

Actions to be taken at the national level
By Governments:

66. (a) Set and encourage the use of explicit short- and long-term time-bound
targets or measurable goals, including, where appropriate, quotas, to promote
progress towards gender balance, including women’s equal access to and full
participation on a basis of equality with men in all areas and at all levels of public
life, especially in decision- and policy-making positions, in political parties and
political activities, in all government ministries and at key policy-making
institutions, as well as in local development bodies and authorities;
(b) Address the barriers faced by women, particularly by indigenous and
other marginalized women, in accessing and participating in politics and decisionmaking, including lack of training, women’s double burden of paid and unpaid
work, negative societal attitudes and stereotypes.
67. (a) Ensure policies that guarantee equal access to education and the
elimination of gender disparities in education, including vocational training, science
and technology and completion of basic education for girls, especially for those
living in rural and deprived areas, and opportunities for continuing education at all
levels for all women and girls;
(b) Support the implementation of plans and programmes of action to ensure
quality education and improved enrolment retention rates for boys and girls and the
elimination of gender discrimination and gender stereotypes in educational curricula
and materials, as well as in the process of education;
(c) Accelerate action and strengthen political commitment to close the
gender gap in primary and secondary education by 2005 and to ensure free
compulsory and universal primary education for both girls and boys by 2015, as
advocated by several global conferences, and eliminate policies that have been
proven to worsen and perpetuate the gap;
(d) Develop a gender-sensitive curriculum from kindergarten to elementary
schools to vocational training and universities in order to address gender
stereotyping as one of the root causes of segregation in working life.
68. (a) Design and implement policies that promote and protect women’s
enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and create an environment
that does not tolerate violations of the rights of women and girls;
(b) Create and maintain a non-discriminatory and gender-sensitive legal
environment by reviewing legislation with a view to striving to remove
discriminatory provisions as soon as possible, preferably by 2005, and eliminating
legislative gaps that leave women and girls without protection of their rights and
without effective recourse against gender-based discrimination;
(c) Ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,8 limit the extent of any reservations to it, and withdraw reservations
that are contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention or otherwise
incompatible with international treaty law;
(d) Consider signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;9

21

A/RES/S-23/3

(e) Consider signing and ratifying the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court;7
(f) Develop, review and implement laws and procedures to prohibit and
eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and girls;
(g) Take measures, including programmes and policies, to ensure that
maternity, motherhood and parenting and the role of women in procreation are not
used as a basis for discrimination nor restrict the full participation of women in
society;
(h) Ensure that national legislative and administrative reform processes,
including those linked to land reform, decentralization and reorientation of the
economy, promote women’s rights, particularly those of rural women and women
living in poverty, and take measures to promote and implement those rights through
women’s equal access to and control over economic resources, including land,
property rights, right to inheritance, credit and traditional saving schemes, such as
women’s banks and cooperatives;
(i) Mainstream a gender perspective into national immigration and asylum
policies, regulations and practices, as appropriate, in order to promote and protect
the rights of all women, including the consideration of steps to recognize genderrelated persecution and violence when assessing grounds for granting refugee status
and asylum;
(j) Take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination and violence
against women and girls by any person, organization or enterprise;
(k) Take necessary measures for the private sector and educational
establishments to facilitate and strengthen compliance with non-discriminatory
legislation.
69. (a) As a matter of priority, review and revise legislation, where appropriate,
with a view to introducing effective legislation, including on violence against
women, and take other necessary measures to ensure that all women and girls are
protected against all forms of physical, psychological and sexual violence, and are
provided recourse to justice;
(b) Prosecute the perpetrators of all forms of violence against women and
girls and sentence them appropriately, and introduce actions aimed at helping and
motivating perpetrators to break the cycle of violence and take measures to provide
avenues for redress to victims;
(c) Treat all forms of violence against women and girls of all ages as a
criminal offence punishable by law, including violence based on all forms of
discrimination;
(d) Establish legislation and/or strengthen appropriate mechanisms to handle
criminal matters relating to all forms of domestic violence, including marital rape
and sexual abuse of women and girls, and ensure that such cases are brought to
justice swiftly;
(e) Develop, adopt and fully implement laws and other measures, as
appropriate, such as policies and educational programmes, to eradicate harmful
customary or traditional practices, including female genital mutilation, early and
forced marriage and so-called honour crimes, which are violations of the human
rights of women and girls and obstacles to the full enjoyment by women of their

22

A/RES/S-23/3

human rights and fundamental freedoms, and intensify efforts, in cooperation with
local women’s groups, to raise collective and individual awareness on how these
harmful traditional or customary practices violate women’s human rights;
(f) Continue to undertake research to develop a better understanding of the
root causes of all forms of violence against women in order to design programmes
and take measures towards eliminating those forms of violence;
(g) Take measures to address through policies and programmes, racism and
racially motivated violence against women and girls;
(h) Take concrete steps, as a priority and with their full and voluntary
participation, to address the impact of violence on indigenous women in order to
implement appropriate, effective programmes and services to eliminate all forms of
violence;
(i) Promote women’s and girls’ mental well-being, integrate mental health
services into primary health-care systems, develop gender-sensitive supportive
programmes and train health workers to recognize gender-based violence and
provide care for girls and women of all ages who have experienced any form of
violence;
(j) Adopt and promote a holistic approach to respond to all forms of
violence and abuse against girls and women of all ages, including girls and women
with disabilities, as well as vulnerable and marginalized women and girls in order to
address their diverse needs, including education, provision of appropriate health
care and services and basic social services;
(k) Approve and promote a holistic approach to combat violence against
women during all their life cycle and circumstances.
70. (a) Take appropriate measures to address the root factors, including external
factors, that encourage trafficking in women and girls for prostitution and other
forms of commercialized sex, forced marriages and forced labour in order to
eliminate trafficking in women, including by strengthening existing legislations with
a view to providing better protection of the rights of women and girls and to
punishing the perpetrators, through both criminal and civil measures;
(b) Devise, enforce and strengthen effective measures to combat and
eliminate all forms of trafficking in women and girls through a comprehensive antitrafficking strategy consisting of, inter alia, legislative measures, prevention
campaigns, information exchange, assistance and protection for and reintegration of
the victims and prosecution of all the offenders involved, including intermediaries;
(c) Consider preventing, within the legal framework and in accordance with
national policies, victims of trafficking, in particular women and girls, from being
prosecuted for their illegal entry or residence, taking into account that they are
victims of exploitation;
(d) Consider setting up or strengthening a national coordinating mechanism,
for example, a national rapporteur or an inter-agency body, with the participation of
civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to encourage the exchange
of information and to report on data, root causes, factors and trends in violence
against women, in particular trafficking;
(e) Provide protection and support to women and their respective families
and develop and strengthen policies to support family security.

23

A/RES/S-23/3

71. (a) Consider adopting, where appropriate, national legislation consistent with
the Convention on Biological Diversity 12 to protect the knowledge, innovations and
practices of women in indigenous and local communities relating to traditional
medicines, biodiversity and indigenous technologies;
(b) Adapt environmental and agricultural policies and mechanisms, when
necessary, to incorporate a gender perspective, and in cooperation with civil society,
support farmers, particularly women farmers and those living in rural areas, with
education and training programmes.
72. (a) Adopt policies and implement measures to address, on a prioritized basis,
the gender aspects of emerging and continued health challenges, such as malaria,
tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and other diseases having a disproportionate impact on
women’s health, including those resulting in the highest mortality and morbidity
rates;
(b) Ensure that the reduction of maternal morbidity and mortality is a health
sector priority and that women have ready access to essential obstetric care, wellequipped and adequately staffed maternal health-care services, skilled attendance at
delivery, emergency obstetric care, effective referral and transport to higher levels of
care when necessary, post-partum care and family planning in order to, inter alia,
promote safe motherhood, and give priority attention to measures to prevent, detect
and treat breast, cervical and ovarian cancer and osteoporosis, and sexually
transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS;
(c) Take measures to meet the unmet needs in good quality family planning
services and in contraception, namely regarding the existing gap in services,
supplies and use;
(d) Collect and disseminate updated and reliable data on mortality and
morbidity of women and conduct further research regarding how social and
economic factors affect the health of girls and women of all ages, as well as research
about the provision of health-care services to girls and women and the patterns of
use of such services and the value of disease prevention and health promotion
programmes for women;
(e) Ensure universal and equal access for women and men throughout the
life-cycle, to social services related to health care, including education, clean water
and safe sanitation, nutrition, food security and health education programmes;
(f)

Ensure the provision of safe working conditions for health-care workers;

(g) Adopt, enact, review and revise, where necessary or appropriate, and
implement health legislation, policies and programmes, in consultation with
women’s organizations and other actors of civil society, and allocate the necessary
budgetary resources to ensure the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, so that all women have full and equal access to comprehensive, high-quality
and affordable health care, information, education and services throughout their life
cycle; reflect the new demands for service and care by women and girls as a result
of the HIV/AIDS pandemic and new knowledge about women’s needs for specific
mental and occupation health programmes and for the ageing process; and protect
and promote human rights by ensuring that all health services and workers conform
12
See United Nations Environment Programme, Convention on Biological Diversity (Environmental Law
and Institute Programme Activity Centre), June 1992.

24

A/RES/S-23/3

to ethical, professional and gender-sensitive standards in the delivery of women’s
health services, including by establishing or strengthening, as appropriate,
regulatory and enforcement mechanisms;
(h) Eliminate discrimination against all women and girls in the access to
health information, education and health care and health services;
(i) Reproductive health is a state of complete physical, mental and social
well-being, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, in all matters relating
to the reproductive system and to its functions and processes. Reproductive health
therefore implies that people are able to have a satisfying and safe sex life and that
they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when and how
often to do so. Implicit in this last condition is the right of men and women to be
informed and to have access to safe, effective, affordable and acceptable methods of
family planning of their choice, as well as other methods of their choice for
regulation of fertility which are not against the law, and the right of access to
appropriate health-care services that will enable women to go safely through
pregnancy and childbirth and provide couples with the best chance of having a
healthy infant. In line with the above definition of reproductive health, reproductive
health care is defined as the constellation of methods, techniques and services that
contribute to reproductive health and well-being by preventing and solving
reproductive health problems. It also includes sexual health, the purpose of which is
the enhancement of life and personal relations, and not merely counselling and care
related to reproduction and sexually transmitted diseases;
(j) Given the above definition, reproductive rights embrace certain human
rights that are already recognized in national laws, international human rights
documents and other consensus documents. These rights rest on the recognition of
the basic right of all couples and individuals to decide freely and responsibly the
number, spacing and timing of their children and to have the information and means
to do so, and the right to attain the highest standard of sexual and reproductive
health. They also include their right to make decisions concerning reproduction free
of discrimination, coercion and violence, as expressed in human rights documents.
In the exercise of these rights, they should take into account the needs of their living
and future children and their responsibilities towards the community. The promotion
of the responsible exercise of these rights for all people should be the fundamental
basis for government- and community-supported policies and programmes in the
area of reproductive health, including family planning. As part of their commitment,
full attention should be given to the promotion of mutually respectful and equitable
gender relations and particularly to meeting the educational and service needs of
adolescents to enable them to deal in a positive and responsible way with their
sexuality. Reproductive health eludes many of the world’s people because of such
factors as inadequate levels of knowledge about human sexuality and inappropriate
or poor-quality reproductive health information and services; the prevalence of highrisk sexual behaviour; discriminatory social practices; negative attitudes towards
women and girls; and the limited power many women and girls have over their
sexual and reproductive lives. In most countries, adolescents are particularly
vulnerable because of their lack of information and access to relevant services.
Older women and men have distinct reproductive and sexual health issues which are
often inadequately addressed;
(k) The human rights of women include their right to have control over and
decide freely and responsibly on matters related to their sexuality, including sexual

25

A/RES/S-23/3

and reproductive health, free of coercion, discrimination and violence. Equal
relationships between women and men in matters of sexual relations and
reproduction, including full respect for the integrity of the person, require mutual
respect, consent and shared responsibility for sexual behaviour and its
consequences;
(l) Design and implement programmes to encourage and enable men to
adopt safe and responsible sexual and reproductive behaviour, and to use effectively
methods to prevent unwanted pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV/AIDS;
(m) Take all appropriate measures to eliminate harmful, medically
unnecessary or coercive medical interventions as well as inappropriate medication
and overmedication of women and ensure that all women are properly informed of
their options, including likely benefits and potential side effects, by properly trained
personnel;
(n) Adopt measures to ensure non-discrimination against and respect for the
privacy of those living with HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections,
including women and young people, so that they are not denied the information
needed to prevent further transmission of HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted
diseases and are able to access treatment and care services without fear of
stigmatization, discrimination or violence;
(o) In the light of paragraph 8.25 of the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development,4 which states:
“In no case should abortion be promoted as a method of family planning.
All Governments and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations are urged to strengthen their commitment to women’s health, to
deal with the health impact of unsafe abortion20 as a major public health
concern and to reduce the recourse to abortion through expanded and improved
family-planning services. Prevention of unwanted pregnancies must always be
given the highest priority and every attempt should be made to eliminate the
need for abortion. Women who have unwanted pregnancies should have ready
access to reliable information and compassionate counselling. Any measures or
changes related to abortion within the health system can only be determined at
the national or local level according to the national legislative process. In
circumstances where abortion is not against the law, such abortion should be
safe. In all cases, women should have access to quality services for the
management of complications arising from abortion. Post-abortion
counselling, education and family-planning services should be offered
promptly, which will also help to avoid repeat abortions.
“20

Unsafe abortion is defined as a procedure for terminating an unwanted
pregnancy either by persons lacking the necessary skills or in an environment
lacking the minimal medical standards or both (based on World Health
Organization, The Prevention and Management of Unsafe Abortion, Report of a
Technical Working Group, Geneva, April 1992 (WHO/MSM/92.5))”,
consider reviewing laws containing punitive measures against women who have
undergone illegal abortions;
(p) Promote and improve comprehensive gender-specific tobacco prevention
and control strategies for all women, particularly adolescent girls and pregnant

26

A/RES/S-23/3

women, which would include education, prevention and cessation programmes and
services, and the reduction of people’s exposure to environmental tobacco smoke,
and support the development of the World Health Organization international
framework convention on tobacco control;
(q) Promote or improve information programmes and measures including
treatment for the elimination of the increasing substance abuse among women and
adolescent girls, including information campaigns about the risks to health and other
consequences and its impact on families.
73. (a) Mainstream a gender perspective into key macroeconomic and social
development policies and national development programmes;
(b) Incorporate a gender perspective into the design, development, adoption
and execution of all budgetary processes, as appropriate, in order to promote
equitable, effective and appropriate resource allocation and establish adequate
budgetary allocations to support gender equality and development programmes that
enhance women’s empowerment and develop the necessary analytical and
methodological tools and mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation;
(c) Increase, as appropriate, and effectively utilize financial and other
resources in the social sector, particularly in education and health, to achieve gender
equality and women’s empowerment as a central strategy for addressing
development and poverty eradication;
(d) Strive to reduce the disproportionate number of women living in poverty,
in particular rural women, by implementing national poverty eradication
programmes with a focus on a gender perspective and the empowerment of women,
including short- and long-term goals.
74. (a) Undertake socio-economic policies that promote sustainable development
and support and ensure poverty eradication programmes, especially for women, by,
inter alia, providing skills training, equal access to and control over resources,
finance, credit, including microcredit, information and technology, and equal access
to markets to benefit women of all ages, in particular those living in poverty and
marginalized women, including rural women, indigenous women and female-headed
households;
(b) Create and ensure access to social protection systems, taking into account
the specific needs of all women living in poverty, demographic changes and changes
in society, to provide safeguards against the uncertainties and changes in conditions
of work associated with globalization, and strive to ensure that new, flexible and
emerging forms of work are adequately covered by social protection;
(c) Continue to review, modify and implement macroeconomic and social
policies and programmes, inter alia, through an analysis from a gender perspective
of those related to structural adjustment and external debt problems, in order to
ensure women’s equal access to resources and universal access to basic social
services.
75. Facilitate employment for women through, inter alia, promotion of adequate
social protection, simplification of administrative procedures, removal of fiscal
obstacles, where appropriate, and other measures, such as access to risk capital,
credit schemes, microcredit and other funding, facilitating the establishment of
microenterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises.

27

A/RES/S-23/3

76. (a) Establish or reinforce existing institutional mechanisms at all levels to
work with national machineries to strengthen societal support for gender equality, in
cooperation with civil society, particularly women’s non-governmental
organizations;
(b) Take action at the highest levels for the continued advancement of
women, in particular by strengthening national machineries to mainstream the
gender perspective to accelerate the empowerment of women in all areas and to
ensure commitment to gender equality policies;
(c) Provide national machineries with the necessary human and financial
resources, including through exploring innovative funding schemes, so that gender
mainstreaming is integrated into all policies, programmes and projects;
(d) Consider establishing effective commissions or other institutions to
promote equal opportunities;
(e) Strengthen efforts to implement fully national action plans developed for
the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and, when necessary, adjust
or develop national plans for the future;
(f) Ensure that the design of all government information policies and
strategies is gender-sensitive.
77. (a) Provide national statistical offices with institutional and financial support
so that they may collect, compile and disseminate data disaggregated by sex, age
and other factors, as appropriate, in formats that are accessible to the public and to
policy makers for, inter alia, gender-based analysis, monitoring and impact
assessment, and support new work to develop statistics and indicators, especially in
areas where information is particularly lacking;
(b) Regularly compile and publish crime statistics, and monitor trends in law
enforcement concerning violations of the rights of women and girls to increase
awareness in order to develop more effective policies;
(c) Develop national capacity to undertake policy-oriented and genderrelated research and impact studies by universities and national research/training
institutes to enable gender-specific knowledge-based policy-making.
B.

Further actions to be taken at the national level
By Governments, the private sector, non-governmental organizations and
other actors of civil society:

78. (a) Encourage the creation of training and legal literacy programmes which
build and support the capacities of women’s organizations to advocate for women’s
and girls’ human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) Encourage collaboration, where appropriate, among Governments, nongovernmental organizations, grass-roots organizations and traditional and
community leaders for the promotion and protection of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms of women and girls, the dignity and worth of the human
person and equal rights for women and men;
(c) Encourage
cooperation
between
governmental
authorities,
parliamentarians and other relevant authorities and women’s organizations,

28

A/RES/S-23/3

including non-governmental organizations, as appropriate, in ensuring that
legislation is non-discriminatory;
(d) Provide gender-sensitive training to all actors, including police,
prosecutors and the judiciary, in dealing with victims of violence, particularly
women and girls, including sexual violence.
79. (a) Adopt a holistic approach to women’s physical and mental health
throughout the life cycle, take further measures to redesign health information,
services and training for health workers in order to make them gender-sensitive,
promote gender balance at all levels of the health-care system, and reflect women’s
perspective and right to privacy, confidentiality, voluntary and informed consent;
(b) Reinforce efforts to ensure universal access to high quality primary
health care throughout the life cycle, including sexual and reproductive health care,
no later than 2015;
(c) Review and revise national policies, programmes and legislation to
implement the key actions3 for the further implementation of the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development4 adopted by
the General Assembly at its twenty-first special session, paying particular attention
to achieving the specific benchmarks to reduce maternal mortality, to increase the
proportion of births assisted by skilled attendants, to provide the widest achievable
range of safe and effective family planning and contraceptive methods and to reduce
young people’s risk of HIV/AIDS;
(d) Strengthen measures to improve the nutritional status of all girls and
women, recognizing the effects of severe and moderate malnutrition, the lifelong
implications of nutrition and the link between mother and child health, by promoting
and enhancing support for programmes to reduce malnutrition, such as school
meal programmes,
mother-child-nutrition
programmes
and
micronutrient
supplementation, giving special attention to bridging the gender gap in nutrition;
(e) Review with the full participation of women and monitor the impact of
health-sector reform initiatives on women’s health and their enjoyment of human
rights, in particular with regard to rural and urban health service delivery to women
living in poverty, and ensure that reforms secure full and equal access to available,
affordable and high-quality health care and services for all women, taking into
account the diverse needs of women;
(f) Design and implement programmes with the full involvement of
adolescents, as appropriate, to provide them with education, information and
appropriate, specific, user-friendly and accessible services, without discrimination,
to address effectively their reproductive and sexual health needs, taking into account
their right to privacy, confidentiality, respect and informed consent, and the
responsibilities, rights and duties of parents and legal guardians to provide in a
manner consistent with the evolving capacities of the child appropriate direction and
guidance in the exercise by the child of the rights recognized in the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, 13 in conformity with the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women 8 and ensuring that in all actions
concerning children, the best interests of the child are a primary consideration.
These programmes should, inter alia, build adolescent girls’ self-esteem and help
them take responsibility for their own lives; promote gender equality and
13

Resolution 44/25, annex.

29

A/RES/S-23/3

responsible sexual behaviour; raise awareness about, prevent and treat sexually
transmitted infections, including HIV/AIDS, and sexual violence and abuse; and
counsel adolescents on avoiding unwanted and early pregnancies;
(g) Design and implement programmes to provide social services and
support to pregnant adolescents and adolescent mothers, in particular to enable them
to continue and complete their education;
(h) Give particular attention to developing and improving access to improved
and new technologies and to safe and affordable drugs and treatments to meet
women’s health needs, including cardiopulmonary diseases, hypertension,
osteoporosis, breast, cervical and ovarian cancer and family planning and
contraceptive methods, for both women and men.
80. Develop and use frameworks, guidelines and other practical tools and
indicators to accelerate gender mainstreaming, including gender-based research,
analytical tools and methodologies, training, case studies, statistics and information.
81. (a) Provide equal opportunities and favourable conditions for women of all
ages and backgrounds on equal terms with men by encouraging their entry into
politics and their participation at all levels;
(b) Encourage the nomination of more women candidates, inter alia, through
political parties, quotas or measurable goals or other appropriate means for election
to parliaments and other legislative structures, to increase their share and
contribution in the formulation of public policy;
(c) Develop and maintain consultative processes and mechanisms, in
partnership with women’s organizations, including non-governmental organizations
and community groups, to ensure that all women, with particular attention to those
who face particular barriers to their participation in public life, are fully involved in
and informed about decisions that impact their lives.
82. (a) Promote and protect the rights of women workers and take action to
remove structural and legal barriers as well as stereotypical attitudes to gender
equality at work, addressing, inter alia, gender bias in recruitment; working
conditions; occupational segregation and harassment; discrimination in social
protection benefits; women’s occupational health and safety; unequal career
opportunities and inadequate sharing, by men, of family responsibilities;
(b) Promote programmes to enable women and men to reconcile their work
and family responsibilities and to encourage men to share equally with women
household and child-care responsibilities;
(c) Develop or strengthen policies and programmes to support the multiple
roles of women in contributing to the welfare of the family in its various forms,
which acknowledge the social significance of maternity and motherhood, parenting,
the role of parents and legal guardians in the upbringing of children and caring for
other family members. Such policies and programmes should also promote shared
responsibility of parents, women and men and society as a whole in this regard;
(d) Design, implement and promote family friendly policies and services,
including affordable, accessible and quality care services for children and other
dependants, parental and other leave schemes and campaigns to sensitize public
opinion and other relevant actors on equal sharing of employment and family
responsibilities between women and men;

30

A/RES/S-23/3

(e) Develop policies and programmes to enhance the employability of
women and their access to quality jobs, through improving access to formal, nonformal and vocational training, lifelong learning and retraining, long-distance
education, including in information and communications technology and
entrepreneurial skills, particularly in developing countries, to support women’s
empowerment in the different stages of their lives;
(f) Take action to increase women’s participation and to bring about a
balanced representation of women and men in all sectors and occupations in the
labour market, inter alia, by encouraging the creation or expansion of institutional
networks to support the career development and promotion of women;
(g) Develop and/or strengthen programmes and policies to support women
entrepreneurs, including those engaged in new enterprises, through access to
information, training, including vocational training, new technologies, networks,
credit and financial services;
(h) Initiate positive steps to promote equal pay for equal work or work of
equal value and to diminish differentials in incomes between women and men;
(i) Encourage and support the education of girls in science, mathematics,
new technologies, including information technologies, and technical subjects, and
encourage women, including through career advising, to seek employment in highgrowth and high-wage sectors and jobs;
(j) Develop policies and implement programmes, particularly for men and
boys, on changing stereotypical attitudes and behaviours concerning gender roles
and responsibilities to promote gender equality and positive attitudes and behaviour;
(k) Strengthen gender-awareness campaigns and gender equality training
among women and men, girls and boys to eliminate the persistence of harmful
stereotypes;
(l) Analyse and respond, as necessary, to the major reasons why men and
women may be affected differently by the process of job creation and retrenchment
associated with economic transition and structural transformation of the economy,
including globalization;
(m) Promote gender-sensitivity and social responsibility of the private sector,
inter alia, through the management of work time and dissemination of gendersensitive information and advocacy campaigns.
83. (a) Strengthen or establish, where appropriate, national collaborative and
regular reporting mechanisms, with the participation of non-governmental
organizations, especially women’s organizations, to monitor progress in the
implementation of national policies, programmes and benchmarks for achieving
gender equality;
(b) Support the work of non-governmental organizations and communitybased organizations in helping disadvantaged women, in particular rural women, in
gaining access to financial institutions in establishing businesses and other
sustainable means of livelihood;
(c) Take measures to enable all older women to be actively engaged in all
aspects of life, as well as to assume a variety of roles in communities, public life and
decision-making, and develop and implement policies and programmes to ensure

31

A/RES/S-23/3

their full enjoyment of human rights and quality of life, as well as to address their
needs, with a view to contributing to the realization of a society for all ages;
(d) Design and implement policies and programmes to address fully specific
needs of women and girls with disabilities, to ensure their equal access to education
at all levels, including technical and vocational training and adequate rehabilitation
programmes, health care and services and employment opportunities, to protect and
promote their human rights and, where appropriate, to eliminate existing inequalities
between women and men with disabilities.
C.

Actions to be taken at the international level
By the United Nations system and international and regional organizations,
as appropriate:

84. (a) Assist Governments, at their request, in building institutional capacity
and developing national action plans or further implementing existing action plans
for the implementation of the Platform for Action;
(b) Support
non-governmental
organizations,
especially
women’s
organizations, to build their capacity to advocate for, implement, assess and follow
up the Platform for Action;
(c) Allocate sufficient resources to regional and national programmes to
implement the Platform for Action in its twelve critical areas of concern;
(d) Assist Governments in countries with economies in transition to further
develop and implement plans and programmes aimed at economic and political
empowerment of women;
(e) Encourage the Economic and Social Council to request the regional
commissions, within their respective mandates and resources, to build up a database
to be updated regularly, in which all programmes and projects carried out in their
respective regions by agencies or organizations of the United Nations system are
listed, and to facilitate their dissemination, as well as the evaluation of their impact
on the empowerment of women through the implementation of the Platform for
Action.
85. (a) Continue to implement and evaluate and follow up the mandated work of
the United Nations agencies, drawing on the full range of expertise available within
the United Nations system, as well as agreed conclusions of the Economic and
Social Council and other programmes and initiatives, to mainstream a gender
perspective into all policies, programmes and planning of the United Nations
system, including through the integrated and coordinated follow-up to all major
United Nations conferences and summits, as well as to ensure the allocation of
sufficient resources and maintenance of gender units and focal points to achieve this
end;
(b) Assist countries, upon their request, in developing methods for and
compiling statistics on the contributions of women and men to society and the
economy, and the socio-economic situation of women and men, in particular in
relation to poverty and paid and unpaid work in all sectors;
(c) Support national efforts, particularly in developing countries, for
enlarged access to new information technology as part of the efforts to develop
collaborative research, training and information dissemination, including through

32

A/RES/S-23/3

the Gender Awareness Information and Networking System developed by the
International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women, while
at the same time supporting traditional methods of information dissemination,
research and training;
(d) Ensure that all United Nations personnel and officials at Headquarters
and in the field, especially in field operations, receive training in order to
mainstream a gender perspective in their work, including gender impact analysis,
and ensure appropriate follow-up to such training;
(e) Support the Commission on the Status of Women, within its mandate, in
assessing and advancing the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and
the follow-up thereto;
(f) Assist Governments, upon their request, in incorporating a gender
perspective as a dimension of development into national development planning;
(g) Assist States parties, upon their request, in building capacity to
implement the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,8 and in this regard encourage States parties to pay attention to the
concluding comments as well as the general recommendations of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
86. (a) Assist Governments, upon request, in developing gender-sensitive
strategies for the delivery of assistance and, where appropriate, responses to
humanitarian crises resulting from armed conflict and natural disasters;
(b) Ensure and support the full participation of women at all levels of
decision-making and implementation in development activities and peace processes,
including conflict prevention and resolution, post-conflict reconstruction,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peace-building, and in this regard, support the
involvement of women’s organizations, community-based organizations and nongovernmental organizations;
(c) Encourage the involvement of women in decision-making at all levels
and achieve gender balance in the appointment of women and men, with full respect
for the principle of equitable geographical distribution, including, as special envoys
and special representatives and in pursuing good offices on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, inter alia, in matters relating to peacekeeping, peace-building and in
operational activities, including as resident coordinators;
(d) Provide gender-sensitive training to all actors, as appropriate, in
peacekeeping missions in dealing with victims, particularly women and girls, of
violence, including sexual violence;
(e) Take further effective measures to remove the obstacles to the realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination, in particular peoples living under
colonial and foreign occupation, that continue to adversely affect their economic and
social development.
87. (a) Support activities aimed at the elimination of all forms of violence
against women and girls, including by providing support for the activities of
women’s networks and organizations within the United Nations system;
(b) Consider launching an international “zero tolerance” campaign on
violence against women.

33

A/RES/S-23/3

88. Encourage the implementation of measures designed to achieve the goal of
50/50 gender balance in all posts, including at the Professional level and above, in
particular at the higher levels in their secretariats, including in peacekeeping
missions, peace negotiations and in all activities, and report thereon, as appropriate,
and enhance management accountability mechanisms.
89. Take measures, with the full participation of women, to create, at all levels, an
enabling environment conducive to the achievement and maintenance of world
peace, for democracy and peaceful settlement of disputes, with full respect for the
principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of States
and non-intervention in matters which are essentially within the jurisdiction of any
State, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and international law, as
well as the promotion and protection of all human rights, including the right to
development, and fundamental freedoms.
D.

Actions to be taken at the national and international levels
By Governments, regional and international organizations, including the
United Nations system, and international financial institutions and other
actors, as appropriate:

90. Take steps with a view to the avoidance of and refrain from any unilateral
measure at variance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations
that impedes the full achievement of economic and social development by the
population of the affected countries, in particular women and children, that
jeopardizes their well-being and that creates obstacles to the full enjoyment of their
human rights, including the right of everyone to a standard of living adequate for
their health and well-being and their right to food, medical care and the necessary
social services. Ensure that food and medicine are not used as tools for political
pressure.
91. Take urgent and effective measures in accordance with international law with a
view to alleviating the negative impact of economic sanctions on women and
children.
92. (a) Promote international cooperation to support regional and national efforts
in the development and use of gender-related analysis and statistics by, inter alia,
providing national statistical offices, upon their request, with institutional and
financial support in order to enable them to respond to requests for data
disaggregated by sex and age for use by national Governments in the formulation of
gender-sensitive statistical indicators for monitoring and policy and programme
impact assessments, as well as to undertake regular strategic surveys;
(b) Develop with the full participation of all countries an international
consensus on indicators and ways to measure violence against women, and consider
establishing a readily accessible database on statistics, legislation, training models,
good practices, lessons learned and other resources with regard to all forms of
violence against women, including women migrant workers;
(c) In partnership, as appropriate, with relevant institutions, promote,
improve, systemize and fund the collection of data disaggregated by sex, age and
other appropriate factors, on health and access to health services, including
comprehensive information on the impact of HIV/AIDS on women, throughout the
life-cycle;

34

A/RES/S-23/3

(d) Eliminate gender biases in bio-medical, clinical and social research,
including by conducting voluntary clinical trials involving women, with due regard
for their human rights, and in strict conformity with internationally accepted legal,
ethical, medical, safety, and scientific standards, and gather, analyse and make
available to appropriate institutions and to end-users gender-specific information
about dosage, side-effects and effectiveness of drugs, including contraceptives and
methods that protect against sexually transmitted infections.
93. (a) Develop and support the capacity of universities, national research and
training institutes and other relevant research institutes to undertake gender-related
and policy-oriented research in order to inform policy makers and to promote full
implementation of the Platform for Action and the follow-up thereto;
(b) Develop a South-South cooperation programme with a view to assisting
in the capacity-building of national machineries on women through, inter alia, the
sharing of expertise, experiences and knowledge of national machineries on
women’s empowerment, gender issues and gender mainstreaming methodologies
and approaches on the twelve critical areas of concern of the Platform for Action;
(c) Support Governments in their efforts to institute action-oriented
programmes and measures to accelerate the full implementation of the Platform for
Action, with time-bound targets and/or measurable goals and evaluation methods,
including gender impact assessments, with full participation of women for
measuring and analysing progress;
(d) Undertake appropriate data collection and research on indigenous
women, with their full participation, in order to foster accessible, culturally and
linguistically appropriate policies, programmes and services;
(e) Continue research on all current trends that may be creating new gender
disparities in order to provide a basis for policy action.
94. (a) Take measures to develop and implement gender-sensitive programmes
aimed at stimulating women’s entrepreneurship and private initiative, and assist
women-owned business in participating in and benefiting from, inter alia,
international trade, technological innovation and investment;
(b) Respect, promote and realize the principles contained in the ILO
Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Follow-up, 14 and
strongly consider ratification and full implementation of International Labour
Organization conventions which are particularly relevant to ensuring women’s rights
at work;
(c) Encourage the strengthening of existing and emerging microcredit
institutions and their capacity, including through the support of international
financial institutions, so that credit and related services for self-employment and
income-generating activities may be made available to an increasing number of
people living in poverty, in particular women, and to further develop, where
appropriate, other microfinance instruments;
(d) Reaffirm commitment to gender-sensitive development and support
women’s role in sustainable and ecologically sound consumption and production
patterns and approaches to natural resource management;

14

Adopted on 18 June 1998 by the International Labour Conference at its eighty-sixth session.

35

A/RES/S-23/3

(e) Adopt measures to ensure that the work of rural women, who continue to
play a vital role in providing food security and nutrition and are engaged in
agricultural production and enterprises related to farming, fishing and resource
management and home-based work, especially in the informal sector, is recognized
and valued in order to enhance their economic security, their access to and control
over resources and credit schemes, services and benefits, and their empowerment.
95. (a) Encourage and implement curriculum changes in training for public
officials to make them fully gender-sensitive;
(b) Strengthen and promote programmes to support the participation of
young women in youth organizations and encourage dialogue among youth between
and among developed and developing countries;
(c) Support national efforts to promote formal and non-formal education and
mentoring programmes for women and girls in order to enable them to acquire
knowledge, develop self-esteem and skills in leadership, advocacy and conflict
resolution;
(d) Undertake comprehensive actions to provide skills training for women
and girls at all levels, in order to eradicate poverty, in particular the feminization of
poverty, through national and international efforts;
(e) With the full voluntary participation of indigenous women, develop and
implement educational and training programmes that respect their history, culture,
spirituality, languages and aspirations and ensure their access to all levels of formal
and non-formal education, including higher education;
(f) Continue to support and strengthen national, regional and international
adult literacy programmes with international cooperation in order to achieve a 50
per cent improvement in the levels of adult literacy by 2015, especially for women,
and equitable access to basic and continuing education for all adults;
(g) Continue to examine the decline in enrolment rates and the increase in
the drop-out rates of girls and boys at the primary and secondary education levels in
some countries, and, with international cooperation, design appropriate national
programmes to eliminate the root causes and support lifelong learning for women
and girls, with a view to ensuring achievement of relevant international targets on
education set by the relevant international conferences;
(h) Ensure equal opportunities for women and girls in cultural, recreational
and sports activities, as well as in participation in athletics and physical activities at
the national, regional and international levels, such as access, training, competition,
remuneration and prizes;
(i) Continue to design efforts for the promotion of respect for cultural
diversity and dialogue among and within civilizations in a manner which contributes
to the implementation of the Platform for Action, which aims at the empowerment
of women and the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all women, and in a manner which ensures that gender equality and the full
enjoyment of all human rights by women are not undermined;
(j) Apply and support positive measures to give all women, particularly
indigenous women, equal access to capacity-building and training programmes to
enhance their participation in decision-making in all fields and at all levels.

36

A/RES/S-23/3

96. (a) Increase cooperation, policy responses, effective implementation of
national legislation and other protective and preventive measures aimed at the
elimination of violence against women and girls, especially all forms of commercial
sexual exploitation, as well as economic exploitation, including trafficking in
women and children, female infanticide, crimes committed in the name of honour,
crimes committed in the name of passion, racially motivated crimes, abduction and
sale of children, dowry-related violence and deaths, acid attacks and harmful
traditional or customary practices, such as female genital mutilation, early and
forced marriages;
(b) Increase awareness and knowledge of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court,7 which affirms that rape, sexual slavery, enforced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization and other forms of sexual
violence constitute war crimes and, in defined circumstances, crimes against
humanity, with the aim of preventing such crimes from occurring, and take measures
to support the prosecution of all persons responsible for such crimes and provide
avenues for redress to victims; also increase awareness of the extent to which such
crimes are used as a weapon of war;
(c) Provide support to non-governmental organizations, in collaboration with
the United Nations system, inter alia, through regional and international
cooperation, including women’s organizations and community groups, in addressing
all forms of violence against women and girls, including for programmes to combat
race and ethnic-based violence against women and girls;
(d) Encourage and support public campaigns, as appropriate, to enhance
public awareness of the unacceptability and social costs of violence against women,
and undertake prevention activities to promote healthy and balanced relationships
based on gender equality.
97. (a) Intensify cooperation between States of origin, transit and destination to
prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children;
(b) Support the ongoing negotiations on a draft protocol to prevent, suppress
and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children, to supplement the
draft United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime; 15
(c) As appropriate, pursue and support national, regional and international
strategies to reduce the risk to women and girls, including those who are refugees
and displaced persons, as well as women migrant workers, of becoming victims of
trafficking; strengthen national legislation by further defining the crime of
trafficking in all its elements and by reinforcing the punishment accordingly; enact
social and economic policies and programmes, as well as informational and
awareness-raising initiatives, to prevent and combat trafficking in persons,
especially women and children; prosecute perpetrators of trafficking; provide
measures to support, assist and protect trafficked persons in their countries of origin
and destination; and facilitate their return to and support their reintegration into their
countries of origin.
98. (a) Improve knowledge and awareness of the remedies available for
violations of women’s human rights;

15

See resolution 54/126.

37

A/RES/S-23/3

(b) Promote and protect the human rights of all migrant women and
implement policies to address the specific needs of documented migrant women and,
where necessary, tackle the existing inequalities between men and women migrants
to ensure gender equality;
(c) Promote respect for the right of women and men to the freedom of
thought, conscience and religion. Recognize the central role that religion,
spirituality and belief play in the lives of millions of women and men;
(d) Encourage, through the media and other means, a high awareness of the
harmful effects of certain traditional or customary practices affecting the health of
women, some of which increase their vulnerability to HIV/AIDS and other sexually
transmitted infections, and intensify efforts to eliminate such practices;
(e) Take necessary measures to protect individuals, groups and organs of
society engaged in promoting and protecting women’s human rights;
(f) Encourage States parties to continue to include a gender perspective in
their reports to the treaty bodies; also encourage these bodies to continue to take into
account a gender perspective in the implementation of their mandates, taking into
account the need to avoid unnecessary duplication and overlapping of their work;
and further encourage human rights mechanisms to continue to take into account a
gender perspective in their work;
(g) Support innovative programmes to empower older women to increase
their contribution to and benefit from development and efforts to combat poverty.
99. (a) Promote comprehensive human rights education programmes, inter alia,
in cooperation, where appropriate, with education and human rights institutions, the
relevant actors of civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations and the
media networks, to ensure widespread dissemination of information on human rights
instruments, in particular those concerning the human rights of women and girls;
(b) Take measures through, inter alia, supporting and strengthening existing
mechanisms entrusted with prosecuting perpetrators of violations of the human
rights of women, to eliminate impunity;
(c) Take measures to eliminate violations of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations. Many of these violations have a negative impact on
the promotion and protection of the human rights of women;
(d) Address the root causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive and
durable manner, as well as the differences in the impact of armed conflict on women
and men, and take them into account in relevant policies and programmes in order
to, inter alia, enhance the protection of civilians, particularly women and children;
(e) Ensure the release of hostages, particularly women and children,
including those subsequently imprisoned, in armed conflict;
(f) Develop and support policies and programmes for the protection of
children, especially girls, in hostilities, in order to prohibit their forced recruitment
and use by all actors and to promote and/or strengthen mechanisms for their
rehabilitation and reintegration, taking into account the specific experiences and
needs of girls;
(g) Improve and strengthen the capacity of women affected by situations of
armed conflict, including women refugees and displaced women, by, inter alia,

38

A/RES/S-23/3

involving them in the design and management of humanitarian activities so that they
benefit from these activities on an equal basis with men;
(h) Invite the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
other relevant United Nations agencies, within their respective mandates, and other
relevant humanitarian organizations as well as Governments to continue to provide
adequate support to countries hosting large numbers of refugees and those with
displaced persons, in their efforts to provide protection and assistance, paying
particular attention to the needs of refugees and other displaced women and
children;
(i) Seek to ensure the full and equal participation of women in the promotion
of peace, in particular through the full implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace; 16
(j) Provide support to and empower women who play an important role
within their families as stabilizing factors in conflict and post-conflict situations;
(k) Strengthen efforts towards general and complete disarmament under
strict and effective international control, based on the priorities established by the
United Nations in the field of disarmament, so that released resources could be used
for, inter alia, social and economic programmes which benefit women and girls;
(l) Explore new ways of generating new public and private financial
resources, inter alia, through the appropriate reduction of excessive military
expenditures and the arms trade and investment for arms production and acquisition,
including global military expenditures, taking into consideration national security
requirements, so as to permit the possible allocation of additional funds for social
and economic development, inter alia, for the advancement of women;
(m) Take measures to ensure the protection of refugees, especially women
and girls, and their access to and the provision of gender-sensitive appropriate basic
social services, including education and health.
100. (a) Cooperate and work with private sector partners and media networks at
the national and international levels to promote equal access for women and men as
producers and consumers, particularly in the area of information and
communications technologies, including through encouraging the media and the
information industry consistent with freedom of expression to adopt, or develop
further codes of conduct, professional guidelines and other self-regulatory
guidelines to remove gender stereotypes and promote balanced portrayals of women
and men;
(b) Develop programmes that support women’s ability to create, access and
promote networking, in particular through the use of new information and
communications technology, including through the establishment and support of
programmes to build the capacity of women’s non-governmental organizations in
this regard;
(c) Capitalize on the new information technologies, including the Internet, to
improve the global sharing of information, research, strengths, lessons learned from
women’s experiences, including “Herstories” 17 related to achieving gender equality,
16

Resolutions 53/243 A and B.
“Herstories” is a widely used term denoting the recounting of events, both historical and contemporary,
from a woman’s point of view.
17

39

A/RES/S-23/3

development and peace, and study other roles that these technologies can play
towards that goal.
101. (a) Take effective measures to address the challenges of globalization,
including through the enhanced and effective participation of developing countries
in the international economic policy decision-making process, in order to, inter alia,
guarantee the equal participation of women, in particular those from developing
countries, in the process of macroeconomic decision-making;
(b) Take measures, with the full and effective participation of women, to
ensure new approaches to international development cooperation, based on stability,
growth and equity, with the enhanced and effective participation and the integration
of developing countries in the globalizing world economy, geared towards poverty
eradication and the reduction of gender-based inequality within the overall
framework of achieving people-centred sustainable development;
(c) Design and strengthen poverty eradication strategies, with the full and
effective participation of women, that reduce the feminization of poverty and
enhance the capacity of women and empower them to meet the negative social and
economic impacts of globalization;
(d) Intensify efforts to implement poverty eradication programmes and
evaluate, with the participation of women, the extent to which these programmes
have an impact on the empowerment of women living in poverty, in terms of access
to quality training and education as well as physical and mental health care,
employment, basic social services, inheritance and access to and control over land,
housing, income, microcredit and other financial instruments and services, and
introduce improvements to such programmes in the light of the above assessment;
(e) Recognizing the mutually reinforcing links between gender equality and
poverty eradication, elaborate and implement, where appropriate, in consultation
with civil society, comprehensive gender-sensitive poverty eradication strategies
addressing social, structural and macroeconomic issues;
(f) Encourage the establishment, in partnership with private financial
institutions, where appropriate, of “lending windows” and other accessible financial
services with simplified procedures that are specifically designed to meet the
savings, credit and insurance needs of all women;
(g) Undertake comprehensive actions to provide and support quality skills
training for women and girls at all levels, on the basis of strategies developed with
their full and effective participation, to achieve agreed targets to eradicate poverty,
in particular the feminization of poverty, through national, regional and international
efforts. National efforts need to be complemented by intensified regional and
international cooperation in order to tackle the risks, overcome the challenges and
ensure that opportunities created by globalization benefit women, particularly in
developing countries;
(h) Establish, with the full and effective participation of women and in
consultation with civil society, particularly non-governmental organizations, in a
timely manner, social development funds, where appropriate, to alleviate the
negative effects on women associated with structural adjustment programmes and
trade liberalization and the disproportionate burden borne by women living in
poverty;

40

A/RES/S-23/3

(i) Identify and implement development-oriented and durable solutions
which integrate a gender perspective to external debt and debt-servicing problems of
developing countries, including least developed countries, inter alia, through debt
relief, including the option of official development assistance debt cancellation, in
order to help them to finance programmes and projects targeted at development,
including the advancement of women;
(j) Support the Cologne initiative for the reduction of debt, particularly the
speedy implementation of the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative; ensure the provision of adequate funds for its implementation and
implement the provision that funds saved should be used to support anti-poverty
programmes that address gender dimensions;
(k) Promote and accelerate the implementation of the 20/20 initiative, which
integrates a gender perspective to fully benefit all, particularly women and girls;
(l) Call for continued international cooperation, including the reaffirmation
to strive to fulfil the yet to be attained internationally agreed target of 0.7 per cent of
the gross national product of developed countries for overall official development
assistance as soon as possible, thereby increasing the flow of resources for gender
equality, development and peace;
(m) Facilitate the transfer to developing countries and countries with
economies in transition of appropriate technology, particularly new and modern
technology, and encourage efforts by the international community to eliminate
restrictions on such transfers, as an effective means of complementing national
efforts for further acceleration in achieving the goals of gender equality,
development and peace;
(n) Recommend that the Preparatory Committee for the Millennium
Assembly make an effort, within the context of gender mainstreaming in the United
Nations system, to integrate a gender perspective in all activities and documents
related to the Millennium Assembly and Summit, including in the consideration of
poverty eradication;
(o) Create an enabling environment and design and implement policies that
promote and protect the enjoyment of all human rights — civil, cultural, economic,
political and social rights, including the right to development — and fundamental
freedoms, as part of the efforts to achieve gender equality, development and peace.
102. (a) Create and strengthen an enabling environment, in accordance with
national laws, to support the capacity of women’s non-governmental organizations
to mobilize resources to ensure the sustainability of their development activities;
(b) Encourage the establishment and strengthening of multi-stakeholder
partnerships/cooperation at all levels among international and intergovernmental
organizations, with relevant actors of civil society, including non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and trade unions, and women’s organizations and
other non-governmental organizations, communications and media systems in
support of the goals of the Fourth World Conference on Women;
(c) Encourage partnerships and cooperation among Governments,
international organizations, in particular international financial institutions, and
multilateral organizations, private sector institutions and civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, especially women’s and community-based
organizations, to support poverty eradication initiatives focused on women and girls;

41

A/RES/S-23/3

(d) Recognize the crucial role of and support women and women’s nongovernmental organizations and community-based organizations in the
implementation of Agenda 21, 18 by integrating a gender perspective in the
formulation, design and implementation of sustainable environmental and resource
management mechanisms, programmes and infrastructure.
103. (a) Promote programmes for healthy active ageing that stress the
independence, equality, participation and security of older women and undertake
gender-specific research and programmes to address their needs;
(b) As a matter of priority, especially in those countries most affected, and in
partnership with non-governmental organizations, wherever possible, intensify
education, services and community-based mobilization strategies to protect women
of all ages from HIV and other sexually transmitted infections, including through
the development of safe, affordable, effective and easily accessible femalecontrolled methods, including such methods as microbicides and female condoms
that protect against sexually transmitted infections and HIV/AIDS; voluntary and
confidential HIV testing and counselling; the promotion of responsible sexual
behaviour, including abstinence and condom use; and the development of vaccines,
simple low-cost diagnosis and single dose treatments for sexually transmitted
infections;
(c) Provide access to adequate and affordable treatment, monitoring and care
for all people, especially women and girls, infected with sexually transmitted
diseases or living with life-threatening diseases, including HIV/AIDS and associated
opportunistic infections, such as tuberculosis. Provide other services, including
adequate housing and social protection, including during pregnancy and
breastfeeding; assist boys and girls orphaned as a result of the HIV/AIDS pandemic;
and provide gender-sensitive support systems for women and other family members
who are involved in caring for persons affected by serious health conditions,
including HIV/AIDS;
(d) Take effective and expeditious measures to mobilize international and
national public opinion concerning the effects of different dimensions of the world
drug problem on women and girls and ensure that appropriate resources are provided
to this end.
104. Encourage partnerships between Governments and non-governmental
organizations in the implementation of commitments made at the Fourth World
Conference on Women and at other United Nations world conferences and summits
in order to promote gender equality, development and peace in the twenty-first
century.

18

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I, Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

42
