S/PV.7485

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7485th meeting

Wednesday, 15 July 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Van Bohemen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(New Zealand)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Šorytė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Ths situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-21952 (E)
*1521952*

S/PV.7485

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Bernardino
León, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Bernardino León and by Ambassador
Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, in his capacity as the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. León.
Mr. León: Since my last briefing to the Council
(S/PV.7398), the situation in Libya has continued to
deteriorate amidst significant political fragmentation
and violence. Too many Libyans have died in a fight
among brothers, and far too much destruction has taken
place. The chaos on the ground has also given way to
the expansion of extremist groups, including Daesh
affiliates, into a number of areas across the country.
This vacuum of authority has also been exploited by
human smugglers, and many refugees, asylum seekers
and migrants are using the country as a launching area
for an unprecedented surge in dangerous crossings of
the Mediterranean.
The Libyan people have been crying out for an
end to the chaos. I am pleased to report today that this
message has been heard by a number of courageous
Libyan leaders, who, on 11 July, in Skhirat, Morocco,
initialled a political agreement. This act signalled
the adoption of a framework for further talks and
has brought the country one step closer to ending the
conflict and fulfilling the goals of the 2011 revolution.
While some members of the dialogue were
not present, the message in Skhirat was one of
reconciliation and encouragement for all Libyans to

2/8

15/07/2015

join together to end the unnecessary state of affairs and
suffering. The agreement was initialled by the dialogue
committee of the Libyan House of Representatives,
boycotting members of the House of Representatives
and independent personalities, as well as a number of
representatives of political parties and of municipalities
from eastern and western Libya who witnessed a
ceremony that was attended by the Foreign Minister of
Morocco.
The initialling of the agreement is only one albeit
important step forward in the process of addressing
the political and institutional divisions. This initialling
also marks a consensus on the text among the parties,
with the clear understanding that it will not be further
amended, without prejudice to the negotiations on its
annexes.
The agreement sets out a comprehensive framework
that will allow Libya to complete the transition that
started in 2011. The text includes guiding principles
and puts in place institutions and decision-making
mechanisms to steer the transition until the adoption
of a permanent constitution. It is intended to culminate
in the creation of a modern, democratic State based on
the principle of inclusion, the rule of law, separation of
powers and respect for human rights.
I want to praise the Libyan participants for their
achievement after months of tough negotiations. It is a
Libyan agreement, developed by Libyan representatives
through their relentless efforts and political
determination. The multiple tracks of this process
sought to involve all segments of Libyan society, from
municipal representatives to political parties, women
and activists who have been engaged since January and
gathered in Algeria, Egypt, Tunisia, Switzerland and
Morocco, and at the European Union in Brussels.
As members of the Council know, the dialogue
committee of the General National Congress decided not
to initial the agreement, although it remains committed
to the dialogue process. As I mentioned in Skhirat, I
want to emphasize that the door remains open for them
to join. I also wish to emphasize and acknowledge their
important role in developing the text. The agreement
is also the fruit of their hard work, and they should not
be on the sidelines as the shared vision for a solution to
the crisis continues to take shape. The Libyan people
have unequivocally expressed themselves as favouring
peace, and I am confident that moderate voices will
hear the call and work constructively to end the conflict

15-21952

15/07/2015

The situation in Libya

S/PV.7485

and bring Libya back to the path of stability, democratic
transition and economic recovery.

Council of Mujahedin in Derna ejected Daesh from the
city in June.

Through the agreement, which has received strong
support from the international community, important
progress has been made. But I shall not shy away from
underscoring that crucial work remains to be done to
complete this first and significant development. As
we move on to the next phase of negotiations, on the
formation of a Government of national accord and
the annexes to the agreement, I am confident that all
remaining issues will be addressed. The Libyan people
deserve a strong Government representing all Libyans,
a Government that the international community can
and will support, to address the many challenges that
the country is facing.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has continued its efforts to convene the
security track of the political dialogue. For that purpose,
the Mission has organized a number of meetings with
armed groups in Libya and abroad, and intensified
its regular bilateral contacts with leaders of armed
formations from all sides. We expect to have meetings
in the coming weeks in Egypt and other countries of
the region, and to convene the track of tribal leaders in
Egypt, whose role has been equally important.

Allow me to express my earnest gratitude to
Morocco and all of Libya’s neighbours for their
support and generosity in hosting the many sessions
of the dialogue. Their support, and that of many other
countries, such as Algeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and the United Arab Emirates, as well as the League
of Arab States and the European Union, has been
crucial in building consensus throughout the process.
I also wish to thank the African Union and the forum
of Libya’s neighbouring countries for their support and
for having provided important opportunities for crucial
discussions and exchanges.
In western Libya, local ceasefires and reconciliation
agreements have improved the security situation
and allowed for an improvement in the humanitarian
situation. A growing rapprochement between the cities
of Misrata, Warshafana, Al-Zawiya and Zintan has
been instrumental in facilitating the ceasefires.
In central Libya, Daesh-affiliated militants
established full control over the city of Sirte and the
surrounding coastal area. Misrata forces withdrew to
the area of Abu Grain, some 75 kilometres east of Sirte,
but continue to carry out air strikes and to block the
Daesh advances westward. The prevailing political and
security divisions within the country have prevented
the development of a coordinated policy to deal with
the threat of Daesh affiliates.
In Benghazi, clashes between the Shura Council
of Benghazi Revolutionaries and Operation Dignity
continue, with neither side making significant gains.
The Shura Council of Benghazi Revolutionaries’ early
July offensive has not changed the situation on the
ground. In Derna, hard-line Islamists from the Shura

The role of security actors is another important
part of the overall reconciliation effort and will
be instrumental in sustaining, supporting and
implementing the political agreement. We have listened
to their concerns and taken on board their contributions,
and it is my intention to convene all those involved in
security before the final signing of the agreement.
With respect to the human rights situation in
the country, violations and abuses of international
human rights and humanitarian law have continued
to take place with impunity across Libya, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the protracted
fighting. In Benghazi, where fighting has again
escalated in recent days, the shelling of residential
areas has led to the killing and injury of children and
medical workers, as well as to further destruction of
the civilian infrastructure. The two main hospitals
still functioning, the Benghazi Medical Centre and
the Jalaa hospital, have been hit. Armed men wielding
hand grenades reportedly entered the Medical Centre
on 5 July, threatening doctors and other staff. A number
of civilians are believed to be trapped, including in
Al-Blaad and Al-Sabri, as the warring parties fail to
ensure their safe evacuation. More than half of the
population in Benghazi is estimated to have left in
a bid to escape the violence, and ongoing fighting is
impeding humanitarian relief operations. The situation
in Benghazi, birthplace of the revolution, remains of
serious concern. We must refocus our efforts on that
city in particular to try to put an end to the fighting,
which has caused so much destruction.
In western Libya, periodic outbursts of fighting,
including in residential areas, have led to the killing and
injury of civilians, including children, in the cities of
Al-Zawiya and Al-Ajailat. Armed groups have targeted
individuals because of their family or perceived
political affiliations. Thousands of Libyans remain

15-219523/8

S/PV.7485

The situation in Libya

illegally detained, including detainees have reportedly
been tortured. They include people held solely based
on their family or tribal identity, and many have been
abducted for the purpose of exchanging them for
fighters. Also among them are humanitarian workers.
I was encouraged by the recent release of prisoners in
various cities during the past weeks. However, all those
illegally detained should be released without further
delay. I have urged all parties to do so before the end
of Ramadan. Such measures are not only a matter of
human rights; they could also contribute significantly
to facilitating the next phase of the political dialogue
and to reconciliation.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the plight
of foreign nationals, especially irregular migrants from
sub-Saharan Africa, who remain vulnerable to killings,
prolonged arbitrary detention, exploitation and sexual
violence, among other abuses. A number of non-Muslim
migrant workers remain missing after having being
abducted around Sirte in previous months. I fear for
their safety after Daesh released videos in February
and April 2015 depicting the brutal killings of some 50
Christians.
The lack of security impedes the resumption of the
work of the judiciary in Benghazi, Derna and Sirte. In
Tripoli, the final session of the trial of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, Abdullah Al-Senussi and 35 other former
regime officials for violations committed during the
2011 conflict took place on 20 May, and the verdict
is still expected on 28 July. Libya must overcome this
dark chapter in its history by holding those responsible
for serious crimes accountable in accordance with
international standards for due process and fair trial.
The overall humanitarian situation continues to
cause concern. The number of internally displaced
persons has doubled since September 2014, and there
has been an underfunded humanitarian response.
Awbari, Ghat and other areas of the south that
require assistance remain largely inaccessible to the
international humanitarian community as a result of
deteriorating security conditions.
Libya is at a critical stage, and it is my duty to seize
this opportunity in addressing the Council to urge all
parties in Libya to continue to engage constructively
in the dialogue process. Spoilers should be held
accountable because they bear the responsibility of
hindering the political agreement. Once again, we
must join together to send an unequivocal message that
only through dialogue and political compromise can
4/8

15/07/2015

a peaceful resolution of the conflict be achieved. A
peaceful transition will succeed in Libya only through
a significant and coordinated effort in supporting a
future Government of national accord and by ensuring
that sufficient security is achieved in Tripoli and
throughout the country so that the key functions of the
public administration can resume. A Government of
national accord is the only interlocutor through which
the growing threat of Daesh and its affiliate groups can
be effectively tackled.
I am confident that the international community is
ready to offer the needed support based on the priorities
that the Libyans will identify. The United Nations
stands ready to work with the Libyans to ensure national
ownership in that process.
The President: I thank Mr. León for his briefing
and commend him and his team for the very valuable
work they have been undertaking on behalf of the
United Nations.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
that resolution concerning Libya. My report covers the
period from 5 March to 15 July 2015, during which time
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations.
At the outset, I would like to briefly touch upon
the activities of the Committee related to the six
recommendations contained in the final report
(S/2015/128) of the Panel of Experts under resolution
2144 (2014) on which the Committee had agreed to
follow-up action.
On 26 March, the Committee updated its sanctions
list, incorporating information provided by the Panel
on the existing entries in the list in its final report.
On 14 April, the Committee sent a letter to the
Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations requesting to be informed about ports, oil
fields and installations that are under the control of the
Government of Libya, in the light of the measures put
in place by resolution 2146 (2014) concerning attempts
to illicitly export crude oil from Libya. On 22 April, the
Permanent Representative of Libya provided relevant
information. He further explained that the National
Oil Corporation, represented by its head, who is based

15-21952

15/07/2015

The situation in Libya

in Benghazi, was the only body authorized to sell oil
and gas. On 5 May, the Committee responded to the
Permanent Representative of Libya and encouraged the
Libyan Government to provide regular updates on this
issue to the Committee.
On 16 April, the Committee dispatched a note
verbale to all Member States drawing attention to two
recommendations of the Panel related to arms brokering
activities and cargo inspections, reminding Member
States of their obligations under resolution 2213 (2015)
regarding cargo inspections and encouraging Member
States with the necessary expertise and resources to
assist those Member States that lack the legal capacity
to implement the assets freeze measure.
On 21 May, the Committee wrote to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Bernardino León, regarding the facilitation of Panel
access to Libya and invited him to brief the Committee.
The Committee received a response on 9 June.
Allow me to now provide a brief overview of the
Committee’s other activities during the reporting
period. On 16 April, the Committee approved the slate
of proposed candidates to serve on the Panel of Experts
on Libya during the period mandated by resolution
2213 (2015).
On 21 May, the Committee received a letter from
the Panel containing an update on an investigation
relating to the freezing of the assets of an individual,
purportedly in relation to the Libya sanctions regime,
but who had, in fact, not been designated under the
assets freeze measure by the Committee.
On 2 June, the Committee started the consideration
of proposals for the designation of two individuals under
the assets freeze and travel ban measures. However,
these proposals were subsequently put on hold.
On 8 June, the Committee held informal
consultations to hear from the Panel of Experts on its
work plan. The Committee further discussed the issue
of sanctions designations.
Since the Chair’s most recent periodic report to the
Council (see S/PV.7398) in relation to the arms embargo,
the Committee responded in two cases that the items to
be supplied did not require approval, given that they
constituted non-lethal military equipment under the
terms of paragraphs 9 and 10, respectively, of resolution
2095 (2013). In the first instance, the Committee urged

S/PV.7485

the supplying State and the recipient organization to
exercise caution and due diligence to guard against
possible misuse or diversion of the materiel. In the
second, the Committee urged the recipient State to take
all the necessary steps to guard against any possible
diversion.
Furthermore, no negative decision was taken by
the Committee in connection with an arms embargo
notification under paragraph 13 (b) of resolution 2009
(2011). The Committee also started the consideration of
an arms embargo exemption request, under paragraph 13
(a) of resolution 2009 (2011), as modified by paragraph
8 of resolution 2174 (2014), which was subsequently
put on hold. The Committee further exchanged letters
with four Member States in follow-up to a request for
guidance on the arms embargo submitted by a Member
State regarding non-lethal military materiel it had
seized.
In relation to the assets freeze, the Committee
responded to a request for guidance regarding an entity
on its sanctions list and responded to a note verbale
received from a Member State regarding a subsidiary
of an entity on its list.
The President: I thank Mr. Ibrahim for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Allow me to thank Ambassador Ramlan
Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of Malaysia,
for his report as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I
would also like to thank Mr. Bernardino León, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
important briefing. I congratulate him on his courage,
persistence and patience. I would congratulate him and
his team in particular for their achievements thus far in
a complicated and difficult mission.
Allow me to stress to Mr. León that the Libyan
Government supports the efforts that he and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya are making to assist
Libyan parties in reaching full agreement on the various
issues that would pave the way towards the creation of
a Government of national accord, which would stem
the bloodshed, enable Libya to emerge from its crisis,
guarantee security for Libyan citizens and revive their
hope of achieving what they fought for in the revolution
of 17 February.

15-219525/8

S/PV.7485

The situation in Libya

15/07/2015

Allow me to begin by addressing the issue of the
Sanctions Committee. Regrettably — and I would say
this frankly — the Committee has indirectly contributed
to continuing instability and further entrenched
terrorism in Libya by insisting on an undeclared veto on
providing weapons to the Libyan army, in contradiction
of paragraph 7 of resolution 2214 (2015), in which the
Council:

obtained agreement. We hope that the Committee will
change its practices and take into consideration the fact
that transparency and cooperation with the Missions of
the States concerned, and, indeed, respect for all the
provisions of the relevant Security Council resolutions,
is the ideal way to make the sanctions regime effective
and to ensure that any new sanctions, if imposed, are
imposed correctly.

“Calls upon the Committee established
pursuant to paragraph 24 of resolution 1970 (2011)
to consider expeditiously requests under paragraph
8 of resolution 2174 (2014) for the transfer or
supply of arms and related materiel, including
related ammunition and spare parts, to the Libyan
Government for the use by its official armed forces
to combat ISIL, groups that pledged allegiance to
ISIL, Ansar Al Charia, and all other individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities associated with
Al-Qaida operating in Libya”.

Libya has suffered four years of security and
institutional chaos, a year of civil war and fratricide
for no reason other than the wish of those who claim to
represent Islam to hold onto power to control various
institutions of the Libyan State and its resources. That
has led to the displacement of one third of Libyan
citizens, the wide-ranging destruction of infrastructure
and grave losses in terms of State resources.
Undoubtedly, the political agreement reached in
Skhirat, Morocco, is a major achievement that paves
the way for a peaceful solution that stresses the unity of
the Libyan people and the integrity of Libyan soil and
that ensures State sovereignty throughout its territory,
preserves the rights of all Libyans, ensures the return
of internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes in conditions of safety, and closes the door to any
potential return of the previous regime or dictatorship,
under any form.

The practices of the Sanctions Committee are in
full contradiction with the provisions of that paragraph.
The Libyan Government’s request to the Committee on
26 February 2015 was met with a decision three weeks
later by the Committee that it was to be put on hold
until further information was provided. On the very
next day, 17 March 2015, we provided the information
requested by the Committee. We stressed that delivery
would be made based on payments over six months.
Nevertheless, that request was totally ignored, and we
have yet to receive a response from the Committee.
This shows clearly that there is a premeditated effort
to hamper the efforts of the Libyan Government to
strengthen its capacity to combat terrorism and extend
its authority to all of Libyan territory.
Regrettably, there is also a communication problem
between the Committee and the Libyan Mission. For
example, a proposal was made to list Libyan citizens
on the sanctions list without officially notifying the
Libyan Mission or seeking the opinion of the Libyan
Government on the accuracy of the information
provided, or indeed as to whether the timing was
appropriate for the Security Council to take such a step.
To date we have not indicated that the procedures of
the Committee serve the interests of the Libyan people.
One month after a request was made for exception
from the arms embargo, although we responded to
all clarification requests and indeed suggested that
observers be dispatched to ensure that weapons would
be delivered only to regular army units, we have not
6/8

Most Libyans undoubtedly welcome the agreement
and look forward to the implementation of all its
provisions as soon as possible. However, we must not
look to the Skhirat agreement as being the goal; it is but
a path to a goal, a path that is replete with obstacles that
will require major efforts on the part of both the Libyan
people and the United Nations to overcome.
There are personal interests, and there are extremist
and terrorist groups that certainly do not believe in
democracy or the nation State. Some of those remain
a core component within the Libyan Dawn militia
alliance, which controls and occupies the capital,
Tripoli, refuses to sign the agreement and indeed bets
on its failure.
Therefore the agreement remains conditioned
on the resolve of the international community in
convincing all sides and compelling them to commit
to the agreement. It depends on the efforts being made
to implement it in good faith and providing a safe
environment for the work of the Government of national
unity. Furthermore, they need to provide support to the
Government to accelerate the rebuilding of a strong
army, under civilian control, as well as arming the
15-21952

15/07/2015

The situation in Libya

police and security forces and ensuring their return to
work.
Some positive developments have taken place
in the past few weeks. They make us more hopeful
that common sense will prevail and that there will
be a general commitment to the agreement and its
implementation. I wish to mention the following points.
First, the Misrata brigades have withdrawn
from the areas west of Tripoli. There is a popular
movement in the city of Misrata calling for accord and
for an end to war. There is a pragmatic, reasonable
movement of accord among militias in the western part
of the country, a part of which seems to include the
beginning of the breakdown of relations between the
Libya Dawn militias among extremists and moderates.
However, there also seems to be an attempt to abort
that movement by stressing the association among
moderates and extremists. Indeed, the Italian television
station Canale 7 recently broadcast a report stressing
that weapons continued to flow across the sea from
Misrata to the extremist militias that call themselves
the Benghazi Revolutionaries Shura Council; that
group includes Ansar al-Sharia and Al-Qaida elements,
and it is a movement that since its creation has rejected
democracy. That is clear from the report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2015/128).
The second element is an agreement between
certain militias in the western region to cease hostilities
and to allow the deployment of the army and the police
in some areas, as well as an exchange of detainees, and
allowing the army to enter three areas without a shot
being fired.
Thirdly, there is discord and infighting between the
Daesh militias and the Al-Qaida-associated militias in
the city of Derna, although they have similar ideologies
and they continue to be allied in other areas against the
army, particularly in Benghazi.
Unlike the Daesh militias, the Al-Qaida-associated
militias are present in a number of Libyan cities,
whether as individual militias or within the so-called
Mujahedeen Consultative Council. They have strong
support in terms of money and weapons from illegitimate
authorities in the capital, Tripoli, and certain States,
and they obtain funds from the Libyan central bank.
There is no doubt that some members of the Security
Council are well aware of who leads Al-Qaida in Libya,
who provides weapons to Al-Qaida and, indeed, who
supports its political leadership. Surely this must end.

S/PV.7485

The alliance of malevolent forces from abroad has
been able to deceive many Libyan youths by raising
fears of the return of the previous regime, calling for
respect for, and the application of, the rules of Islam,
and by tempting them with money. They have made
them fodder for a savage war against the State — against
their very brothers — with the aim of ensuring that
terrorism could ultimately strengthen its hold over the
Libyan people, throwing Libyans from their homes,
stealing their money and destroying their property,
and ultimately occupying the capital. Having failed
to achieve any measure of success in the elections,
they have also resorted to every means to destroy the
elected Assembly of Deputies. Perhaps it is a source
of optimism that certain militias and some youths have
come to realize the facts of the matter and have begun
to disassociate themselves from extremist militias
associated with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida and even Ansar al-Sharia. We hope that the
establishment of a Government of national unity will
be a historic opportunity for all Libyans to reaffirm
their love for their homeland, their mutual respect and
their desire for reconciliation and tolerance with their
brothers, and their wish to heal the wounds of the nation
and come together to save the country from the mire of
terrorism and backwardness and turn towards a better
future for all.
Combating terrorism cannot entail just an ad hoc
response to attacks and criminal acts by terrorist groups.
Fighting terrorism must be based on a clear strategy and
policy built upon a real awareness of the threat. That
implies mobilizing all material and human resources
in every Libyan city in order to combat terrorist
groups and thwart all individuals, States and entities
that provide assistance and support to terrorists. The
time has come for the Security Council to realize the
difference between those who fight to uproot terrorism
as a strategic choice in the interests of the entire Libyan
people — and who say so clearly and honestly, as is the
case in Benghazi — and those who have been forced
to become involved with terrorist groups because they
have been coerced or because they seek to safeguard
their spheres of influence, as is the case in Sirte.
Every passing day without Libyan unity in combating
terrorism, without facilitating the provision of weapons
to the Libyan army and without concrete support
from the international community to the legitimate
authorities, serves as another opportunity for terrorist
groups to become stronger by acquiring ever more
weapons and drawing in more foreign fighters to Libya.

15-219527/8

S/PV.7485

The situation in Libya

The longer that the Security Council turns a blind eye
to the support provided to terrorist groups in Libya
by certain countries, the more the Libyan crisis will
escalate, the more the threat to neighbouring States will
increase and the more distant the hope for achieving the
aspirations of the Libyan people as expressed by way of
their revolt against dictatorship.
Regrettably, the extremists and their allies have thus
far refused to sign the Skhirat agreement. They have
been emboldened by the foot-dragging in the Security
Council on the issue of arming the Libyan army, by the
fact that they are receiving more money and weapons
from their allies abroad and by the emerging desire of

8/8

15/07/2015

the legitimate Government to avoid the use of force to
re-enter the capital and extend its authority over all of
Libyan territory. We hope this situation will change
through the taking of effective and practical steps by
the Security Council and the international community
as soon as possible to strengthen the capacities of the
Libyan army and by becoming directly involved in
combating terrorism.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m

15-21952
