S/2006/260

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 April 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 25 April 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the decision of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union adopted at its 40th meeting, on 6 October 2005, in Addis Ababa
and to Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) of 21 October 2005, under which an
international working group was created to assist the Government of Côte d’Ivoire
in the implementation of the peace process and the preparation of free, fair, open
and transparent elections.
Please find attached the text of the communiqué issued by the International
Working Group following its sixth ministerial meeting, held in Abidjan on 20 April
2006.
I should be grateful if you would bring this communiqué to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-32512 (E) 260406

*0632512*

S/2006/260

Annex
[Original: English and French]

Final communiqué of the sixth ministerial meeting of
the International Working Group on Côte d’Ivoire
Abidjan, 20 April 2006
1.
The sixth ministerial level meeting of the International Working Group was
held in Abidjan on 20 April 2006, under the co-chairmanship of H.E. Mr. Rodolphe
Adada, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Francophonie of the Congo, and Mr. Pierre
Schori, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Côte d’Ivoire. In
attendance were Ministers from France, Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria and South Africa,
as well as the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, the High
Representative for the Elections in Côte d’Ivoire, the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and representatives of
Benin, Niger, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, the African
Union, the European Union and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie.
2.
The Group examined the report of the Mediation Group. It was further briefed
by the Prime Minister, the General Coordinator of the National Programme for
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration, the Chairman of the Independent
Electoral Commission, and the acting Chairman of the National Commission for
Supervision of Identification.
3.
While highlighting the progress achieved, the Group expressed its deep
concern regarding the delays encountered in the commencement of the activities
essential to the effective implementation of the road map. In this regard, the Group
underlined that, midway through the process, time is running out. The Group also
shares the concern of the Secretary-General as expressed in paragraph 74 of his
eighth report on the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
(S/2006/222), about the delay in the peace process and the consequences that would
arise from any further blockages if deadlines were not met.
4.
Bearing in mind the urgency of the matter, and in keeping with the deadlines
set by Security Council resolution 1633 (2005) regarding the holding of the
elections no later than 31 October 2006, the Group stressed the following:
(a) The Group recalled that the main Ivorian political leaders agreed, at their
meeting held on 8 April under the auspices of President Denis Sassou-Nguesso,
Chairman of the African Union, on the simultaneous and immediate implementation
of the identification and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes;
(b) To that end, the Government of National Reconciliation should take all
necessary measures to accelerate the simultaneous implementation of the
identification and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes;
(c) The identification of citizens will allow the establishment of reliable
voter lists, which should contribute to the holding of free, fair, open and transparent
elections;
(d) The Group is concerned about the suspension of the dialogue between the
Chiefs of Staff of the National Armed Forces of Côte d’Ivoire (FANCI) and the
Forces nouvelles and strongly encourages them to restore, under the leadership of

2

S/2006/260

the Government, the conditions necessary for its smooth continuation, with a view
to ensuring the effective commencement of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and the dismantling of the militia, without further delay;
(e) The successful implementation of the identification and disarmament
processes calls for the active and irreversible commitment of the political leaders. In
this regard, the Group urges all Ivorian parties to sensitize their followers to the
pressing need to abide by all commitments made during the Yamoussoukro I and II
meetings.
5.
In the light of persistent violations of resolutions 1633 (2005) and 1643
(2005), as highlighted in the eighth report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on UNOCI, the Group invites the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004) concerning Côte d’Ivoire to identify the
perpetrators and not to hesitate to resort to appropriate measures.
6.
The Group welcomed Mr. Gérard Stoudmann in his capacity as the new High
Representative for the elections in Côte d’Ivoire. The Group invites all Ivorian
parties to cooperate with him with a view to accelerating the preparations leading to
the holding of credible elections.
7.
The Group welcomes the redeployment of UNOCI troops to the western part
of the country and requests the local authorities and communities to continue to
cooperate closely with the United Nations mission, including respecting the freedom
of movement of the impartial forces.
8.
The Group recommends that the Security Council provide UNOCI, as soon as
possible, with the additional means necessary to achieve its mandate.
9.

The Group will hold its next meeting on 19 May 2006 in Côte d’Ivoire.

3
