UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

1I FEBRUARY

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2412). , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Expression of thanks to the retiring President. , . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . , . . , , . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

I

. . . . . . . . a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . I ,........

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (5115481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of the
Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires nd irztcr’im of the
Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15599) . , . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2412

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions ad
Decisions of tlze Securify Cow&.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, berame fully operative
on that date,

2412th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 11 February 1983, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich
TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of the Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Charge
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15599)

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Zaire, Zimbabwe.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russia~z):
with
decisions
taken
at the
In accordance
2401st meeting,
I invite the representatives
of
Morocco, the Niger and Senegal to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber;
I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to take a place at the Council
table.

agenda (S/Agenda/2412)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15481); *
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of the Niger to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15483);
Letter dated 8 February 1983 from the Chargk
d’affaires nd interim of the Permanent
Mission of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/1.5599)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mrani Zentar
(Morocco),
Mr. Oumarou (Niger) and Mr. Saw&
(Senegal) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber; Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took a pluce at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
I should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Egypt, India, the
Syrian Arab Republic,
Yemen and Yugoslavia in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meetir?g was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

I. The PRESIDENT
linterp,‘Ptcrfiorl j?om Russian):
I should iike at the very outset to pay a rribute to
Mr. Atsu-Koffi Amega, representative of Togo, for his
service as President of the Council for the month
of January. I am sure I am speaking for all members of
the Council in expressing to Mr. Amega deep gratitude
for the great diplomatic skill, tact and courtesy with
which he guided the Council’s work last month.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Khalil
(Egypt), Mr. Krishnarz (India), Mr. El-Fattal (Syria/z
Arab Republic), Mr. Sallam (Yemen) and Mr. Golob
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved.for them. at the
side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT
(iizterpretation from Russian):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received a letter dated II February [S/15604]
from the representative
of Jordan which reads as
follows:

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/lS481);

“I have the honour to request the Security
Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the
1

process that, from their point of view, is irrevocable
and that culminates eventually in annexation and the
mass expulsion of the population and in depriving thal
population of its homeland.

item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab
in accordance with rule 39 of the
territories’,
provisional rules of procedure”.
5. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to the request.

12. In contravention of the principles of international
law and the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,’ the
Israelis put forward exclusivist and selective interpretations of the law of nations, just as the Nazis did
during the Second World War-and
you, Mr. President, know full well what nazism means-when they
deprived the people of Eastern Europe of human or
legal protection under the pretext that those people
were savages and uncivilized. Thus today the Israeli
colonialists resort to the same racist pretexts to deny
the rights of the Arab people to legal protection.

It was so decided.

6. The PRESIDENT
(intctpretntiorz
j?om Russian):
Members will recall that the Council considered this
item at the 2401st meeting, on 12 November 1982. The
Council resumes its consideration of the matter today
in response to the request contained in a letter dated
8 February 1983 from the Charge d’affaires ad ilzter’irn
of the Permanent Mission of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council [Sll5599].

13. The charter of the Nazi Herut Party, which is the
largest party in the ruling Likud coalition in Israel,
provides that all Palestine, in addition to the East Bank
of the Jordan, is Jewish territory. This slogan was
chanted at the headquarters of the Herut Party by
Begin’s supporters during the elections that he won in
1977:

7. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following documents:
S/15488,
which contains the text of a letter dated 12 November
1982 from the representative of Jordan to the President
of the Council; S/15.510, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 December from the representative
of
Morocco to the Secretary-General;
S/15572, which
contains the text of a letter dated 21 January 1983 from
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed
to the Secretary-General; S/15.574, which contains the
text of a letter dated 24 January from the representative of Jordan to the Secretary-General;
and S/15576,
which contains the text of a letter dated 27 January
from the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the Secretary-General.

“This one is ours and that one too.“*
14. And in the second paragraph of the so-called
guiding principles, the Government
of Israel stales
that “the Jewish people has an unquestionable historical right to the land of Israel, the bequest of 0111
forefathers”.
15. It is on this illusory basis that Begin’s GOVLTIImen’-which
is no different from the previous, Labour
Party, Governments
of Israel, which ruled Isrnel
through Zionist dogma-declares
that the West Bank
is not an occupied territory, but rather a “liberated
territory”.
That claim runs counter to the most
rudimentary principles and norms of international lnw,
as adopted by the international
community,
represented in the United Nations.

8. The first speaker is the representative
of the
Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
9.

Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (i/zterfrom Arabic): Mr. President, allow me to
express to you our great esteem for your friendly
country, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. My
delegation takes great pleasure in seeing you presiding
over the Council this month, with your well-known
diplomatic expertise and broad experience and great
objectivity.

pretation

16. Every crimin’al has his own way of justifying his
crime, but the worst excuses are those which ascribe
the crime to divine causes. The fact is that all religions
and beliefs teach us that all hutnan beings are equa!,
and we firmly believe in our common humanity. But
the Zionists believe that the world is divided into :i
“select klite” and an inferior class, the common
people. We are taught that man was created in God’s
image, but Begin, Sharon and Shamir are trying today
to impose a new concept upon us: that the Lord w;1s
created in their image. What a disgrace it is that they
debase the Lord and compare him to a real estate
broker or a travel agent or an advocate of’ settler
colonialism. What a disgrace it is, especially to do SO
before the Council. What a disgrace!

10. I should like also to express to my colleague
Mr. Atsu-Koffi Amega of Togo our sincere congratulations and our appreciation of his outstanding wisdom
and competence.
11. Today the Council is continuing its consideration
of the Israeli racist settler practices in the occupied
Arab territories. The Council today faces the strategy
of ’ ‘leaping’ ’ annexation, which was in the past
preceded by the strategy of “creeping”
annexation.
The Israeli usurpers are no longer content with
creating,fi&
acconrplis on the land inch by inch but
now are sadistically involved in an expansionist

* Quoted

2

in English

by the speaker.

17. For all believers in ethics and justice, the worst
thing of.all has been the publication of advertisements
on the real estate pages of major American and Israeli
newspapers offering the usurped Arab territories in the
West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights to wealthy
Western investors born of Jewish mothers. That is a
subterfuge that not even the most extreme Afrikaner
would dare to resort to in South Africa to justify the
expropriation
of a territory or the exploitation
of its
natural resources.

22. Israel’s persistence in its policy of changing the
demographic and geographical nature of the occupied
Arab territories-a
policy which constitutes a violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and of
General Assembly and Security Council resolutionscan only aggravate the tension and the volatile
situation prevailing in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the occupied Syrian territories and inside and
outside Palestine.
23. In the Golan Heights, the Israeli occupation
authorities have persisted in their brutal practices
against our people in that occupied territory, thereby
attempting to stifle any opposition to their designs
for settlement and occupation.
In a release dated
8 December, a French news agency stated that the
Zionist occupation forces had arrested seven citizens
in the Golan Heights, a fact that was confirmed by the
Zionist security organs. Five of those arrested were
from the village of Majdelshams
and two from the
village of Bakaata. They had been arrested because
of their opposition to the occupation and annexation of
the Golan Heights and the imposition
of Zionist
colonial status upon them. On 22 December the
Zionist occupation authorities stormed the village of
Majdelshams with tanks, armoured cars and heiicopters and laid siege to it. The Zionist forces searched
the houses, carrying out a campaign of terror and
humiliation
against men, women, children and the
elderly, because as Syrian nationals they had rejected
the Zionist regulations imposed by the occupation
authorities in an attempt to undermine their national
resistance,

18. By September 1982 the number of Israeli colonialist settlements in the West Bank and Gaza had
reached 139, and the number in the Syrian Golan
Heights-which
were annexed against the will of the
Council and in contravention of its resolutions-had
reached 33, most of them of American origin. In
Jerusalem, where it is impossible to calculate mathematically
the expansion process, there are today
more than 90,000 settlers who have colonized the
annexed portion of the city, the eastern part, and
there are 30,000 others who have settled more than
100 nahnfs, or military outposts, thereby laying racist
siege to the City of Cities.
19. All this has been accompanied not only by
expropriation,
expulsion, deportation, imprisonment
and oppression, but also by notions of superiority and
by racial discrimination,
which is no secret even to
the representatives of the United States.
20. The New York Times of 5 November 1982 quoted
David Levy, the Israeli Housing Minister, as having
said two days earlier that another five settlements
would be established in the West Bank in the race to
alienate Arab rights-a race between Washington and
Tel Aviv. That same newspaper, on 4 November,
quoted a spokesman for the World Zionist Organization as saying that there are 25,000 Jews living in
103 settlements in the West Bank and that Israel will
proceed with the implementation
of its plan to settle
400,000 Jews on the West Bank. 1 use the word
“Jew” not to mean the adherent of a religion, but to
mean a settler-colonialist,
for they have distorted the
meaning of Judaism and transformed Jews into settlers
-that is, into criminals-at
the expense of the rights
of the Arab people: 400,000 Jews in the West Bank in
the next five years, and 1.4 million Jews in the next
30 years. Again, by Judaism I do not mean a religion;
I use it to mean racist settler Zionism, committed to
colonialism and to United States imperialism.

24. In the national charter formulated
at Majdelshams on 25 March 1981, a document expressing the
will of the Syrian Arab citizens of the Golan Heights, it
is stated that “the occupied Golan plateau is an integral part of Arab Syria”. Article 3 of that charter,
which was formulated by our citizens under occupation in spite of the Israeli tanks and United States wal
planes, provides that “our occupied territory is the
sacred inheritance of the Syrian people and that any
person who attempts to sell or abandon an inch of that
territory to the Israeli occupiers will be committing
unforgivable
treason and a great sin against our
people”.
25. 1 can confirm to the Council that the situation in
the Golan Heights is deteriorating
day by day. The
Jerusalem newspaper Al-F@, in its issue of 6 January
1983, quoted the mayor of the village of Majdelshams
as saying: “We have been pressured by the occupation
authorities to carry Israeli identification
cards, but we
carry hatred for them in our hearts,”

21. Xn addition, The Jervsale~n Post on 7 October
1982 published an interview with the Minister of
Defence of Israel, the hero of Israel, Ariel Sharon; that
interview was conducted in a settlement near Jenin, in
the northern part of the West Bank. He said that
“massive settlements all over the West Bank area are
the best answer to the various plans that outsiders are
trying to foist on Israel” [see S/1.5482]. Is that not a
challenge to the Security Council? Is the Council not
an “outsider”
to Israel?

26. The punishment meted out by the Israeli occupation authorities to every Syrian Arab in the Golan
Heights who refuses to carry the Israeli identification
card is equal to civil death, since such a person is
prohibited from selling his crops if he does not carry an
Israeli identification
card and all opportunities to work
3

i

are denied him. Moreover,
students whose fathers
reject Israeli citizenship are denied the right to an
education. The Israeli occupation authorities
deny
Syrian teachers in the Golan Heights the right to work
unless they carry the Israeli identity papers that have
been imposed upon them.

save for American support? How could it have been
possible to expel these people from their lands anll
expropriate
their properties without such support?
That is the question we put to the Councit. How could
this crook--Israel-even
with all its strategic muaD%
protect itself without assistance, without collusion anif
without American funds and weapons’?

27. With regard to Israeli expansion in the Golan
Heights-a Jhit nocornpli that Israel considers to be
irrevocable, but one that we feel can be changed-AlFc@ recentIy quoted the Israeli official responsible for
the expansionist Israeli settlement operations in the
Golan Heights as stating:

32. American assistance to Israel in all fomlj
exceeds $4 billion for the next fiscal year. This figtrflr‘
includes $2.7 billion the American Government wishcj
to grant to Israel, including no less than $500 million of
tax-exempt Jewish contributions and another $5Ot) mile
lion in revenues from the sale of Israeli Government
bonds, as well as several million dollars earned from
tariff exemptions on Israeli products imported into Ihe
United States. These figures, large as they are, do n31
reflect the real dimensions and do not actually shuu
the greed of Israel.

“We want to add 20,000 citizens within five years,
and the law [on the annexation of the Golan Heights
approved by the Israeli Knesset on 14 December
1981”1--a law which the Security Council declared
null and void in its resolution 497 (19X1)--“helps
us
in this respect. There are initiatives for investors.
We are pIanning a large settlement that can accommodate hundreds of families, and we are also
making plans to establish other permanent
settlements in addition to the 31 already in existence.”

33. I should like to say that he who laughs today Hill
cry tomorrow; he who laughs today when the rL’presentative of the Syrian Arab Republic is speaking
will cry tomorrow.

28. Such facts and figures, and many others, represent a great deal of human suffering and are
violations of national sovereignty, international
law
and the principles of human rights, as well as having
grave security and political
implications
that the
Council will undoubtedly consider very important,
since its prime responsibility
is the elimination
of
aggression. Should the Council fail to exercise that
responsibility, we would remind members that States
have a natural right to exercise self-defence in order to
repulse aggression, until the Council takes the necessary measures.

34. Who is paying for the recent and continuous
Israeli aggression against Lebanon’? Surely, there is 3
dilemma
regarding the capacity of the American
treasury. While taxes are being imposed on American
citizens living on welfare, Israeli greed is be&
satisfied at the expense of the American taxpayer.
Why‘? Because senators, representatives
and got’ernors must obey the instructions of the Zionist lobby.
In addition, this generous help is being provided while
millions of third-world children are starving to death
and while each Israeli is receiving approximstsl~
$i ,000 annually in the form of American assistance, iiS
well as revenues drawn from usurped Arab properties
and properties of Palestinian
refugees and at tht
expense of the Lebanese and Egyptian economics.

29. In light of these ob.jectives and principles and in
view of the tragic reahty imposed by the Zionist
colonialists on our citizens and brothers in the West
Bank, the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights-an
now
in south Lebanon, where, according to the latest
reports from American sources, the Israelis are now
building settlements-we
must pause and ask what the
Council will finally do and how it will live up to its
responsibilities
and its duties in the face of this
continuous aggression that began in 1948.
in the region can
factors,
the first of which is the official American position of
extending unlimited support to Israel. It is irrationally
affording excessive protection to the aggressor, and
such a course is detrimental
to the Americans thetnselves, from whom, in the name of democracy and
freedom of the press, the facts are being hidden and
concealed,

35. As for the Palestinians, they receive from the
American
Administration
only incendiary
bornhs.
cluster bombs and fragmentation bombs dropped from
sophisticated
American aircraft. In one day Ia\1
summer the number of these bombs reached 2OQ,o(.pII.
Actually, the United States is involved in a colonialist scheme: in order to give this scheme the necessary respect, to promote it and to sell it to American
public opinion, the United States Government
hiI5
thrown in the so-called strategic alliance for the
defence of democracy-this
democracy which has
stifled Lebanon economically and destroyed its peuple, its economic symmetry and its health and social
structures. Having devastated cities and villages am!
having destroyed the total infrastructure
of Arab
Palestine and Arab Lebanon, it has also isolated Arab
Egypt and imposed restrictions on its sovereignty.

31. How could these territories have been occupied,
and by what means, had it not been for American
support’? How could the settlements have been built

36. The second factor, which is no less importan!
than the first, is that while Israel escalates its
expansionist policies and hastens to implement
them.

30.

The brutal aggression prevailing

clearly be ascribed to three major interrelated

4

persisting in its violations of established rules and
principles of international
law, Washington tries to
hoodwink world public opinion into believing that it
seeks peace. Where is the evidence for this trend?
There is evidence of blackmail-that
is, land in
exchange for sovereignty, land in exchange for restrictions on freedom or, rather, part of the land in
exchange for the destruction of the sovereignty of a
State. Where is the evidence’? The American Administration denies the Palestinians their right to selfdetermination and to the establishment of an independent Palestinian State and makes withdrawal by Israel
conditional upon concessions from those whose territories are being occupied by Israel with the force of
American weapons and funds. The Israeli blackmail in
Lebanon is the latest proof.

tives were to gain more land. The Council adopted two
resolutions
calling for the immediate
and unconditional withdrawal from all Lebanese occupied territory. What has the Council done about those
resolutions?
43. We warned the Council that the objectives of
Israel were to usurp the land of others and we, along
with all other objective analysts, expected the fate
of the West Bank, Gaza and the Golan Heights to
be directly linked to the blood-bath
committed
in
Lebanon. This is the third factor constituting proof of
the Israeli madness we are still witnessing. While the
Israelis were committing
methodical
massacres in
Lebanon against Lebanese and Palestinians, they were
actually trying to achieve two other aims-the
first, to
weaken Syria, the bastion of Arab resistance and
confrontation;
and the second, as I said before, to
smallow up more Arab territories, to eliminate the
heroic resistance of our citizens who are under
occupation and to liquidate the Palestinian resistance
inside and outside.

37. The current meetings of the Council must be
interpreted as another test of the credibility of ,American policy with regard to Israel’s settlements policy
and the protection of the national
rights of the
Palestinian people. It is also a test of the American
position on the continuous violation of Arab rights in
the West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Jerusalem and the
Golan Heights.

44. The Israelis are presenting the world with an
occupation that is a fuit accunzpli and that is being
expanded. Here one has to wonder if the Lexicon of the
United States delegation will continue to fail to
consider annexation as a form of aggression-just
as it
did when Israel annexed the Golan Heights.

38. We wish once more to declare to .the United
States delegation that we are not guardians of American interests in the area.
39. If the United States really wants peace, then
it must make use of the principles of the Twelfth
Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez,‘Morocco,
on
25 November 1981 and from 6 to 9 September 1982,
based on full Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Arab territories and from Jerusalem, the declaration of
Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian
State and
the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
rights, including its right to establish an independent
State [S/15510, N~IICX, sect. I]. We repeat that there
will be peace only if it is based on the Fez principles,
which enjoy consensus throughout the Arab world.

45. We in the Syrian Arab Republic have stated that
Arab rights are not up for sale or for barter. We have
also said that we are resolved to resist aggression and
occupation, regardless of the price and the sacrifices.
In our persistent efforts to achieve peace, we will not
give up our rights or the rights of our Arab brothers.
We should like to remind the Council that the one that
is impeding work towards a just peace is the one that is
providing Israel with funds, weapons and political
support in all areas. The evidence we cite is what has
happened to Lebanon and the impeditnents erected by
the United States in order to bring about the abrogation of Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982).

40. We sincerely believe that the Council must
condemn Israel and its Zionist dogma, regardless of
the personality of Israel’s ruler today or of its future
rulers-for Israeli dogma remains the same no matter
what party is in power. Political parties in Israel are a
way of splitting power, but the dogma remains the
same; it is that of Zionism; it is a racist settler dogma.
The Israeli nature cannot be changed regardless of
who rules.

46. In conclusion, I should like to recall that Israel
and the United States are responsible,
before the
international
community,
for every violation or contravention of Arab rights, whether they be territorial
or humanitarian rights. Our national duty is very clear
from the Charter of the United Nations. General
Assembly
and Security Council resolutions
have
determined that the colonial settlements are illegal and
must be treated as such and destroyed. Every Arab
citizen must return to his homeland and his property
and Israel must withdraw from all the occupied Arab
territories
unconditionally
and must recognize the
national rights of the Palestinian people, which are
inalienable rights.

41. Is not Allon a member of the so-called Socialist
Party? And is not what we see today the faithful implementation
of his infamous 1967 plan? The
essence of the issue is the Zionist ideology stemming
from petrified, immoral and distorted colonialist dogma-an
ideology which cannot survive within the
framework of an international rkgime under the rule of
law.

47. If the Council is to regain its prestige and
credibility-and
I apologize for saying that, but my
land is occupied and my people is oppressed-it
must

42. At the outset of the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon we warned the Council that Israel’s objec5

-

54. If the Council has chosen to consider today
exclusively one side of this multifaceted problem, this
is due not only to the fact that it is the only item on the
agenda, but perhaps also to the fact that the aspect of
territory is the gravest of all the aspects and constitutes one of the bases on which peace is founded. If
this is lost, the possibilities of peace based on legality
and justice will be lost. Justice is the only guarantee
for the maintenance of stability and security.

impose ma&tory

sanctions against Israel, in accordance with the proViSiOnS of Chapter VII of the Charter
and must expel Israel from the Organization as a *OnPeace-loving State, as provided for by the General
Assembly in its resolution ES-9/l Of 5 February 1982,
adopted at the ninth emergency special session
convened to consider the question of the annexation of
the Golan Heights. We appeal to all States, both
members and non-members of the Council, to cease
dealing with Israel in all fields unless Israel respects
the principles of the Charter and the rules of international law.

55. The policy of settlement practised by Israel since
I967 in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories
has become a serious issue. It has extended beyond
the territories occupied in 1967.

The
PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jkom
REIS,sjcln): The next speaker is the EPreSeIltEitiVe Of
Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

48.

56. All the components of the problem are based on
this occupation and the centrality of the subject of
territory. Starting with practices against the legal
inhabitants of the land-those
who have the legal and
historical rights-we
see a policy that seeks to
evacuate the Palestinian inhabitants gradually from the
occupied territories. This occupation of territory leads
to a strangulation of the national legislative, administrative and educational institutions as well as transforming the Palestinian inhabitants by force from fullfledged citizens in their land to citizens the least of
whom could be described as second-class or thirdclass citizens who daily suffer greatly under the yoke
of the military occupation.

49. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) (interpretution
fiorn
,Qclbic): Mr. President, at the outset of the first
statement I have the honour to make before the
Council, as the representative of Egypt, 1 should like
to express our appreciation of resolution 528 (1982)
adopted unanimously at the end of last year to make
the Arabic language a language of the Council in
recognition not only of that language’s vitality in
contemporary international relations and the important role of the peoples and States that use it, but also
of the contribution made by those who speak it to
world culture and legacy throughout history.

57. All the peace initiatives have been unanimous, in
one way or another, on the necessity of implementing
Council resolution 242 (1967), which calls on Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Arab territories. All those
initiatives have that sound legal and political basis for
a just peace in the Middle East. Despite that, the
continuous Israeli practices since 1967 in the occupied
Arab territories aim at undermining that basis by the
determined liquidation of everything having to do with
the subject of territory, by establishing settlements,
seizing the water resources or evacuating the original
inhabitants of the territory.

50. I should like to express our congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. You represent a country with which we have
relations of friendship and mutual respect. I am sure
that your experience and well-known ability will lead
the Council to the desired success in discharging its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
51. I should also like to express the appreciation of
the delegation of Egypt to your predecessor, the
President of the Council last month, Mr, Amega, who
demonstrated his experience and ability and is an
e=nlPlarY representative of the friendly people of
Togo, which has bonds of common history and
struggle with my country,

58. A settlements policy which started, only two
weeks after the June 1967 war, by annexing Arab
Jerusalem has continued in the Jordan Valley in order
to erect a human barrier from north to south on the
West Bank of the Jordan River; then it went on to
create more settlements around the larger Palestinian
cities of Nablus, Ramallah, Hebron and Halhul. Those
policies were at first camouflaged under the pretext of
security; then other arguments-religious
and historical claims-were
used, under the label of “liberated”
or “administered”
territories. Today all those policies
are pursued brazenly and with impunity to try to
swallow up the rest of the occupied Arab territories.

52. MY delegation is also pleased to see the friendly
nations that joined the Council at the beginning of this
Year and hopes that they will have great success in
discharging their great responsibilities for the maintenance of the stability and security of the world and the
consecration of international legality,
53. The maw meetings of the Council on the
problem of the Middle East reflect the continuous
UNrcern of the world over this problem and the
constant hkrest in the unceasing development of
events in order to grasp from their meaning and
tragedy new hope that may help in maintaining peace
in the Middle East.

59. All international
forums and the resolutions
emanating from them have been unanimous in stating
that the settlements are illegal and an obstacle to peace.
I need not recall here before the Council the statement
by the United States Department of State on the
6

illegality of the settlements, issued in April 1978. It
described the establishment of those settlements as
being in contravention of international law, 1 need not
recall article 49, paragraph 6, of the fourth Geneva
Convention’ and its application to the occupied Arab
territories, our insistence that Israel should respect
them, and Israel’s persistence in claiming that those
international agreements do not apply to the occupied
territories. It is a situation in which no one supports
Israel.

sincere initiatives that seek to put an end to the vicious
cycle of war, bloodshed and instability in the Middle
East.
65. Egypt is not alone when it says that the key to
peace in the Middle East is acceptance by each party
of the rights of all parties to existence, self-determination and independence
within the framework of
international
legality. Peace cannot be maintained by
evacuating the original inhabitants from their land.
Occupation,
oppression and the establishment
of
settlements are futile. The only way to settle the ArabIsraeli conflict is by a dialogue for a just peace in
which all the parties take part, without any party
trying to pre-empt the situation by effecting defacto
changes as Israel does.

60. The study published by Benvenisti, the former
deputy mayor of Jerusalem, in which he describes the
means and aims to dominate more occupied Arab
territories and increase the number of Israeli inhabitants, has debunked the Israeli peace claims. The
main plan put forward by the settlements administration of the Jewish Agency and the Settlement Section
of the Zionist Association covers five years starting
from 1983. Right from this year, in accordance with
that plan, there will be, in addition to the inhabitants of
the West Bank, 100,000 Israelis; 20,000 will be added
in the Golan Heights and 10,000 in the Gaza Strip. We
can imagine the consequences of all that for the
original inhabitants of those Arab territories.

66. The policy of force and oppression exacerbates
the situation. The old methods that have been used so
far-and
more starkly and flagrantly-cannot
lead to
stability. The continued establishment of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories should cease
forthwith.
67. The usurpation of land by force cannot prepare
the way towards peaceful coexistence. We hail the
attitudes we have witnessed in Israel itself in the
last few months, deploring and rejecting the policy
of oppression and suppression, because the peace
dynamism and the peace circle-despite
all adverse
pressures-are
expanding day by day. We arc not far
away from the winds of change expressed by the
voices of peace we have heard recently in Israel itself
calling for a dialogue and coexistence and mutual
recognition of rights and duties.

61. Israel is actually practising the right of ownership
over 400,000 acres of the total area of the West
Bank-which
is estimated at 1.5 million
acresunder an old Ottoman law which Israel invokes to
claim the right to seize uncultivated land.
62. It is clear that the explicit aim here is to keep the
Arabs under military rule, surrounded by settlements
in which the inhabitants would be hostages in their
own territory and homeland, surrounded by Israeli
citizens who are subjected to Israeli law on all sides,
and where in the end there would be a duality in the
rule prevailing, which the Palestinians would either
accept or be expelled for good.

68. The glimmer
of hope, emanating from these
attitudes that oppose policies rejecting peace, will
confirm that the genuine desire for peace based on
justice and international
legality is destined to prevail.
The Council, is discharging its responsibilities
and
commitments
for maintaining international peace and
security, should reaffirm in regard to the Middle East
what has been stated in its resolutions concerning the
illegality
of Israeli policies and practices in the
occupied Arab territories and the necessity of desisting from them forthwith so that the circle of peace,
now small and limited, may expand, and so that the
voices of peace and right and justice may be heard
loud and clear in implementation
of the national
legitimate Palestinian rights to its occupied territories
under its legal leadership, within the framework of the
Charter of the United Nations and its resolutions and
in the light of a new epoch of coexistence and
conciliation among all the peoples of the region and the
world.

63. The Council unanimously adopted its resolution
465 (1980) which states, in paragraph 5, “that all
measures taken by Israel to change the physical
character, demographic
composition. . . of the. . .
territories occupied. . , including Jerusalem. . . have
no legal validity”.
In 1981 the Council adopted
resolution 497 (1981), on the illegality of Israel’s
decision to impose its laws in the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights, and demanded that Israel should
rescind it forthwith. Other resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly and the Security Council in 1982
confirm those principles and call on Israel to respect
and implement them.
64. The delegation of Egypt sees Israel’s resistance
and intransigence and its persistence in refusing to
comply with the will of the international community as
weakening the possibilities for peace, a breach of the
principles of the Charter and international
law, a
violation of Israel’s contractual commitments
and a
placing of obstacles day after day in the path of all the

69. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfr’otn
Rrrssiatz):
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
7

coercive politicization
of academics in the occupied
territories, by forcing them to sign political declarations under duress. All these actions are proof-if
further proof were inqeed needed-that
Israel has
every intention to perpetuate its illegal occupation
over the West Bank and Gaza, to add to its equally
illegitimate annexation of the Golan Heights. They are
further proof that lsrael pays scant regard to the
wishes and interests of the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples in the occupied territories and has no desire to
contribute
to a fair and durable solution to the
Palestinian problem.

70. Mr. KRISI-INAN
(India): Mr.. qresid.ent, allow
me first of a]] to extend to you the fellcItatIons of my
delegation on yout having assumed the important
office of President of the Council for the month of
February. India enjoys cordial and friendly relations
with your country, the Soviet Union., We share the
conviction that the Counctl IS the richer for your
varied dip]omatic
experience atd wise counsel. and
that under your stewardship it wtll be able effectively
to address itself to the pressing problems of the day.
71. One such problem, which is a matter of grave
concern and great urgency,, is the prqblem which
brings us to this chamber agam this evenmg. It IS yet,
by any means, a new problem. At the same time tt IS a
matter which in the recent past has assumed a new and
frightening dimension and which threatens further to
aggravate the tension and strife that have long afflicted
the Middle East.

74. The brave people of Palestine, under the leadership of the PLO, have been through endless agony.
Successive generations
of Palestinians
have not
known what it means to live in peace. Their aspirations are consecrated with the blood of thousands
of innocent men, women and children. Today the
freedom-fighters
of Palestine have been dispersed to
far-away places, separated from their near and dear
ones, waiting in the hope that they can one day return
to see the fulfilment
of their legitimate rights. The
people of Palestine have made tremendous sacrifices
and have demonstrated both statesmanship and a spirit
of accommodation.
They have every right to restitution of their homeland and the establishment of an
independent
State of their own. Recently certain
proposals have been made, particularly at Fez [ibid.],
which could constitute a significant step forward in the
quest for a settlement. We should like those proposals
to make headway. The creation of an atmosphere
conducive to that end is essential. Israel’s intolerable
actions can only gravely hamper that process. It is
imperative that Israel be restrained, effectively and
without prevarication,
by those in a position to
restrain it.

72. Not too long ago the world was witness to Yet
another series of Israel’s misdeeds. The memory of
Israel’s brazen aggression against Lebanon and the
Palestinian people and of the genocidal massacres of
Sabra and Shati]a is still fresh in our minds. The report
of the Israeli Commission of Inquiry released earlier
this week has established beyond doubt the responsibility of the Israeli authorities. One would have
hoped
that with the restoration of another transient
and precarious truce in the Middle East, and with the
efforts being made in several quarters to look for a just
and lasting settlement of the Palestine question, a
greater sense of sobriety and responsibility would be
displayed by all concerned. But obviously the attributes of sobriety and responsibility are quite alien to
Israel. Obviously the Government of Israel is too
habituated to indulgence in acts of aggression, subversion and every conceivable kind of provocation to
remain inactive for long.

75. The Council should in unequivocal terms fix
responsibility
on Israel for all its actions in the
occupied Arab territories in violation of the Council’s
resolutions and its obligations under the Charter of the
United Natiolis, and demand its immediate and unconditional withdrawal from those territories.

73. Israel’s decision to press ahead with its plans to
establish further settlements in the illegally occupied
Arab territories is only one more instance of how that
country wilfully flouts international law and the will of
the world community as reflected in innumerable
resolutions of the General Assembly as well as of the
Council. All those decisions and resolutions have
recognized that this policy violates international law
and constitutes an insurmountable obstacle to peace
and stability in the region. Clearly Israel’s recent
actions are part of its grand design radically to alter the
demographic structure of the occupied territories in
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.1 It
is now estimated that the number of Israeli settlers on
the West Bank has increased more than seven-fold in
the last five years. If the Israeli rBgime has its way, we
are told that 400,000 Israelis will be made to settle on
the West Bank over the next five years and I ,4 million
in the same area over the next three decades. We also
have been hearing of instances of brutal repression
being undertaken against the indigenous popu]ation
of
the

OccuPied

tetT~tOriCs.

We

have

learned

about

76. The Council discharges an important duty. It has
the capacity to act decisively and with a sense of
purpose to put a halt to Israel’s intransigence. We
hope that its members will display the requisite
political will to do so. We hope that the Council will
vindicate our trust.
77. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from H~.sian):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
78. Mr. GOLOB
(Yugoslavia): 1 should like to
express my gratitude to the Council for enabling me to
present the views of Yugoslavia on the situation in the
occupied Arab territories.

the

8

79. I should like first to avail myself of this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. Our
appreciation goes also to the representative of Togo,
Mr. Amega, President of the Council in January.

incessant repression and blatant and continuous violation of the human rights of the Palestinian people and
to attempts at the so-called dispersal of Palestinians.
87. We fully support the resolve of the Palestinian
people to live in freedom and independence and in its
own territory. The Palestinian people have not yielded
in their determination
to achieve their own liberation
and to preserve their national and cultural identity. In
that struggle they are led by their sole and legitimate
representative,
the PLO.

80. Our congratulations
are also addressed to the
representatives of Malta, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Pakistan and Zimbabwe, countries that were elected
to the Council at the last session of the General
Assembly.
81. We are particularly pleased to note the growing
number of representatives
of non-aligned countries
elected to the Council. Their participation
in the
deliberations of the Council is another example, in our
view, of the increasingly important influence and role
of the policy and movement
of non-alignment
in
international relations.

88. The peoples of Yugoslavia have jealously safeguarded and are still jealously safeguarding their
freedom and independence, Our experience and that
of other peoples teach us that peoples fighting for
freedom, self-determination
and independence will not
and cannot remain alone: they are always stronger
than those trying to impose domination and they are
victorious in the end, The quest for freedom by the
Palestinian people has made the world aware of the
moral obligation to put an end to such domination. The
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people have
become one of the highest and most urgent responsibilities of the United Nations, and the Palestinian
people have the sovereign right to self-determination,
which implies the establishment of their own State.

82. The use of force by Israel, its continuous and
systematic expansion, its policy of defiance, colonization and domination have for years been the focus of
our attention and represent a continous challenge to
the conscience of the international community.
83. The General Assembly, as well as the Security
Council, recently considered the consequences of the
aggressive policy of Israel, which is attempting
to
subjugate peoples and to usurp their ‘land by force.
Flagrant violations of norms of international
law, as
well as the encroachment upon the inalienable rights of
the population in the occupied Palestinian and other
Arab territories, continue unabated.

89. We believe that new efforts have to be made in
th,at regard so that the bases for a lasting peace,
security and justice for all peoples and States in that
region, can be created. The United Nations, and in
particular the Council, must constantly promote the
legitimate rights to freedom and independence of all
peoples under colonial and foreign domination.
It
cannot be tolerated that these rights be violated and
ignored, as in the case of the Palestinian people.

84. Recourse to arms, persecution and infringement
of the fundamental human rights of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples remain the order of the day.
Examples of and testimony to the continued aggression, expansion and annexation of Arab territories,
and the suffering of the people living in those
territories, demonstrate that there is a threat to the
peace and security of the region and of the world at
large.

90. There is no doubt that the United Nations, and
in particular the Security Council, bears great responsibility for solving the Middle East crisis. The role of
the United Nations in this process is indispensable and
should be further strengthened. The constant use of
force, military interventions and interference in the
internal affairs of sovereign countries call for a higher
sense of responsibility,
and this should be approached
with a great sense of urgency if more countries are not
to fall victim to the use of force and aggression.

X.5. There are systematic attempts to impose changes
by Juit ncconzpli in the political, demographic
and
national map of the entire region. A large part of the
national territory of Lebanon remains under lsraeli
occupation. Persecution continues on the West Bank
and in the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights-all
territories occupied by Israel. In defiance of the
decisions of the United Nations, there are more and
more illegal settlements on Palestinian and Arab soil
and property.

91. Yugoslavia, as well as other non-aligned countries, has always attached great significance to all
aspects of the Middle East crisis, in particular the
aspect of the exercise of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people. We have always proceeded from
the genuine principles of non-alignment-opposing
any aggression and use of force and colonial and
foreign domination
and supporting the right of all
peoples to decide their destiny freely-and
we have
always considered that the United Nations constitutes
the best framework for safeguarding the fundamental
rights of peoples.

86. It should be clearly stated once again that the
purposes and aims of the Charter of the United
Nations and our dedication to the principles
of
independence and sovereignty, as well as our dedication to the right to national life and existence of all
peoples, make us duty bound to bring an end to the
9

the agony of displacement, the tragedy of poverty and
depriviation,
and the bitterness of loss. They live on
handouts and are the victims of humiliation,
hegemony
and blackmail on the part of Israel. They are herded to
be massacred, as in the latest case, that of the
massacres of Sabra and Shatila. Who is responsibfe for
that’? Do not you, the members of the Council-and
especially the permanent members-bear
a large part
of that responsibility
because you played the role of
spectators with regard to an occupied and displaced
people, uprooted from its lands and homes 35 years
ago? Whatever has happened to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the principles
of
international
law? Whatever has happened to the
ethical principles adopted by the civilized world?
Whatever has happened to the universal principles
calling for respect for human rights? Whatever has
happened to your conscience, you permanent members of the Council?

92, we are party to an ever-more-widely-held
position that Israe] must withdraw from a]] Arab territories, including Jerusalem, occupied after 5 June
1967 and that the Palestinian people have the right to
self-determination,
national independence and their
own State.
93. ~~ solution can, in our view, be considered just
and comprehensive without the participation
of the
pLG on an equal footing and without the recognition
of the right of all States and peoples in the region to independence, within secure and recognized
boundaries.
94. We expect that further efforts will be undertaken
by the Security Council and the General Assembly,
and other initiatives taken aimed at a just, tasting and
comprehensive political solution of the situation in the
Middle East and ofthe Palestinian qUeStiOn as its core.
95. The PRESIDENT (intnpwtutionfiont
Russiun):
The next speaker is the representative of the Yemen
Arab Republic, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

100. The Arabs have declared repeatedly that they
are a peace-loving nation. The Twelfth Arab Summit
Conference, held at Fez in November
198 I and
September 1982, unanimously adopted an Arab peace
plan which, inter alia, calls for the establishment of a
just, comprehensive peace in the Middle East, guaranteeing the right of all peoples in the region to live in
peace within secure borders, this to be guaranteed by
the Security Council [ibid.]. What, members of the
Council, have you done with this international responsibility, entrusted to you by the international
community? What have you done in the face of Israeli
intransigence and rejection of all peace initiatives?
Will you disappoint the international community once
more, and wiII you permit the State of the Zionist
gangs to wreak havoc with impunity,
oppressing
Palestinian citizens, expelling them from their territories, devastating their homeland, displacing them,
and oppressing and humiliating
those who are left
under occupation? The evidence calling for the Council to condemn these Zionist gangs is abundant; the
most recent evidence is contained in the report of the
Israeli commission
of inquiry into the atrocious
massacres of Palestinians committed in the Sabra and
Shatila camps, claiming the lives of innocent women,
children and old people.

96. Mr. SALLAM
(Yemen) (irztcrdprctation j?‘onz
Arabic): I should like at the outset to express my
pleasure at seeing you, Mr, Oleg Aleksandrovich
Troyanovsky, presiding over the work of the Council,
for you are a close friend of the Arab people and your
country is a true friend of the Arab people and is linked
to Yemen by long-standing bonds of friendship going
back 54 years. Yemen was one of the first Arab States
to sign a treaty of friendship with the Soviet Union, in
1928. I had the honour to participate in the preparations for the celebrations which took place in 1978 in
Sana’a to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the signing of
the Soviet-Yemeni
treaty of friendship, That longstanding friendship between Yemen and the Soviet
Union is a demonstration of good faith and mutual
respect and trust. The delegation of the Yemen Arab
Republic therefore hopes, Sir, that under your presidency the Council will adopt resolutions which will
restore the international community’s
confidence in
the Security Council, which is entrusted with the
responsibility
for the maintenance of internationa]
peace and security.

101. The State of the Zionist gangs has become
addicted to blackmail,
treachery and treason, and to
sowing discord among brothers and neighbours. The
latest report on this subject was published in The
Christian Science Monitor
of 8 February 1983. It
stated that the Zionist occupiers of southern Lebanon
admit that they have begun to establish, through
blackmail
and the threat of force, militias of Shiite
Muslims,
which they have dubbed “Guards of the
Southl’ or the “National
Guard”, to pit Lebanese
Muslims against one another. Yet the admirers of
Israel speak of its democracy and its ethical principles.
Does Israel’s “democratic”
regime absolve its leaders
of responsibility
for the crimes which they commit
daily against humanity?

97. 1 should like also to express my delegation’s

thanks to the members of the Council for their
kindness in permitting it to participate in this discussion. l also extend our congratulations to the new
members of the Council.
98. 1 cannot fail t0 express our appreciation also to
Mr. Amega of Togo, who presided over the work of
the Council last month with outstanding wisdom.
99. Once more the Council is considering the situation in the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories,
where tragedy and suffering have been unremitting for
the past 35 years. The Palestinians are sti]] suffering
10

102. The people of the occupied West Bank and
Gaza Strip are subjected daily to the expropriation of
their territory, to expulsion from their homes, to the
devastation of their homeland, to the establishment of
Zionist settlements, and to the construction of roads
on their territory. Their schools and universities are
closed down periodically.
Students and faculty members are arrested for petty reasons. Unjust taxes are
levied on poor citizens. Political prisoners are tortured. Villages and camps are denied electricity and
water in extremely cold weather conditions.
103. Whatever happened to the Israelis’
ethical
principles? Man cannot commit such barbaric acts
unless he abandons his humanity. To our great regret,
a super-Power that is a permanent member of the
Council, one that assumes great responsibility
for
international peace and security is strengthening this
Nazi rigime through military and economic assistance
with the funds it collects from its taxpayers who
themselves are desperately in need of such funds to
generate employment.
104. It has been proved beyond doubt that the rulers
of Israel were the planners and executors, in accordance with military traditions, of the orders for soldiers
to enter the camps of the Palestinian refugees to
commit the horrendous massacre that claimed the
lives of innocent persons in the &bra and Shatila
camps. The prime responsibility
for that horrendous
massacre falls upon the Israeli forces of occupation.
The Israeli committee
of inquiry has condemned
bloodthirsty Sharon and called for his resignation or
expulsion from the Israeli Cabinet. It has also condemned bloodthirsty
Begin, Shamir and the Nazi
military clique of spiteful officers, whose actions
reveal their malice.
105. The Council has called for the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli forces from
Lebanon, but Begin’s Government
is resolved to
impose its unjust conditions on Lebanon through
blackmail and the threat of continued occupation.
106. The Begin Government has totally disregarded
the Arab peace plan and the peace plan proposed by
the late President of the Soviet Union,
Leonid
Brezhnev [see S/15403, anrzex], as well as President
Reagan’s peace initiative? and all the resofutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly. That Government
has, I repeat, totally
disregarded all of these. What option is then left to the
Council to deter aggression and establish peace in the
Middle East? In the view of my delegation, it has no
other option but to implement the resolutions of the
General Assembly,
including resolution
37/86 D,
which requests the Security Council to discharge its
responsibilities
under the Charter and recognize the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian Arab people,
including the right to self-determination
and the right
to establish its independent Arab State in Palestine, as
well as to implement relevant United Nations resolu-

tions by implementing
the plan which, inter n&z,
recommends
that an independent Arab State shall
come into existence in Palestine.
107. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian): The next speaker is the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, upon whom I now
call,
108. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
The fact that the Council responded almost immediately to the request of the Group of Arab States in
the United Nations, as submitted by the representative
of Jordan [s/155991, is an expression of the concern of
the members of the Council at the policies and
practices of Israel, the occupying Power, in the
Palestinian and other Arab territories under Israeli
military occupation since June 1967, including Jerusalem. We are certain that under your presidency, Sir,
and with your wisdom, the Council will prescribe a
formula-or
will, at least, spare no effort to prescribe one-that
will end the existing state of continuous and alarming deterioration in the situation in
the Middle East. First and foremost the Council must,
we believe, invoke all the powers vested in it by the
Charter of the United Nations to compel a so-called
Member of the United Nations to accept and carry out
the Council’s decisions and, in case of failure, the
Council should then prescribe the remedies detailed in
the Charter.
109. It is our earnest belief and conviction that the
founding fathers who drafted and ratified the Charter
meant every word in it. It is not a literary heritage; it
is a moral heritage aimed at saving “succeeding generations from the scourge of war”. And yet two
generations of Palestinian Arabs have been subjected
to the scourge and horrors of acts of aggression, culminating in acts of genocide.
110. You, Mr. President, represent peoples in the
Soviet Union who have paid an extremely high price,
The heroic peoples of the Soviet Union resolved to
confront and defeat the Nazi onslaught and, together
with the peace-loving
peoples in the world, they
succeeded in crushing the Nazis and their allies.
Thus, you do know from personal experience what
the scourge of war means. Your Government
has
unequivocally
pronounced its commitment
to all endeavours to secure a comprehensive and just peace in
the Middle East. We in the PLO know that your
Government is sincerely committed to its policy in the
Middle East, and our Palestinian people highly esteem
that principled stand.
111. I wish to register my great appreciation to our
brother, the representative of Togo, who conducted
the business of the Council last month. I wish to
extend through you, Sir, to Ireland, Japan, Panama,
Spain and Uganda our appreciation for their positive
contribution
to the achievement
of peace during
the past two years. In particular our thanks go to

117. I should like now to tell the Council why we
thought the Council should meet. I shall deal first with
the Palestinian
educational
establishments
in the
Palestinian territories occupied by Israel.

their rcpresenlatives especially during tht summer
of 1987 when Israel, backed by the. Admmlstration
in W;~shington, decided to resume lb eXpanSlOIliSt
~&rt.~r-~llclll policy and to invade yet anotlter territory, the sovereign State of Lebanon, with the
climin;ltion of the ~J~khlian peopk as one of the
declared Israeli aims. To Malta, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan and Zimbabwe we extend a
hearty welcome, assuring their representatives, out
friends and colleagues in the Movement of NonAligned Countries, of our full co-operation in the joint
efforts to find a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East.

118. On 13 January, after midnight, armed Israeli
soldiers raided and searched the campus of Bethlehem University.
They took away posters, literature
and other printed material from the bulletin boards.
According to a press release by the University, “two
military vehicles appeared at the university gates at
11.30 p.m.” -almost
midnight--“and
demanded entry
to the campus”. Of course, the gatekeeper refused
to unlock the gates. But when Brother Thomas,
the Bethlehem University Vice-President, and others
arrived, the soldiers showed them a document written
in Hebrew-a
language that Brother Thomas did not
understand-and
claimed that it was a warrant. Being
a man of the church and actually assigned to his post
by His Holiness, Brother Thomas just let them in. For
the next four hours soldiers toured the buildings of the
University, confiscating papers, posters, written materials and photographs from bulletin boards. Some of
them went to the trouble of photographing university
rooms. I do not know why they did that, but they did.

II?. The Council has decided to resume the debate it
began in November 1982 [2401sf meetingI. In September 1982 the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference was
held at Fez, and a declaration constituting the basis
for a constructive approach to attain peace was
unanimously adopted [s/1.5510, nn/zex, sect. 11. This
approach fully recognizes the role of the United
Nations and specifically the role of the Security
Council, on which the States Members have conferred
the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of
international
peace and security, agreeing that in
carrying out its duties under this responsibilily
the
Council acts on their behalf.

119. The Academic Vice-President of the college,
Brother Robert Daszkiwicz, told the press that the
invasion of Bethlehem University was an infringement
on the University’s
and its students’ rights to own
property, to be free to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information
and ideas through any media regardless of frontiers, as
well as to be free to hold peaceful assemblies. The
University administration
issued a statement calling
upon “all people who seek peace and justice and
all those committed
to preserving academic freedom to join them in speaking out against this nighttime invasion”.
As a representative of that people,
I thought it my duty to bring that appeal before the
Council.

113. The declaration of the Fez Arab Summit Conference is a reaffirmation of the trust o:f the Arabs in
[he Council. The PLO wishes, on behalf of the
Palestinian people, to reaffirm its adherence and
commitment
to the principles of the Charter, the
resolutions of the United Nations on the question of
Palestine and. naturally, the decisions of the Arab
Summit Conference,
I 14. 1 am being asked by a number of friends why the
Council should be convened. I have just stated why
the Council convenes at any time. The Council
convenes simply because it is entrusted with the
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security. This responsibility was conferred upon the
Council by “the peoples”, as the Charter says, and the
Palestinian people is one of those peoples.

120. Earlier’ that day, troops has surrounded the
campus and prevented students and visitors from
getting in. At the time, hundreds of students were
celebrating, delivering speeches and singing as part of
a cultural programme entitled “The Palestinian Song
Festival”, sponsored by the students’ senate arts club.
Perhaps the word “Palestinian”
enraged the Israelis.
Brother Thomas reportedly told the authorities that he
refused to intervene and prevent such festivities, since
that would be interference in internal activities.

1IS. I am also being asked why the Council should be
convened now. Frankly, for the past few weeks the
PLO has been issuing almost daily information
and
press releases on the fate and destiny of our brothers
under Israeli occupation. We had hoped that, as a
result of those letters that were addressed to the
President of the Council and the Secretary-General
and of those press releases, we would at least receive
some response from someone and the matter would be
taken up seriously in the Council.

121. Similar raids were carried out against Al-Najah
University,
in Nablus, in which 10 members of the
students’ council of the University were arrested.

116. Well. that did not rc;~lly happen, so the matter
was
discussed in the Group of Arab States and a
decision was taken to ask the Council to convene-and I am glad that the Council has responded.

122. At Bir Zeit University, Israeli military personnel arrested two students and barred foreign faculty
from entering the campus on 18 January. Military
checkposts stopped all cars and buses carrying students and teachers to the University. Israeli soldiers at
12

compelled to take all the arrested to the military
government in the nearest town.”

the checkposts ordered teachers and students to get
out of their vehicles, conducted body searches and
arrested two students. Nine foreign teachers were
stopped; their names were checked against a list; their
passport numbers were recorded; and the expiration
dates of their visas were registrered.

127. That was reported in Ydiot Alrc~rcmot m
12 November 1982, And yet WC are asked sometimes:
Why go to the Council?
128. In Hcr’n~etz; of 10 December, Amos Elan,
writer and journalist,
reported the following:

123, It was reported that Israeli soldiers informed the
foreigners that they had been forbidden to teach at Bir
‘Zeit University and that, if they did, they would be
breaking the law.

a

“Israel is a ‘democracy of masters’ which dominates a large population of other nations and denies
them any rights, including the most fundamental
ones. This population lives under a ‘police State’
which operates through arbitrary orders without the
control of a parliamentary
body, The Israelis can no
longer escape from the acknowledgement
of their
apartheid policy.”

124. There is also a university in Hebron. For three
days no classes were held at Hebron University-on
15, 16 and 17 January-following
the detention of
30 students. On 17 January five foreign teachers were
ordered to stop lecturing until they signed an antiPLO pledge. These teachers are British and Irish
nationals giving classes at Hebron University; they
were threatened with arrest if they kept working there.

129. This is one voice criticizing Israel within Israel.
There were 400,000 Israelis criticizing Israel and
nobody would dare say that the 400,000 were antiSemitic or anti-Jewish. If one voice is raised in the
United States criticizing
Israel, immediately
that
person becomes anti-Semitic,
even if he is a good
honest-to-God Jew.

125. And we are asked: Why convene the Council?
We thought that perhaps the Council could really be
moved and take some action.
126. Apart from incidents at the universities, there
are other things happening. I shall quote from an
Israeli newspaper, Ye&t Ahnronor, on the substance
of testimony given by a member of the Knesset, Shiva
Weiss, who sent a report to the ‘Chairman of the
Foreign and Security Affairs Committee of the Knesset and, through him, ‘to the Prime Minister. Neither
the Prime Minister nor the Chairman of that Committee has reacted and, according to the press report, no
one took the trouble to check the information.
The
report deals with the stoning of an Israeli car. It says:

130. Radio Israel, broadcasting in Hebrew on 4 January 1983-the Jerusalem domestic service-reported
the following:
“An officer who was the commander of the
General Staff branch in the Judea district testified
today for the defence in the trial of the seven
soldiers and officers charged with hitting civilians in
Judea and Samaria. He said thal there were clear
directives on how to treat the population, and they
included torture and hitting. . , . He answered in the
affirmative the prosecutor’s question of whether he
carried out orders to hit pupils after a riot in a school
in Hebron.”

“Half an hour later, in an alley far from where the
stoning happened, an Arab boy was arrested and
severely beaten with clubs until he could not stand
any more on his legs. He was merely the first of
those arrested in a preventative action which was
planned for that night with the help of somebody
appointed by the Israeli forces of occupation. Those
people pointed out the addresses of inhabitants.
Some 50 persons were arrested. They were concentrated along a wall, made to lie on their bellies and
then to do what they call ‘exercises’-flexing
their
elbows. Those who were slow were being beaten on
their backs or their testicles. Kicking was also
employed. The boy who was arrested previously
was then interrogated in public, and he was made to
lie under a jeep, beaten up and cursed. And until
6 a.m. the arrested continued doing exercises and
being beaten while from time to time soldiers shot
above their heads-soldiers
beating and humiliating.
The arrested were compelled to stand on one leg,
with their hands kept forward like statues. And as
dawn broke, the soldiers indulged in an orgy of
shooting in the presence of the arrested. And as the
morning cleared, a truck belonging to one of the
local inhabitants
was confiscated, and he was

131. The Jeudetn
Post in its issue of 21 January
reported that a document was submitted to the Central
Military Court in Jaffa on Wednesday, 19 January,
during the trial of this officer and the other soldiers.
According to that report Eitan-the
Chief of Staff; his
name came up the other day and we all know what
happened, but it is irrelevant at this moment-had
singled out issues such as the withdrawal from Sinai
and the introduction
of the civil administration as the
main causes for unrest in the territories under occupation I wonder whether Eitan had ever thought that the
unrest was caused by the prolonged occupation, by the
repression, by the denial of the human and political
and civil rights of the people. But what did he
prescribe for confronting such a situation? First he
opened a camp for teenage detainees at Far’a near
Nablus. There were other recommendations,
which
were:
“‘To arrest sparingly according to lists of suspects, arrest gradually according to the number of
places available in the prisons:
13

135. There is a process of indoctrination
about a
radical solution for the Arabs in what is called Eretz
Yisrael. What is that radical solution? The radical
solution is this: in order better to defend Israel, the
areas of the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and part of
Sinai should be for ever under Israeli control. The only
problem with that solution is the existence of more
than 1 million Palestinian terrorists-that
is what they
say-who
could be used by the Arabs behind the
defence line. The solution: we have to expel all the
Arabs from the occupied territories and kill those who
resist. This appeared in the Israeli paper Ha’aretz on
3 1 December 1982.

“To use the meanS of punishing parents;
“To demonstrate a positive attitude to the ‘good
ones’ and a harsh attitude to the ‘bad ones’ ”
-a carrot-and-stick policy.
132, In the document issued by Eitan he gave clear
instructions to the following effect:
“Inciters are to be dealt with forcefully
detained at every OpportunitY;

and

“One must construct a camp urgently and use the
legal facilities permitting detention for questioning
[without trial] for the [18-day1 period stipulated
. 1. release for a day or two and then renewed
arrest;

136. Members can see the compelling
that forced us to come to the Security
again.

circumstance
Council once

137. And there is the question of our treasured land.
The Israeli military authorities ordered the seizure on
13 January 1983 of 20,000 dunums of land belonging to
residents of Al-Dhahiriyeh,
south of Hebron. It was
not accidental, because that tract of land falls in an
area slated by the World Zionist Organization,
under
the Drobles Plan, for the establishment
of settlement blocs around densely populated centres in the
occupied territories. To my recollection, the Drobles
PIan was circulated as a document of the Council [see
S/13582 of 22 October 19791.

“The

civil administration iS t0 refrain from
notables in order to warn them [we would
humiliate ourselves] and is instead to carry out
arrests. ”
inviting

He also says in those directives that:
“The residents of the Jewish settlements have to
carry arms and open fire when they are attacked.
This should be made clear and publicized among the
Arab residents.”

138. In this case the land is located within the Mount
Hebron bloc, which, according to the World Zionist
Organization’s
plan, will be the site of three settlements. But that land was not empty. It has been
described by its owners as partially planted with
almond and olive trees, while the other section was
used for growing grain. For the families that owned the
20,000 dunums, the land constitutes a major source of
income, if not the only source of income. The Israeli
explanation: this is taken for military purposes.

They should be terrorized and shot’at. A further point
in the instructions says that:
“The civil administration should make extensive
use of economic sanctions against problematic
[Arab] localities, such as preventing the purchase of
cement or fuel for a period we will determine.”
That is, a period that the commander will determine,
133. And we are asked why the Council should meet
and consider what is going on.

around
139. But then, another 23,000 dunums-again
Hebron, in the village of Yatta-were
confiscated.
This time the reason for the seizure is not specified.

134. But this is not new to us. The military Government has issued orders to Israeli armed conscripts
on
the West Bank. One of those orders was the following:

140. As is known, Hebron is south of Jerusalem. North of Jerusalem in the Ramallah district,
5,000 dunums belonging to the village of Mukhmas
were seized, and, according to the Israeli newspaper
Hu’crretz, the land will be used to build a road to
to the
connect the Israeli settlement of Mukhmish
Palestinian village of Mukhmas.

“Anyone YOU catch outside, you first beat with
the clubs all over his body, except the head. Have
no mercy, break all his bones! Give no explanations.
First of all beat, and when you are finished YOU can
explain why YOU have done so. If you catch a small
child, order his whole famiiy out, make them stand
in a row, and beat the father in front of his children,
Don’t treat this beating as a privilege, it’s a duty!
They understand no other way. There is no point itI
arresting those who just wander around outside.
Beat them and send them home, But if someone
causes trouble, throws stones or something,
first
break his bones and then put him on the vehicle that
will take him to military headquarters,’ Remember:
from the minute he is on the vehicle he is an arrested
n-m and must not be beaten any more.37

141. Again, a detailed report, published before the
military authorities notified the Palestinian residents,
spoke of other areas in Jenin and Nablus-one
more,
north of Jerusalem-which
will come up for grabs very
soon.
142. Commenting
on the Israeli campaign to grab
more land, Meron Benvenisti, the former deputy
mayor of Jerusalem and an authority on Israeli
14

settlements policy, said that the Israeli Government is
going for 1.7 million dunums of West Bank land. He
predicted that the next few months will witness a large
increase in the rate of land confiscations.
143. In the Nablus area, 28,000 dunums were
grabbed on 19 January. The Israeli Custodian of
Absentee Property sent letters to the mukhturs of six
villages informing them of the decision of the occupation authorities. Just grab it! What do they do with that
land? According to Ha’arctz,
five new Jewish settlements will be established in the Jordan Valley on the
West Bank. The establishment
of these new scttlements has been approved by a Sub-Committee
of
the Governmental Committee for Settlements. So it is
not being done by dissidents or irresponsible elements;
it is being done by a Sub-Committee
of the Governmental Committee for Settlements.
144. Three of those five new settlements will be
established in 1983, as has been recommended
by
the Head of the Settlement Division in the Zionist
Histadrut.
145. On 25 January 1983 residents of Samu Village
on the West Bank complained that 1,500 dunums of
their land had been illegally grabbed.
146. On the other hand, the Israeli military Governor
of Gaza met with representatives of refugees on 25
January and ordered the delivery to the refugees of
written instructions signed by the military officer in
charge of Refugee Rehabilitation
and Welfare Affairs
-1 do not know what sort of establishment that is. The
‘instructions forbid the Palestinian refugees to construct new buildings, to build additional parts to old
ones or to demolish old buildings in order to build new
ones, without written permission from the military
government. The instructions also forbid the selling or
the renting of apartments or any buildings within the
refugee camp area. So a Palestinian who has a house
cannot rent a part of it in order to pay the taxes.
Eventually he might end up having to sell the house in
order to meet the dues and pay the taxes. That was in
Gaza.
147. In the Nablus area, the military-appointed
municipal council-or
what they called a municipal
council after they had dissolved the legally elected
Council of Nablus-had
stopped granting licences to
residents for building in the areas east and west of the
town, as well as in the Sawaneh and Green Belt areas,
which cover an area of 700 dunums’. Those areas were
considered “closed” by the military and no building
was allowed.
148. According to Hn’aretz of 5 January, the Israeli
Minister of Science and one of his assistants are
involved in establishing what they call “surveillant
staffs” in the West Bank to prevent Palestinians from
building new houses there.

149. One can see why it is imperative that the
Council should involve itself-if it is really up to the
responsibilities
vested in it by the Charter of the
United Nations. What we are seeing now is a policy of
economic and geographic strangulation of the Palestinian people. But, again, for us who are learned in
the Zionist doctrine, this is expected.
150. First, the aim was to spirit our people across the
frontiers. That was what Herzl wanted to do. He did
not succeed; nobody could spirit us across. Then
Jabotinsky,
the prompter and mentor of the Herut
Party, called for the evacuation of the Palestinians as a
prerequisite for establishing the State and said that the
evacuation should take place, if need be, by an ironfirst policy. Next came Koenig, who prescribed a
“thinning
away” policy - thinning the Arab population away, the way Eichmann wanted to thin away the
Jews in Vienna, It is not accidental that they used the
same terminology.
And now we are approaching what
is known as the “radical solution”. Maybe it is a
euphemism for the “final solution”, but we shall not
permit them to do it.
I5 I, We come now to the way the Israelis continue
their policies.
152. There was a United States President who, on
30 April 1979, stated that the policy of establishing
settlements was inconsistent with international law
and an obstacle to peace. Another President of the
United States was asked what he would do about what
he called a freeze on settlements. The Council calls fat
dismantling,
the United States speaks of freeze,
somebody may speak of defrosting, but nobody listens
in any event. That President said:
“1 don’t think that it would be good diplomacy to
be threatening
or anything. And I don’t believe
that’s necessary. I think that all of us realize that
peace is the ultimate goal there.”
What peace is the ultimate goal in light of what we
have just read to the Council? Even statements in the

State Department

of the United States vary.

153. Alan Romberg, on 4 November, commenting
the establishment
of settlements, said:
“[that]

intention.

on

, . [is] most unwelcome.

we cannot understand why, at a time when
we are actively seeking broader participation in the
peace process, Israel persists in a pattern of activity
which erodes the confidence of all, and most
particularly
the Palestinians of the West Bank and
Gaza.”
6,

*

I

.

He even questioned Israel’s “willingness to abide by
the promise of resolution 242 [(1967)]“. Even the
United States questions that.

their homes in Sidon and taking refuge in the nearby
Ein El-Melweh camp.”

154. ~~~~ I wish through
YOU, Mr. President, to assure
the representative of the United States that it is not
only

the

cc,nfidence

of

the

PdestinianS

Of

the

West

Bank and Gaza that has been eroded; the credibility of
the United States and the confidence in the United
SLates (,f all p;llestinians have been eroded also. We
have completely lost all confidence after Sabra and
Shatila.

159. We are really concerned. Are our people being
forced out of the city, being put in a refugee camp,
unprotected, unarmed, undefended, so that there may
be a repetition of what happened at the Sabra and
Shatila camps?

155. ‘fhcre

160. 1 shall hold the Council responsible for any
repetition of that genocidal crime against our people,
unless the Council moves. We cannot but condemn
Israel and hold it solely and exclusively responsible for
these criminal acts.

was another statement by the State
Department on the Israeli Settlement+-!
moSt
unfortunate and unwelcome statement. Here 1s a concrete
translation of the position of the United States: only
five months after Israel’s brutal invasion of Lebanon,
it gets $475 million more than it used to receive.

161. A report of the International
tells us that an

156. After slaughtering innocent men, women and
children, Israel arrogantly dismissed President Reagan’s Middle East peace plan. I am not defending that
plan in any way, but I should at least like the United
States to know exactly how much it is contributing
-and not indirectly but directly-to Israel’s maintenance of and persistence in its policy. After all, if the
United States gives Israel $2.485 billion a year-officially two thirds of it will take the form of grants, but in
the final analysis it will be all grants--I
cannot
understand how the United States can exonerate itself
of this Israeli policy, And yet we are asked why the
Council should intervene.

“internationally
wrongful act committed by a State
in a field of activity in which that State is subject to
the power of direction or control of another State
entails the international
responsibility of that other
State. . . . The occupying State. . . assumes international responsibility
for any internationally
wrongful
acts committed
by organs of its own with which it
has replaced corresponding organs of the occupied
State, and will obviously be responsible for its own
act.”
The same responsibility falls squarely on that State fol
acts committed by other organs. Israel is exclusively
responsible for all those crimes, including the crimes
of Sabra and Shatila and the invasion of Beirut, and
I should like to see the Council pronounce itself clearly
on this matter.

157. Israel occupies a large part of Lebanon. It has
been asked and requested, and there have been
demands to this effect too, to withdraw from those
territories and to ensure that the lives of the people of
those territories are safeguarded and protected.
158. On 9 February the Commissioner-General
of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) issued a press
release--at last someone in the United Nations informed us what was happening lo our people under
occupation. In that press release he stated that an
explosion at the Miyah Miyah refugee camp, which
has a population of 2,500, near Sidon, during the night
had injured 3 people and damaged I4 houses, 2 seriously. Mr. Rydbeck, the Commissioner-General,
said
at his headquarters in Vienna:

162. The General
Assembly,
in its resolution
37/123 B of 16 December 1982, has unanimously
condemned the plunder of the Palestinian cultural
heritage and called upon the Government of Israel to
make full restitution
of all the cultural properly
belonging to Palestinian
institutions,
including
the
archives and documents removed from the Palestine
Research Centre in Beirut, documents and archives
arbitrarily seized by the Israeli military forces. The
General Assembly
adopted that resolution
unanimously. Naturally, the criminal cast the lone negative
vote.

“This is the third incident at the camp in less than
two weeks. On 31 January a shop in the camp was
blown up, and on I February a group of men arrived
in taxis and stoned some houses, UNRWA
is in
touch with the Israeli forces on the spot in an
attempt to Put an end to these attacks, which are
terrorizing innocent refugees, including children. It
is Israel’s responsibility to ensure the safety of the
civilian population in the areas which it controls.”
Thai was the statement of Mr. Rydbeck.
release continues:

Law Commission

163. An attack on a cultural heritage is an act of
cultural genocide. We are now watching a television
series called “The Winds of War”, The world watched
the Nazis-those
Christian Nazis-burn
books, a cultural heritage. We still live through those scenes
almost every night. We live them in our minds, in our
consciences. We remember those crimes, those acts of
cultural genocide, with horror.

The press
164. Yet the Palestine Research Centre in Beirut was
subjected to an escalating wave of attacks. A few
years ago the Director, an academic, received an
envelope which proved to be a letter-bomb. It caused

“In other recent incidents, some 40 Palestinian
I-cfQW families have been intimidated into leaving
16

loss of sight in one eve. and the fingers of one hand
were litel’ally choppeh ‘off. Another member of the
Research Centre, a Palestinian writer, was killed when
a time bomb exploded in his car. A few years ago the
Centre was the target of a missile attack-yes,
an
attack with missiles mounted on a vehicle automatically and remotely controlled. While there was a
lack of precision, the Centre suffered costly damage.
The military troops of the Judeo-Nazis and the JudeoNazi Junta that sits in Tel-Aviv,
that Junta that
represents the Irgun Tzeva’i Leumi, those who collaborated with Hitler’s
hordes-yes,
those troops
marched on Beirut. And one prime target was the
Palestine Research Centre. The Israeli army looted
archives and documents of every kind concerning
Palestinian history and culture. Irreplaceable manuscripts were looted. But the PLO was resolute. A
cultural centre with our Palestinian heritage, our
national heritage, should be made available to all.

166. I am sure that the Judeo-Nazi Junta in Tel Aviv
will persist in its policy and efforts to eliminate the
Palestinian-cultural
or human. The PLO deems it
only proper that the Council should condemn Israel for
such acts and demand full restitution and indemnification for the material loss incurred. Israel cannot
exonerate itself by the challenge: “Show me concrete
evidence that Israel is implicated in or party to the
crime”.
167. In conclusion, we call upon the Council and we
hope it will respond. Israel must bc forced to withdraw
from all the territories it has occupied since 1967.
Israel must abide by and carry out all the decisions of
the Security Council, and if Israel does not do that,
then the Council has the remedy: such criminals have
no place in the United Nations.
T/w meeting r’ose ut 6.30 p.m.

165. Thus having failed to destroy the resolute will
of the Palestinians to survive, and alarmed by the
powers of the intellect,
Israel proceeded to the
next step-burning
the Centre. A car loaded with
500 pounds of explosives was detonated outside the
Centre, resulting in the destruction by fire of a cultural heritage. The explosion resulted in another act
of human, or rather inhuman, genocide. More than
20 innocent human beings were killed, assassinated in
cold blood, and more than 120 were . rushed to
hospitals to be attended by medical’ specialists as a
result of injuries received.

NOTES

’ Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of 12 August 1949 (United Nations, Treaty Series,
vol.

75, No.

973).

’ WmkIy
Compilatiort
qf Prcsiderl/in/
D~~I~I~~II~~, Washington,
D.C.. Government Printing Office, 1982, vol. 18, No. 35, p, 1081.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Cor~uh

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&
des ventes. New York ou Gen&.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votrc lihraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

L;ls publicacioncs
de las Nacioncs
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nuevd
York o Ginebra.

DES

UNIES

et Its agences
zi : Nations

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estin
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

dbpositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casns distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n
de Vmtas,
