A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/60
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 142
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/49/743)]
49/60.

Measures to eliminate international
terrorism

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 46/51 of 9 December 1991 and its decision
48/411 of 9 December 1993,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1/
Having considered in depth the question of measures to eliminate
international terrorism,
Convinced that the adoption of the declaration on measures to eliminate
international terrorism should contribute to the enhancement of the struggle
against international terrorism,
1.
Approves the Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International
Terrorism, the text of which is annexed to the present resolution;
2.
Invites the Secretary-General to inform all States, the Security
Council, the International Court of Justice and the relevant specialized
agencies, organizations and organisms of the adoption of the Declaration;
3.
Urges that every effort be made in order that the Declaration
becomes generally known and is observed and implemented in full;
4.
Urges States, in accordance with the provisions of the
Declaration, to take all appropriate measures at the national and
international levels to eliminate terrorism;
___________
1/
95-76819

A/49/257 and Add.1-3.
/...

A/RES/49/60
Page 2

5.
Invites the Secretary-General to follow up closely the
implementation of the present resolution and the Declaration, and to submit to
the General Assembly at its fiftieth session a report thereon, relating, in
particular, to the modalities of implementation of paragraph 10 of the
Declaration;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session the item entitled "Measures to eliminate international terrorism", in
order to examine the report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph 5
above, without prejudice to the annual or biennial consideration of the item.
84th plenary meeting
9 December 1994
ANNEX
Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 2/ the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security, 3/ the Definition of Aggression, 4/ the Declaration on
the Enhancement of the Effectiveness of the Principle of Refraining from the
Threat or Use of Force in International Relations, 5/ the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights, 6/
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 7/ and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 7/
Deeply disturbed by the world-wide persistence of acts of international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including those in which States
are directly or indirectly involved, which endanger or take innocent lives,
have a deleterious effect on international relations and may jeopardize the
security of States,
____________
2/

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

3/

Resolution 2734 (XXV).

4/

Resolution 3314 (XXIX), annex.

5/

Resolution 42/22, annex.

6/
Report of the World Conference on Human Rights, Vienna,
14-25 June 1993 (A/CONF.157/24 (Part I)), chap. III.
7/

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

/...

A/RES/49/60
Page 3

Deeply concerned by the increase, in many regions of the world, of acts
of terrorism based on intolerance or extremism,
Concerned at the growing and dangerous links between terrorist groups
and drug traffickers and their paramilitary gangs, which have resorted to all
types of violence, thus endangering the constitutional order of States and
violating basic human rights,
Convinced of the desirability for closer coordination and cooperation
among States in combating crimes closely connected with terrorism, including
drug trafficking, unlawful arms trade, money laundering and smuggling of
nuclear and other potentially deadly materials, and bearing in mind the role
that could be played by both the United Nations and regional organizations in
this respect,
Firmly determined to eliminate international terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations,
Convinced also that the suppression of acts of international terrorism,
including those in which States are directly or indirectly involved, is an
essential element for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Convinced further that those responsible for acts of international
terrorism must be brought to justice,
Stressing the imperative need to further strengthen international
cooperation between States in order to take and adopt practical and effective
measures to prevent, combat and eliminate all forms of terrorism that affect
the international community as a whole,
Conscious of the important role that might be played by the United
Nations, the relevant specialized agencies and States in fostering widespread
cooperation in preventing and combating international terrorism, inter alia,
by increasing public awareness of the problem,
Recalling the existing international treaties relating to various
aspects of the problem of international terrorism, inter alia, the Convention
on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at
Tokyo on 14 September 1963, 8/ the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970, 9/ the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil
Aviation, concluded at Montreal on 23 September 1971, 10/ the Convention on
the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, adopted in New York on
14 December 1973, 11/ the International Convention against the Taking of
___________
8/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704, No. 10106.

9/

Ibid., vol. 860, No. 12325.

10/

Ibid., vol. 974, No. 14118.

11/

Ibid., vol. 1035, No. 15410.

/...

A/RES/49/60
Page 4

Hostages, adopted in New York on 17 December 1979, 12/ the Convention on
thePhysical Protection of Nuclear Material, adopted at Vienna on 3 March 1980,
13/ the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports
Serving International Civil Aviation, supplementary to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, signed at
Montreal on 24 February 1988, 14/ the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, done at Rome on
10 March 1988, 15/ the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against
the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on the Continental Shelf, done at Rome
on 10 March 1988, 16/ and the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives
for the Purpose of Detection, done at Montreal on 1 March 1991, 17/
Welcoming the conclusion of regional agreements and mutually agreed
declarations to combat and eliminate terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations,
Convinced of the desirability of keeping under review the scope of
existing international legal provisions to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, with the aim of ensuring a comprehensive legal framework
for the prevention and elimination of terrorism,
Solemnly declares the following:
I
1.
The States Members of the United Nations solemnly reaffirm their
unequivocal condemnation of all acts, methods and practices of terrorism, as
criminal and unjustifiable, wherever and by whomever committed, including
those which jeopardize the friendly relations among States and peoples and
threaten the territorial integrity and security of States;
2.
Acts, methods and practices of terrorism constitute a grave
violation of the purposes and principles of the United Nations, which may pose
a threat to international peace and security, jeopardize friendly relations
among States, hinder international cooperation and aim at the destruction of
human rights, fundamental freedoms and the democratic bases of society;
3.
Criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror
in the general public, a group of persons or particular persons for political
purposes are in any circumstance unjustifiable, whatever the considerations of
a political, philosophical, ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or any
other nature that may be invoked to justify them;
___________
12/

Resolution 34/146, annex.

13/
International Atomic Energy Agency, document INFCIRC/225; to be
published in United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1456, No. 24631.
14/

International Civil Aviation Organization, document DOC 9518.

15/

International Maritime Organization, document SUA/CONF/15/Rev.1.

16/

Ibid., document SUA/CONF/16/Rev.2.

17/

See S/22393 and Corr.1.
/...

A/RES/49/60
Page 5

II
4.
States, guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and other relevant rules of international law, must refrain
from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in terrorist acts in
territories of other States, or from acquiescing in or encouraging activities
within their territories directed towards the commission of such acts;
5.
States must also fulfil their obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations and other provisions of international law with respect to
combating international terrorism and are urged to take effective and resolute
measures in accordance with the relevant provisions of international law and
international standards of human rights for the speedy and final elimination
of international terrorism, in particular:
To refrain from organizing, instigating, facilitating, financing,
(a)
encouraging or tolerating terrorist activities and to take appropriate
practical measures to ensure that their respective territories are not used
for terrorist installations or training camps, or for the preparation or
organization of terrorist acts intended to be committed against other States
or their citizens;
(b)
To ensure the apprehension and prosecution or extradition of
perpetrators of terrorist acts, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
their national law;
(c)
To endeavour to conclude special agreements to that effect on a
bilateral, regional and multilateral basis, and to prepare, to that effect,
model agreements on cooperation;
(d)
To cooperate with one another in exchanging relevant information
concerning the prevention and combating of terrorism;
(e)
To take promptly all steps necessary to implement the existing
international conventions on this subject to which they are parties, including
the harmonization of their domestic legislation with those conventions;
(f)
To take appropriate measures, before granting asylum, for the
purpose of ensuring that the asylum seeker has not engaged in terrorist
activities and, after granting asylum, for the purpose of ensuring that the
refugee status is not used in a manner contrary to the provisions set out in
subparagraph (a) above;
6.
In order to combat effectively the increase in, and the growing
international character and effects of, acts of terrorism, States should
enhance their cooperation in this area through, in particular, systematizing
the exchange of information concerning the prevention and combating of
terrorism, as well as by effective implementation of the relevant
international conventions and conclusion of mutual judicial assistance and
extradition agreements on a bilateral, regional and multilateral basis;
7.
In this context, States are encouraged to review urgently the
scope of the existing international legal provisions on the prevention,
repression and elimination of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
with the aim of ensuring that there is a comprehensive legal framework
covering all aspects of the matter;
/...

A/RES/49/60
Page 6

8.
Furthermore States that have not yet done so are urged to
consider, as a matter of priority, becoming parties to the international
conventions and protocols relating to various aspects of international
terrorism referred to in the preamble to the present Declaration;
III
9.
The United Nations, the relevant specialized agencies and
intergovernmental organizations and other relevant bodies must make every
effort with a view to promoting measures to combat and eliminate acts of
terrorism and to strengthening their role in this field;
10.
The Secretary-General should assist in the implementation of the
present Declaration by taking, within existing resources, the following
practical measures to enhance international cooperation:
A collection of data on the status and implementation of existing
(a)
multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements relating to international
terrorism, including information on incidents caused by international
terrorism and criminal prosecutions and sentencing, based on information
received from the depositaries of those agreements and from Member States;
(b)
A compendium of national laws and regulations regarding the
prevention and suppression of international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, based on information received from Member States;
(c)
An analytical review of existing international legal instruments
relating to international terrorism, in order to assist States in identifying
aspects of this matter that have not been covered by such instruments and
could be addressed to develop further a comprehensive legal framework of
conventions dealing with international terrorism;
(d)
A review of existing possibilities within the United Nations
system for assisting States in organizing workshops and training courses on
combating crimes connected with international terrorism;
IV
11.
All States are urged to promote and implement in good faith and
effectively the provisions of the present Declaration in all its aspects;
12.
Emphasis is placed on the need to pursue efforts aiming at
eliminating definitively all acts of terrorism by the strengthening of
international cooperation and progressive development of international law and
its codification, as well as by enhancement of coordination between, and
increase of the efficiency of, the United Nations and the relevant specialized
agencies, organizations and bodies.
