S/PRST/2010/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2010
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6326th meeting of the Security Council, held on 1 June 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council deeply regrets the loss of life and injuries
resulting from the use of force during the Israeli military operation in
international waters against the convoy sailing to Gaza. The Council, in this
context, condemns those acts which resulted in the loss of at least ten civilians
and many wounded, and expresses its condolences to their families.
“The Security Council requests the immediate release of the ships as well
as the civilians held by Israel. The Council urges Israel to permit full consular
access, to allow the countries concerned to retrieve their deceased and
wounded immediately, and to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance
from the convoy to its destination.
“The Security Council takes note of the statement of the UN SecretaryGeneral on the need to have a full investigation into the matter and it calls for
a prompt, impartial, credible and transparent investigation conforming to
international standards.
“The Security Council stresses that the situation in Gaza is not
sustainable. The Council re-emphasizes the importance of the full
implementation of Resolutions 1850 and 1860. In that context, it reiterates its
grave concern at the humanitarian situation in Gaza and stresses the need for
sustained and regular flow of goods and people to Gaza as well as unimpeded
provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza.
“The Security Council underscores that the only viable solution to
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an agreement negotiated between the parties and
re-emphasizes that only a two-State solution, with an independent and viable
Palestinian State living side by side in peace and security with Israel and its
other neighbours, could bring peace to the region.
“The Security Council expresses support for the proximity talks and
voices concern that this incident took place while the proximity talks are
underway and urges the parties to act with restraint, avoiding any unilateral
and provocative actions, and all international partners to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation between the parties and throughout the region.”

10-38279 (E) 010610

*1038279*
