“’ ,‘.,I; f,:;‘I :
>’L ).‘,,!/
TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 14 NOVEMBER 1967

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1376)

.... .,... ... .... .. I.... .... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . .

1

Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8218) . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1376

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of-the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 14 Noirember 1967, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE (Mali).

4. I have what I believe to be a communication of some
importance to make to the Council but, before I do so, I
wish to answer the concrete questions asked on Friday,
10 November [1374th meetilzgj, by one of the delegations
participating in this debate.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America.

5. The first question was: “Are the authorities of Lisbon
prepared to deny that they have played, or are playing, any
role, either direct or indirect, in the activities of the
mercenaries? ”

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 376)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
6. My delegation’s answer is that we do deny that the
Portuguese authorities have played, or are playing, any role,
either direct or indirect, in the activities of the mercenaries.

2. Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/821 8).

7. The second question was: “Is Portugal indeed in a
position to certify that it has never had any knowledge
whatsoever of the recruitment of mercenaries in territories
under its jurisdiction? ”

Adoption of the Ayends

8. My delegation’s answer is that we have never had, noi
do we have, any knowledge of the recruitment of mqrcenaries in Portuguese territories and in fact we deny that any
such recruitment has ever taken place.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/821 8)

9. The third question was: “Is the Lisbon Government
really in a position to state that it is completely unaware of
the fact that mercenaries preparing for an assault against
the Congo have been located on any territory under its
jurisdiction? ”

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the decision taken at the 1372nd meeting, I
propose with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Portugal, Burundi, Zambia and Algeria to participate
without vote in the discussion and to take the places
reserved for them.

10. My delegation’s answer is that we deny that any
mercenaries have been located in any Portuguese territory
for the purpose of assaulting any neighbouring or other
country. We do not allow such activities in our territories.
11. Having answered these questions I wish now to draw
the attention of the Council to the statement issued by the
Portuguese Government on 12 November which was circulated on the following day to the members of the Council
at the request of the Permanent Mission of Portugal to the
United Nations [S/8238/. That statement reveals:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Umba di Lutete
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Mr. F. de Miranda
(Portugal) took places at the Council table.
‘At
the invitation of the President, Mr. T Nsanzd
(Burundi),
Mr. J. II. Mwemba (Zambia)
and Mr. T.
Bouattoura (Algeria) took the seats reserved for them.
,

(1) That two groups of refugees totalling 492 persons
crossed into Angola from the Congo towards the end of last
week;

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
.The
Council will now continue its discussion of the item before
it. The first speaker is the representative of Portugal, and I
now call on him.

(2) That the unarmed persons will be repatriated in
accordance with their wishes;

3. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): I thank you very much
indeed for giving me the floor.

(3) That among the refugees there were 75 Europeans
and 213 Congolese, all carrying arms;
1

(4) That these have been disarmed by the Portuguese
authorities;

20, Mr. PARTHASARATHI
(India): The Security
Council, within four months of its consideration of a
complaint from the Government of the Democratic Bepublic of the Congo regarding the activities of a group of
mercenaries on its territory, is called upon once agail to
examine a similar complaint from the same Govemrnent,
Members will recall that in July this year and before that ia
October 1966 the Council also met to deal with exactlY the
same situation. This frequency of interference by external
forces in the domestic affairs of a State Member of the
United Nations is a matter of great concern to mY
delegation, a concern which, I have no doubt, is shareIdbY
the other members of the Council. My delegation attaches
the highest importance to the principle of non-intervention
in the internal affairs of Member States and consequently
deplores any such interference or attempted interferlence
from any quarter.

(5) That the 75 Europeans will be sent to their respective
countries while the 213 Congolese will be given asylum in
terms of international law should they so desire;
(6) That there was no Portuguese national
refugees.

among the

12. My delegation ventures to hope that the countries of
which the seventy-five armed Europeans are nationals will
take adequate steps to ensure that such persons, if they are
mercenaries, are not given new passports enabling them to
travel again to the Congo.
13. My delegation would also like to refer to some
practical questions. Who are the mercenaries really? Are
they only white men or are they also the Congolese who
follow their call? Do they include the so-called volunteers
serving in the Congolese army, or are these to be called
mercenaries only when they turn against their employers?

21. We all know the history of the friendly country of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and how it has been
subjected to foreign forces of colonialism, in one form or
another, since its emergence to independent statehood over
seven years ago. Soon after it became independent the
country was engulfed in a bitter civil war which, as we all
know, was engineered and controlled from outside. The
United Nations, whose assistance was asked for- and
provided on a massive scale, succeeded, after four yea:rsof
ceaseless efforts, in restoring the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the country. The Government of India is
proud of this achievement of the world Organization and of
its own contribution to it.

14. These are not mere rhetorical questions, Since Portugal has been accused in regard to mercenaries in the Congo,
my delegation feels entitled to an answer to these questions. We have to know the mind of the Council for our
future guidance, lest we should be brought here once again
to be subjected to judgements based on mere presumptions.
15. Finally, 1 hope the Council realizes that, having spent
so many hours on accusations against Portugal, those who
have used the Council for this purpose have not succeeded
in diverting the attention of the world from the real
problems of international peace and security.

22. Everyb,ody hoped that the Congo would be able,
thereafter, to live in peace and to consolidate its internal
position so as to devote its energies to the causewhich is so
dear to all the newly independent countries, namely, the
improvement of the standards of living of our peoples. But,
alas, this was not to be the case for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which continued to be the victim of
foreign interference and which has, as a result, been obliged
to spend a good deal of effort and resourceson combating
the reactionary elements from outside.

16. Mr. ADEBO (Nigeria): The African case on the subject
before the Security Council in support of the representative
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been amply
and most effectively put forward by those designated by
the African group of countries for this purpose, namely, the
representatives of Burundi, Zambia and Algeria, and very
effectively supported, as will be recalled, by my friend and
colleague, the representative of Ethiopia.

23. My delegation listened with great care and sym@hy
to the statement made by the Deputy Foreign Minister of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 8 November
[1372nd meeting/. I wish to assure the Deputy Minister
that my delegation, far from becoming weary, appreciates
the trouble and efforts made by his delegation to apprise
the Council of the unhappy situation existing or. the
borders of the Congo.

17. In this brief intervention, I wish to make a comment
upon this general question of the presence of mercenaries in
Africa and their use to the detriment of the sovereignty and
national integrity of African countries. My colleagues will
recall that a meeting of a special committee of the
Organization of African Unity took place a couple days ago
in Kinshasa, and that the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo made a very important statement on
that occasion,

24. The principal source for the recurrent troubles faced
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo from outside
seems to be the Portuguese colony of Angola. The
representative of the Democratic Republic’of the Ccago
gave a detailed expose of the latest incidents inVolVi% the
activities of mercenary bands which came into the atanga
province of the Congo from Angola with a view to car.rYing
out their usual destructive plans. The representative of
Portugal, as was to be expected, denied that Angola.Was
being used or was allowed to be used as a baseof operations
for interfering in the domestic affairs of the Congo. B% as

18. I think that from this my colleagues will realize that
we have not had the last word from Africa on this question
of the presence of mercenaries in our continent. It is a
general question which we wish to pursue and I can assure
the Council that it will be pursued energetically as soon as
possible.
19. That is the brief intervention
this stage of our proceedings.

that’ I wished to make at
2

was rightly pointed out by the representative of the United
Kingdom:
‘I . . . it is hard-it is very hard-to believe that the Iatest
band of mercenaries, who apparently came into the
Ratanga Province of the Congo from Angola, could have
been assembled and armed in Angola without the
knowledge of the Portuguese authorities” f1372nd meet-

we want is to live in peace in our own country, and we
want both the Congolese and the foreigners living among
us to be able to go about their business in peace without
having to defend themselves against highway robbers and
mercenaries.” [1372nd meeting, para. 32.1
29. Surely the Security Council cannot fail to heed this
appeal from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I want
to assure the representative of the Congo that my delegation will give full support to any measures which would
help his country rid itself of the curse of the mercenaries.
We hope that the Security Council wili deal effectively with
the complaint of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
the discharge of its responsibilities for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

ing, para. 63J.

25. That mercenaries had entered the Congo cannot be
doubted by any one. And the only place they could have
come from is Angola. The disclaimer of the representative
of Portugal, therefore, did not and could not sound
convincing. As the representative of the United States
stated:
“It is very difficult for my delegation to understand
how foreign mercenaries could be present in Angola,
make preparations for such a misadventure and then leave
Angola for the Congo without the knowledge or at least
acquiescence of the Portuguese authorities. The implications of Portuguese responsibility, even if only tacit,
would therefore appear to be serious.” [Ibid., para. 86.1

30. Mr, DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): My delegation is
happy to join those which have preceded it here in
expressing gratitude to Ambassador Tsuruoka of Japan for
the able manner in which he discharged his duties as
President of the Security Council during the month of
October. We are happy also to express to you, Mr.
President, our confidence in your competence and integrity-a confidence which is shared by all in this Council,

26. My delegation would like to express its most serious
concern at the reported and repeated attempts of the
Portuguese authorities to use and permit the use of their
African colonies for the purpose of interfering in the
domestic affairs of the neighbouring independent African
States. I have advisedly used the noun “State” in the plural
because my delegation recalls that the Governments of
Zambia, Senegal and Guinea have also complained of the
active interference in their internal affairs by the Portuguese authorities in Angola and so-called Portuguese
Guinea. These complaints were made by Zambia on 5
January I967 (S/7664/, by Senegal on IO October 1967
(S/81 861 and by Guinea on 13 October 1967 [S/81 931. In
fact, the Security Council deemed it necessary to include a
paragraph in its resolution 226 (1966) of 14 October 1966
which reads:

31. My delegation has examined carefully the statements
made before this Council on Wednesday, 8 November, by
the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the representative of Portugal. From what
we heard, three points are of particular importance for our
deliberations here. In the first place, according to the
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, “the mercenaries stationed in Angola launched an
aggressive attack on our country on 1 November 1967”
/1372nd meeting, para. 141, penetrating through Luashi.
Secondly, the representative of Portugal read for us a note
from his Government stating categorically that “there are
no bases in Angola and there have been none at the service
of mercenaries, nor have any groups, whether armed or
unarmed, crossed the frontier posts in the direction of the
Congo” (ibid., para. 591. Thirdly, the representative of
Portugal reiterated an invitation by his Government to
investigate the charges which the Congolese Government
has levelled against Portugal. It is in the light of those three
elements that I should like to state the position of the
Brazilian delegation.

Vrges the Government of Portugal, in view of its own
statement, not to allow foreign mercenaries to use Angola
as a base of operation for interfering in the domestic
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.

27. My colleagues from Ethiopia, Liberia, Burundi,
Zambia and Nigeria gave a very accurate analysis of the
situation obtaining in southern Africa, today. They explained how the problem of mercenary activities was only a
ramification of more fundamental problems in southern
Africa with which the United Nations has failed, up to now,
to deal effectively. My delegation agrees with the views of
our African colleagues. It is obvious that the difficulties of
the Congo and some other African countries. will not be
completely eliminated until the people in Angola, Mommbique and so-called Portuguese Guinea achieve their freedom and independence.

32. There is no denying that, if established, the facts
alleged by the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are of a most serious nature in
themselves, irrespective of the violations they constitute of
the Security Council resolutions 226 (1966) of 14 October
1966 and 239 (1967) of 10 July 1967. The Brazilian
Government has already made clear in this chamber its
position in regard to the recruitment, training and transit of
mercenaries used for subversive activities. My delegation
voted for the Security Council resolution adopted on 10
July 1967 and in this context I should like to recall that at
the time we suggested here that the Council should go a
step further and condemn all kinds of subversive activities
and all breaches of the principles of the Charter, regardless
of who carried out those activities-mercenaries or volunteers motivated by ideological reasons. We stand by our
views.

28. The Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has appealed to the Council for
help. He told us in very moving terms that his country
wanted only one thing. I quote from his statement:
(6. . . we have suffered a great deal and many countries
represented here have helped us in our misfortunes All
3

33. This is not the first time that the Security Council has
been faced with the task of determining responsibilities for
actions that endanger world peace and security. In recent
history we have been called upon to tackle problems of this
nature many times and it has not proved to be an easy task.
The weight that condemnation by this Council carries is a
strong reason for us to consider each and every fact
thoroughIy and with the utmost care. This Council has
often refrained from passing a verdict or taking a clear-cut
decision when it has considered that there was not
sufficient evidence to warrant such action.

promotion or organization of subversion, terrorism or other
indirect forms of intervention for the purpose of changing
by violence the existing system in another State or
interfering in civil strife in another State”.
39. We endorse the contention of the Democratic R.epublic of the Congo that measures are called for to put ;an
end to the activities of mercenary troops seeking to gain a
foothold by force of arms in order to attain goals which are
unavowable or, at any rate unknown. We believe that with
the evidence we hdVe at hand, though it is not all we should
have liked in order to act with greater authority, we c;an
verify the inaction on the part of Congo’s neighbour Stat.es
to prevent the territory in question from becoming the
bridgehead for intervention in other territories.

34. That should not be construed as a failure of the
Council to fulfil its responsibilities but only as a measure of
the caution and care that must necessarily frame our
deliberations. The gravity of the matters brought to this
body makes it imperative that any decisions taken by us,
especially those of a condemnatory nature, be based on
solid, unequivocal evidence. The evidence presented here at
the 1372nd meeting was not sufficient, in our view, to
establish in an unequivocal way the participation of the
Portuguese authorities in the recent events in Katanga.

40. I believe that we must act realistically and objective:ly
in regard to intervention and must deplore it whenever it
occurs for the very reason that it has been committed,
without reference to notions as difficult to define and to
prove as intent and complicity. We believe that interventilon
is a pathological phenomenon of international life which we
must make every effort to extirpate.

35. Furthermore, it appears to my delegation that it
would perhaps be difficult to single out any one country, or
rather the citizens or organizations of a single country, as
mainly responsible for the mercenary operations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Are not those operations, I ask, by their nature, scale and purpose of a
multinational
character and launched from different
places? In the view of my delegation, the Council should
try first to investigate all aspects of the activities relating to
the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries used
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

41. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): As there
are no more speakers on the list, and as no other member
has expressed a desire to speak it is now the turn of the
delegation of Mali to speak. I shall therefore speak on
behalf of the delegation of MALI.
42. I should first like to say how much my delegation
appreciates the flattering things said here about my country
and its representatives. I would add that if over its seven
years of active participation in international life my
country has earned your praise, it has been due rather to
the virtues of its people than to the competence of the
unassuming individuals who have had the signal privilege of
representing it here since its accession to independence,
Av~ as I said on 27 September 1967 [1368th meet@], i:he
position I occupy among you will be used exclusively in lJie
cause of international justice, peace and security,

36. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated from Spanish): We
are meeting once again to consider a complaint from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo regarding mercenary
troop activities in that country. We are confronted,
regrettably, with a phenomenon that seems to be endemic
in that region, and one which the United Nations must
vigorously condemn. It is not permissible fc I the territor-T
of one State to be used for the perpetration of serious
crimes against the personality of others. Only a short time
ago, in July, we pointed out that such phenomena were not
new to the Council. Only a few days after the Congo
became independent, in July 1960, the Council wasalready
appealing to all States to refrain from action which might
jeopardize the political independence of the cou.ntry; and
the appeal has been repeated several times, both by the
General Assembly and by the Security Council.

43. My country, involved as a militant in the cause of
peace, resolutely anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist, will
spare neither efforts nor resources to help the Security
Council settle the world’s problems. Let me assureyou that
we are not trying to blow our own trumpet or to prete:nd
that we have a monopoly of physical courage; our attitude
stems from the simple rule of intellectual and moral probity
which imposes upon all of us a rigorous respect for our
commitments to the United Nations, whose Charter our
countries have freely signed. I pledge my co-operation in
advance to all men of good will working for peace and
justice.

37. Despite all this, we again have to face apparently
similar situations which recur from time to time in the
Congo. We are thus confonted with what is an evident
example of interference in the life of a people struggling
hard for its economic and social development and its
political independence.

44. Having said this, I should now like to give my own
views, on behalf of the delegation of Mali, on the matter
before us today.

38. We must emphasize again that we condemn all forms
of intervention, particularly those censured in the principles
set forth in General Assembly resolutions 2131 (XX) and
2225 (XXI). The latter resolution, adopted last year, calls
upon all States “to refrain from armed intervention or the

45. Once again we are faced with a complaint by ,the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
against Portugal. The clear statement by the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, backed up by concrete facts substantiating the
4

annexed documents placed before the Council by his
delegation, constitutes an irrefutable and damning accusation against Portugal, which has, now been condemned
at the bar of this Organization for the third time and for
the same reason. Even the most cautious members of the
Council have found a strong presumption of guilt on the
part of Portugal.

Lisbon authorities for the most recent resolution of the
Fourth Committee of the United Nations, and reported by
the world Press in the following terms:
“Lisbon, 11 November. The approval by the Fourth
Committee of the United Nations of the Afro-Asian
resolution condemning Portugal’s attitude in Africa was
received calmly in Lisbon. Official circles say they are
used to such resolutions, which contain nothing new and
are merely meaningless repetitions of previous votes.
They point out, incidentally, that the most important
States did not approve the resolution, and that only its
sponsors and their friends, the Afro-Asian bloc and the
communist countries, voted for it which is the best proof
that it has no relation to the facts of life.”

46. Portugal has ignored the recommendations and resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council;
and has been encouraged to do so in large measure by the
reprehensible apathy of this Organization. The pious denials
by the representative of Lisbon cannot deceive anyone.
Portugal and the Non-Self-Governing Territories it adnunisters-the favourite haunt of stateless persons and adventurers of every description-have been and still are the
rallying and transit point for all the hordes of mercenaries
who have attacked without ceasing the territorial integrity
and independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

51. The next move is now with the States Members of the
United Nations, who are bound in duty to honour fully
their commitments towards the international community.
52. By the standards of international morality, to which
we all freely subscribed, aid to Portugal is no longer
justifiable, whatever the legal foundations of contracts
entered into with it. If we still wish to make even a modest
effort to shoulder our responsibilities in the world generally
and in the Congo in particular, we must put a stop to the
criminal actions committed by Portugal in supplying
mercenaries, those latter-day pirates and highway men. _

47. Are not Angola’s airports being used for large shipments of weapons and war equipment to those mercenaries? Are not these marauders using certain towns in
that Territory as bases for aggression against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo? Is not Portugal, with
the most brazen impunity, pursuing war of genocide in
Angola, Mozambique, Guinea (B&au) and the Cape Verde
Islands? And is not Portugal vigorously supporting the
illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia and the shameful
apartheid regime of Pretoria?

53. The United Nations cannot shirk its responsibilities in
the Congo, a crucified country with which the Organization
has been sadly involved since the early days of its
independence. The people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has shed enough blood-including that of one of
its eminent sons, a great African, the late Patrice
Lumumba-for us indefinitely to continue, in the name of
the international community, to give kid-glove treatment to
Portugal, the last survivor of the most abject colonial
system of our time, a country implicated, either as an active
accomplice or an active party, in all the tragic and dramatic
episodes which have shaken Africa.

48. If Portugal is thus defying the international community, it is because it enjoys active complicity among us
in the name of blocs, pacts and other alliances which, when
all is said and done, no longer cater for the objective needs
of a world where science and technical progress have
radically upset the logistics of any conflagration that might
occur. Furthermore, States whose representatives have
joined their colleagues here in officially condemning the
policy and conduct of this retrograde regime continue to
maintain their relations with it at the same level. We shall
never cease to express to world public opinion our
denunciation of this masquerade-the outcome of the
policy of blocs.

54. Shall we continue to harangue this unregenerate
Portugal? My delegation regards Portugal’s reactionary
cynicism as an insulting challenge to the international
community which we must take up immediately.

49. Portugal, an under-developed country with no resources owes its very survival to the fact that it has
managed to foist its shaky future onto the bandwagon of
the economic, political and strategic interests of international imperialism. It could not by itself simultaneously
maintain colonial wars and foment subversion against other
States if it wasnot helped, directly or indirectly, by certain
Powers. Tlie enormous sums it receives as “rake-off” from
the capitalist monopolies entrenched in its colonial Territories are supplemented by massive arms and war materiel
deliveries-equipment supplied under the terms of a certain
pact.

55. Before appealing to the United Nations, the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo did its
duty, and did it whole-heartedly, towards its brave people,
by crushing the mercenaries at Bukavu and breaking up the
hordes in the south of the country. It now remains for the
Grganization in its turn to do its duty, for it is with the
Security Council’s responsibility for maintaining international peace and security in mind that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has again brought this distressing
issue before it. We must therefore live up to this responsibility and adopt adequate and firm measures to put an
end to Portugal’s criminal intrigues against the Congo.

50. Thus, no matter how strong the terms of the resolutions we adopt here, Portugal will ignore them as long
as it continues to enjoy the aid which enables it, an
exhausted colonialist Power, to bolster its capacity to resist.
This is proved by the cynical scorn lately shown by the

56. My delegation endorses the very pertinent obser‘vations and the thorough and accurate analysis of the
mercenary system made by the representative of the
Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria in this
chamber on 10 November at the 1374th meeting.
5

58. This is the only way by which we can stamp out the
mercenary scourge, that other scandal of our time,

57. The Security Council is surely able to induce the
States Members of the United Nations to prohibit the
degrading practices of recruiting and brigading mercenaries
on their territory. Now that genocide is recognized as a
crime the whole world over, regardless of the colour of its
victims, the mercenaries on the run, those common
criminals, should be dealt with as such in the States of
origin or arrival, or should be handed over to the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ,meet the fate
they deserve from the Congolese people who are the victims
of these adventurers. We shall thus be spared the gloomy
spectacle of mercenaries with bloody hands parading as
heroes through the streets of Europe and granting interviews like playboys on chalet terraces and beaches.

59. Speaking once again as PRESIDENT of the Council, I
note that there are no more speakers on my list for this
afternoon. After unofficial consultations, the members of
the Council are apparently agreed that our next meeting on
the complaint by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should be tomorrow, Wednesday, 15 November, at 3 p.m.
If there are no objections, I shall take it that this is so
decided.
The meeting rose at 4.50 pm.

6
Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

iy other

currencies)

35557.-November

1970~-2,100
