S/PRST/2005/18

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 May 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5177th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 May 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary General on
assistance by the United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) to the African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) of 3 May 2005 (S/2005/285) and the
proposals therein on support the United Nations could make available to the
AMIS.
“The Security Council applauds the vital leadership role the African
Union is playing in Darfur and the work of AMIS on the ground. The Council
supports the findings of the joint assessment mission, led by the African Union
from 10-22 March 2005, which included UN and other partners. The Council
also supports the subsequent decision taken by the African Union’s Peace and
Security Council on 28 April 2005 to expand its mission in Darfur to 7731
personnel by the end of September 2005.
“The Security Council welcomes the ongoing deployment of UNMIS and
looks forward to close co-ordination and co-operation between UNMIS and
AMIS. In this context the Council recalls its request in resolution 1590 for
UNMIS to closely and continuously liaise and co-ordinate, at all levels, with
the African Union Mission in Sudan with a view towards expeditiously
reinforcing the effort to foster peace in Darfur, especially with regard to the
Abuja peace process and the African Union Mission in Sudan.
“The Security Council welcomes the role played by the African Union’s
partners in support of AMIS and underlines the active role played by the EU
and by other, bilateral, donors.
“The Council emphasises the importance of increased co-ordinated
international assistance for the African Union effort in Darfur and emphasises
the readiness of the UN to continue playing a key role. In this context, the
Council welcomes the second joint assessment mission from 1-4 May, which
included representatives from the AU, UN and other partners. The Council
looks forward to continuing contacts in order to facilitate provision of
assistance as requested by the African Union. The Council welcomes, in this
regard, the effort and intention of the Secretary General to consult closely with
the African Union on the scope and nature of possible UN support to AMIS.”

05-34250 (E) 120505

*0534250*
