UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26572
13 October 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3290th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 October 1993, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "Navigation on the
Danube river in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)", the
President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
"The Security Council has learned with deep concern that the blocking
of the Danube by two Serbian non-governmental organizations is still
continuing and deplores the acquiescence of the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), which is reflected in the
fact that they have failed to take any action to prevent these acts. It
condemns these deliberate and unjustified acts of interference with the
river traffic of several Member States of the United Nations. It
emphasizes the importance it attaches to the free and unhindered navigation
on the Danube which is essential for legitimate trade in the region. It
reminds the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) of their previous written commitment to secure free and safe
navigation on this vital international waterway.
"The Security Council is also concerned that the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) continue to impose
tolls on foreign vessels transiting the section of the Danube which passes
through the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro). By extracting these payments, the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) violates its international obligations.
The Security Council rejects any attempt to justify, on whatever ground,
the imposition of tolls on the Danube. It demands that the authorities of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and any others
imposing similar tolls cease such action immediately.
"The Security Council condemns these illegal actions and reaffirms
that it is wholly unacceptable for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) to take retaliatory measures in response to action
by a State in fulfilment of its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. It reminds the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) of its own international obligations and demands that its
authorities ensure free movement of international traffic on the Danube.
"The Security Council remains seized of the matter."
----93-55529 (E)

131093
