S/2007/684

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 November 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 28 November 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the ninth report of the International
Independent Investigation Commission, which was prepared pursuant to Security
Council resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005), 1686 (2006) and
1748 (2007).
The report provides the Security Council with an overview of the progress
made by the Commission since its previous report to the Council, dated 12 July
2007, in the investigation of the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and 22 others on 14 February 2005. The report also provides details of
the assistance provided by the Commission to the Lebanese authorities in the
investigation of 18 other bombings and assassinations in Lebanon since October
2004, including the assassination of Antoine Ghanem, a Member of Parliament, and
five others on 19 September 2007. The report also highlights some of the measures
the Commission has taken to prepare for the handover of its activities to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon at the time when the Tribunal begins functioning.
I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate my sincere thanks to Commissioner
Serge Brammertz for his outstanding leadership of the Commission since his
appointment in February 2006. I also wish to convey my thanks to the
Commission’s personnel, who have continued to show commitment and dedication
in carrying out this important mission. I also would like to thank the Government of
the Republic of Lebanon for its continued cooperation and support.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council. Meanwhile, I am transmitting the report to the
Government of the Republic of Lebanon.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-61693 (E) 041207

*0761693*

S/2007/684

Ninth report of the International Independent Investigation
Commission established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1595 (2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005), 1686
(2006) and 1748 (2007)
Serge Brammertz
Commissioner

Beirut
November 2007

Summary
The Security Council requested the International Independent Investigation
Commission to report to it every four months on the progress of its inquiry, including
cooperation received from the Syrian authorities.
The present report outlines the progress made since 12 July 2007 in the
investigation into the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
as well as the technical assistance provided to the Lebanese authorities in their
investigations into 18 other cases, notably the assassination of Member of Parliament
Antoine Ghanem on 19 September 2007.
Building on the consolidation of all of its findings conducted in the previous
reporting period, the Commission has focused on the implementation of detailed
workplans in all areas of the investigations. The pace and progress of the
Commission’s activities have been encouraging and have allowed the Commission to
reach a satisfactory understanding in a growing number of investigative areas and to
refine its investigative priorities for the coming months.
As the scope of its investigations narrows, the Commission is taking an
increasingly cautious approach to the management of information. This approach is
being taken to protect the integrity both of the investigation and of any future legal
process and to ensure the security of individuals who cooperate or desire to
cooperate with the Commission as well as the security of the staff of the
Commission.
During this reporting period, the Commission also continued to prepare for the
transition to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon at the
time when the Tribunal begins functioning. The activities of the Commission in this
regard include specific investigative and analytical projects and preparations for the
transfer of the Commission’s data, files, documents and exhibits.
Since its previous report to the Council (S/2007/424), the Commission has
continued to work closely with the Lebanese authorities and has received generally
positive responses when seeking assistance from Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic as well as other States.
Despite the mitigating measures put in place, the tense political and security
environment in Lebanon continues to have an impact on the activities of the
Commission.

2

07-61693

S/2007/684

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1595
(2005), 1636 (2005), 1644 (2005), 1686 (2006) and 1748 (2007), in which the
Council requested the International Independent Investigation Commission to report
every four months to the Council on the progress of its inquiry, and on international
cooperation, including the cooperation received from the Syrian authorities.
2.
This report, the ninth report issued by the Commission, provides an update on
issues covered in previous reports to the Council and notes the progress made in the
work of the Commission since its last report of 12 July 2007 (S/2007/424).
3.
During the reporting period, the security and political situation in Lebanon
remained very tense. At the time of the finalizing of the present report, Lebanon’s
parliament had not elected a new president to replace President Emile Lahoud,
whose term expired on 23 November 2007. Although the security situation remained
relatively calm during this crisis, the country’s security forces are on high alert,
braced for a possible deterioration if the ongoing deadlock is not broken. The
reporting period was also marked by a number of security incidents, most
significantly the assassination of Member of Parliament Antoine Ghanem and five
other persons on 19 September 2007.
4.
As reported in the Commission’s last submission to the Council, the focus
during the previous reporting period was on bringing together all of the
Commission’s information, findings and recommendations on all the ongoing
investigations. That consolidation produced a number of comprehensive,
confidential reports, including a 2,000-page report on the Hariri investigation. That
intensive exercise has enabled the Commission to inventory its current holdings,
assess the evidence and identify remaining gaps in the investigation as well as
potential new leads. These internal reports, which are kept up to date, will be one of
the major tools in the transition from the Commission to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
5.
Building on the consolidation efforts, the focus for the reporting period shifted
to the implementation of the detailed 150-page workplans which were developed
based on the consolidated reports. Despite several organizational challenges faced
by the Commission, the rate of progress has been encouraging, with 109 interviews
conducted in the past four months.
6.
As the investigation into the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister
Rafiq Hariri and 22 others on 14 February 2005 progresses, the Commission has
increasingly been able to narrow the scope of the investigation by drawing more
precise preliminary conclusions regarding the circumstances surrounding the crime
while excluding certain previously held hypotheses. Thanks to the progress made
during the reporting period, the Commission has reached a satisfactory
understanding in a growing number of investigative areas, developed certain new
investigative leads and identified additional persons of interest.
7.
As the scope of the investigations narrows and as investigative priorities are
refined, the Commission is taking an increasingly cautious approach to the
management of information linked to the investigations. This approach is being
taken in order to protect the integrity of the ongoing investigations as well as the
legal process in the light of the upcoming transition to the Special Tribunal for

07-61693

3

S/2007/684

Lebanon. The Commission is also obliged to maintain the confidentiality of the
investigative process to avoid compromising investigative techniques and tactics
which, if known, could hinder the progress of the investigations.
8.
Moreover, the Commission is mindful of the need to avoid undue influence,
whether real or perceived, on potential or future witnesses in particular by providing
information which may allow the identification of the source of such information. It
is of paramount importance to the Commission that the confidentiality of those
persons who cooperate or desire to cooperate with the Commission be maintained.
The Commission also acknowledges potential safety concerns related to persons
directly or indirectly identified as persons of interest who may have been involved
in some aspects of the preparation and commission of the crimes or who may have
known that a plan to carry out the crimes was being prepared. The Commission is
also mindful of its duty to protect the security of its own staff and has therefore
implemented a number of additional security measures designed to protect the
Commission’s staff and maximize information security management.
9.
In the light of this approach, the present report should be seen by the Council
as a general overview of the activities of the Commission during the past four
months rather than as a comprehensive account of the progress made to date in the
investigations. This approach is taken in full agreement with the Lebanese judicial
authorities.
10. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 1757 (2007), in which
the Council called for the establishment of a Special Tribunal for Lebanon, the
Commission has been preparing to hand over its work to the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal when the Tribunal begins functioning. The Commission
has been particularly active in preparing the transfer of its sizeable electronic data
holdings to the Office of the Prosecutor. The Commission has also worked with the
team set up to oversee the transition to establish the first elements of a witnessprotection programme adapted to the specific circumstances of the Tribunal. In
addition, the Commission is working with the transition team on some important
administrative aspects of the handover between the two institutions.
11. Throughout the reporting period, the Commission maintained close and
collegial interaction with the Lebanese authorities on all matters related to its work.
With regard to its requests for assistance, the Commission has continued to receive
generally satisfactory responses from all States, including the Syrian Arab Republic.
The Commission notes that, in order to implement its mandate, it continues to
depend on the full and timely cooperation of all States.

II. Progress in the investigations
A.

Hariri investigation
12. Since its previous report to the Council, the Commission has continued to
devote most of its resources to the investigation into the assassination of Rafiq
Hariri. As outlined in the Commission’s most recent report, detailed workplans were
drawn up based on an extensive consolidation effort which brought together the
Commission’s considerable information and findings on all aspects of the Hariri
investigation. These workplans identified the priority objectives to be pursued by

4

07-61693

S/2007/684

the Commission before the end of its current mandate and in preparation for the
transition to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon in each area of the investigation. As
foreseen, the focus of the Commission in this reporting period has been the
implementation of these workplans.
13. Progress has been encouraging. Of the more than 200 priority interviews
identified in the Hariri investigation, 70 were conducted during this reporting
period, both in Lebanon and abroad. The Commission has taken a number of other
conclusive investigative steps, in particular in the fields of forensics and
communications analysis, which have significantly advanced the Commission’s
understanding of the events of 14 February 2005 and allowed the identification of
additional persons of interest.
1.

Crime scene and associated topics
14. Regarding the crime-scene-related aspects of the investigation, the
Commission has resolved a number of remaining issues during the reporting period.
Since its previous report to the Council, the Commission has conducted 26 witness
interviews in relation to the Hariri crime-scene investigations and received the
results of several forensic examinations, which have helped it draw some additional
preliminary conclusions.
15. Most of the forensics projects undertaken by the Commission have now been
completed. Of the 66 forensic projects undertaken since January 2006 in the Hariri
investigation, only 23 remain open, including eight new projects initiated during the
reporting period. The Commission will focus its efforts in the next reporting period
on obtaining the results of the remaining forensics projects in order to complete the
extensive work undertaken in this area since 2005. As in other areas, all the new
results will be added to the Commission’s consolidated reports, which will be fully
updated before the end of its mandate.
Improvised explosive device
16. As indicated in the Commission’s previous report, all of the results and
findings regarding the type and amount of explosives, the type of initiating device,
the type and position of the container which carried the improvised explosive device
and the exact time of the blast were brought together in one consolidated report.
Newly available reports have confirmed the Commission’s preliminary findings.
The Commission is satisfied that it has conducted all possible and relevant
comparisons of the type of explosives used in the attack. Thanks to the considerable
progress made during the reporting period in addressing the remaining questions
regarding the improvised explosive device, the Commission is satisfied that it has
reached a comprehensive understanding of most of these aspects of the crime.
17. During the reporting period, specific emphasis was placed on tracing the origin
of the explosives. The Commission is currently reviewing new information
regarding persons, groups and institutions which may have had access to these types
of explosives in the period preceding the attack. The Commission is also reviewing
cases of possible disappearances of explosives in the period prior to the attack.
18. In addition, analysis based on newly available seismological data has allowed
the Commission to draw meaningful comparisons between the seismological signals
recorded by the National Centre for Geophysics in Lebanon following the explosion

07-61693

5

S/2007/684

in the Hariri case and other explosions, including some of the other cases in which
the Commission is providing technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities, and to
make a comparative analysis of those signals in order to evaluate and confirm the
size of the blasts and other factual elements associated with each explosion. That
data has been stored in a way that will allow for easy comparisons of the intensity
and other specific characteristics of those different explosions.
19. Having undertaken additional investigative steps during the reporting period,
the Commission is satisfied that the possibility that the improvised explosive device
was delivered by aerial means can be excluded.
Mitsubishi van
20. Through the consolidation of all its findings in the previous reporting period,
the Commission has reached a satisfactory understanding of the origin and recent
history of the Mitsubishi Canter van used in the attack. In the reporting period, the
Commission focused on the remaining questions regarding the sale of the van to its
final users. Four additional interviews have been conducted since the Commission’s
last report to obtain a more precise understanding of the timeline and circumstances
of that sale. The Commission has also obtained statements and documents which
have allowed it to increase its appreciation of the sequence of transactions which led
to the sale of the vehicle.
21. The Commission has information which indicates that two males purchased
the vehicle using counterfeit identification documents. These individuals also
provided false contact details to the vendor at the time of the purchase of the van.
The Commission is working to identify them and to clarify their background and
possible involvement in the crime.
22. The Commission is also still concentrating on the preparation phase of the
vehicle. Given the scale and sophistication of the attack, loading the vehicle with
the explosives and preparing it for the attack was likely to have been a lengthy
process requiring the participation of several individuals, including individuals with
experience in handling explosives. Several interviews are planned for the next
reporting period to advance this line of inquiry. The Commission’s findings based
on exhibits found at the crime scene suggest that the explosives were covered with a
wood plank in the loading platform of the Mitsubishi van. The Commission will
continue its examinations to advance its understanding of the preparation of the
vehicle for the attack and to finalize its understanding of the exact location and
layout of the explosives.
Identity of the suicide bomber
23. The Commission has continued to refine its understanding of the geographic
origin of the unidentified male presumed to have been the suicide bomber. As
reported earlier, the Commission has been able to establish a more detailed profile
of this individual’s personal history.
24. Through odontological examinations, statistical comparisons of DNA profile
distribution and comparative isotopic investigations, the Commission has developed
one principal hypothesis regarding the specific area of the Middle East from which
the unidentified male is thought to have originated. Expert findings received during
the reporting period suggest that the presumed suicide bomber was exposed to

6

07-61693

S/2007/684

significant quantities of a specific type of lead, possibly through proximity to
military ammunition, between the ages of 16 and 20. This could indicate that he was
living close to either a conflict area or an area where weapons were used on a
regular basis, such as a military training camp. New expert findings have provided
additional information on the possible place of birth of the unidentified male as well
as further details on the location where he may have spent his childhood. The
Commission is awaiting the results of further forensic examinations to confirm these
findings.
25. Although this line of inquiry has already produced very useful results and
continues to be promising, the Commission remains mindful that these initial
conclusions must be carefully interpreted and the limitations clearly understood.
These results will need to be further explored in the next reporting period, in
conjunction with other areas of the investigation, in order to advance this line of
inquiry.
26. The results obtained in the reporting period concerning the origin of the
presumed suicide bomber have led the Commission to turn its attention to persons
who match the unidentified male’s characteristics and who entered Lebanon during
the time period under consideration. This project entails the analysis of the more
than 2 million entry records obtained by the Commission. In addition, the
Commission is currently examining the missing-person records held by a number of
countries. These large-scale, resource-intensive projects will continue in the next
reporting period.
Other forensic issues
27. As indicated in the Commission’s previous report to the Council, the
Commission has brought together more than 330 DNA profiles, 160 fingerprints and
24 sketches of persons of interest to the investigations which have been collected in
the course of the Commission’s investigations. These have all been placed in
searchable databases which have recently become operational and are used by the
Commission to carry out comparisons with similar existing national and
international criminal databases. These comparisons have started to yield some
significant results by generating new avenues for investigation and, equally
importantly, allowing the Commission to close down other investigative tracks.
28. Progress has been made in completing the Commission’s exhibits database. So
far, more than 3,000 physical and biological exhibits accumulated in the course of
the investigations have been entered into the database, and the Commission will aim
to finalize this project in the next reporting period. This database will be linked to a
project involving a three-dimensional visualization of the crime scene.
29. In order to ensure the integrated and coordinated management of the exhibits
in preparation for the transition to the Tribunal, the Commission has assumed
custody of most of the remaining forensic exhibits from the Hariri crime scene,
some of which were previously held by the Lebanese authorities. The Commission
will complete a review and inventory of these items and carry out additional
forensic examinations where appropriate.

07-61693

7

S/2007/684

Other crime-scene investigations
30. The Commission’s consolidation efforts have allowed it to establish the
circumstances regarding the route taken by Rafiq Hariri’s convoy, the composition
of the convoy on the day of the attack, the status of the jamming devices used in the
convoy vehicles, the circumstances regarding the slight delay of the convoy at a
point on the route between parliament and the Saint Georges Hotel, the presence of
suspicious road works near the Saint Georges Hotel, the presence of specific
vehicles on or near the crime scene, as well as the alleged tampering with the crime
scene and obstruction of the investigation. The Commission is also satisfied that it
has compiled a comprehensive list of individuals who were informed of the
convoy’s movement on the day of the assassination.
31. During the reporting period, the Commission continued to gather more details
about the activities of Rafiq Hariri in the period immediately prior to his death. The
Commission has conducted eight witness interviews — including interviews with
several individuals who were in close contact with Rafiq Hariri in the days before
the attack — in the past four months to advance this line of inquiry.
32. The Commission is continuing to gather additional information on all the
individuals and vehicles present at or close to the crime scene on the day of the
attack. The Commission recently acquired large amounts of additional video footage
of Hariri’s activities in the days before the attack. This footage, which includes
61 newly obtained clips filmed in the 14 months prior to the attack, is proving
useful in identifying several individuals who came into contact with Hariri in the
period before the crime and in advancing the Commission’s understanding of the
timeline of events in the days preceding the crime.
33. The Commission has also acquired new closed-circuit television footage
showing several locations around the crime scene and other significant locations
covering time periods before and after the attack. This new footage is currently
being reviewed, and wherever possible, enhanced and analysed with the assistance
of international experts. The review of this footage has been incorporated into the
Commission’s sizeable holdings of closed-circuit television and other imagery.
2.

Individuals involved in the commission of the crime
Ahmed Abu Adass
34. Following the consolidation of the Commission’s findings on Ahmed Abu
Adass, the individual appearing in the video claim of responsibility for the
assassination of Rafiq Hariri, the Commission is satisfied that it has reached a
comprehensive understanding of the background, family circumstances, political
and religious views and employment history of Ahmed Abu Adass. As indicated in
the Commission’s previous report and based on its findings to date, the Commission
has concluded that Ahmed Abu Adass is not the suicide bomber who carried out the
attack on Rafiq Hariri.
35. A number of aspects regarding the role Ahmed Abu Adass played in the crime
remain under active investigation by the Commission. Through 16 interviews in the
reporting period, forensic analyses and other investigative steps, the Commission
has reached a more detailed comprehension of the activities of Ahmed Abu Adass in
the years preceding the crime, particularly those activities which brought him into

8

07-61693

S/2007/684

contact with one or more persons linked to known extremist groups. In particular,
progress has been made in establishing the identity of the individual who is believed
to have disappeared with Ahmed Abu Adass on 16 January 2005.
36. The Commission is awaiting results from a number of important examinations
which are expected to shed more light on the links between Ahmed Abu Adass, his
associates and the assassination of Rafiq Hariri.
37. The Commission has also made considerable progress during the reporting
period in establishing the sequence of events which led to the broadcast of the video
claim of responsibility on the Al-Jazeera television channel. In particular, the
Commission has increased its understanding of the sequence and content of a series
of calls to the Al-Jazeera bureau in Beirut placed on the day of the attack as well as
the subsequent recovery of the videotape by Al-Jazeera staff. On the basis of
information regarding the accents and vocabulary used by the individuals who
placed the calls to Al-Jazeera, the Commission’s preliminary conclusions confirm
that at least some of those individuals may not have been native Arabic speakers.
This remains under investigation. In addition, the Commission has reviewed and
analysed closed-circuit television footage covering the location where the videotape
was placed and identified some images which present a particular interest to the
investigation.
38. The Commission has processed the 30 fingerprints found on the videotape and
associated materials and is currently identifying, by a process of elimination,
potential suspects or other persons who may have touched the tape during its
recording or delivery. To date, 13 fingerprints have been identified as belonging to
members of law enforcement agencies or the media and hence have been excluded
from suspicion.
39. The Commission has also traced the videotape used to record the claim of
responsibility. The Commission has confirmed that the tape was produced in China.
The tape was subsequently distributed by a company based in the Republic of Korea
in November 2003 as part of a batch of 27,000 tapes which were exported to
Lebanon. The Commission is currently attempting to establish the chain of
transactions leading to the sale of the tape to its final user. This will continue to be
explored in the next reporting period.
Communications analysis
40. One of the principal investigative tools used by the Commission in the Hariri
investigation, as well as in the other cases where it is providing technical assistance
to the Lebanese authorities, continues to be the analysis of very large volumes of
call records, text messages and other forms of telecommunications data. The
Commission has recently devoted additional technical and human resources to this
aspect of the investigations. Currently, the Commission is working on a data set in
excess of 6.5 billion call records covering various time frames of interest to the
investigations.
41. The communications analysis components of the investigations continue to
form an essential tool to test and support findings and conclusions developed in
other areas of the investigation. The analysis of call records in particular is an
essential part of the preparation of witness interviews.

07-61693

9

S/2007/684

42. The Commission has continued to advance its enquiries into the individuals
who appear to have been using a small number of mobile cellular telephone SIM
cards to conduct surveillance on Rafiq Hariri in the period leading up to the attack.
The Commission has conducted a number of interviews and other investigative
activities regarding the sale of the SIM cards and a number of telephone handsets to
these individuals. The Commission has focused on one particular area where the
SIM cards are thought to have been sold. The Commission is now satisfied with its
understanding of the role played by the individuals who sold these SIM cards.
43. Communications surveys of approximately 15 locations of relevance to the
Hariri case were conducted during the reporting period. The objective of these
surveys is to identify the cellular telephone towers which may have been providing
coverage to cellular telephones of particular interest to the investigation at
significant locations during specific periods of time. Further surveys are being
conducted in order to complete the Commission’s inquiries in this regard.
44. The results of the Commission’s ongoing communication analysis work have
been transferred into an analytical software format, which is the common platform
used by most law enforcement organizations. This allows the data and the analysis
to be easily searchable and transferable.
3.

Motives and persons of interest
45. As described in the Commission’s previous report, considerable efforts have
been made since the establishment of the Commission to reach a comprehensive
understanding of the factors which are likely to have shaped the environment from
which the motive to assassinate Rafiq Hariri emerged. Based on the critical review
of the Commission’s holdings on possible motives, the Commission is satisfied with
progress made so far in this area.
46. As detailed in the Commission’s consolidation reports, the Commission has
largely narrowed down the possible motives for the assassination to those linked to
Rafiq Hariri’s political activities in the months and years leading up to his death.
During the reporting period, the Commission continued to expand its understanding
of the relevance of several political events to the possible motives. These events
include the adoption of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) and the possible or
perceived role played by Rafiq Hariri in the inception and implementation of that
resolution, the extension of President Emile Lahoud’s mandate and the proposed
reform of the electoral law, as well as Rafiq Hariri’s political posture regarding the
2005 parliamentary elections.
47. As indicated previously, the Commission is continuing to evaluate the
relevance of attempts made to facilitate a rapprochement between Rafiq Hariri and
certain other individuals with whom he may have been at odds in the period
preceding his assassination. The Commission is now also satisfied with its inquiries
into specific threats, warnings and assurances conveyed to Hariri regarding his
safety in the months before the attack.
48. During the reporting period, 27 interviews were conducted and several other
investigative steps were taken based on the action plans outlined in the
Commission’s previous report. The work of the Commission in this area during the
reporting period has refined some of its working hypotheses regarding likely
motives for the attack. The Commission has also worked to investigate and evaluate

10

07-61693

S/2007/684

how these possible motives may potentially link the other cases in which the
Commission is providing technical assistance with the Hariri assassination.
49. While the Commission is now satisfied with its general understanding of these
events and their relevance to possible motives for the crime, certain specific lines of
inquiry will continue to be pursued into the next reporting period.
50. In addition, throughout the course of the investigation, the Commission has
fulfilled its obligation to adequately examine and consider alternative hypotheses.
As stated in the previous report, this includes the possibility that Hariri was targeted
by extremist groups for several possible reasons, including the fact that he was
widely seen as a leading figure in his community. As it cannot be excluded that the
motive to assassinate Hariri may have arisen from a combination of political and
sectarian factors, the Commission has continued to examine these issues in order to
properly understand and assess the viability of each hypothesis. Given the
possibility that a combination of factors may have influenced the motive to
assassinate Hariri, the Commission is closely examining the possibility that two or
more teams of perpetrators may have taken part in the preparation and commission
of the attack.
51. Since the Commission’s previous report, special emphasis has been placed on
the analysis of the de jure and de facto structures of several organizations which
present a particular interest to the investigation due to their role in Lebanon in the
period leading up to the assassination. The Commission is continuing to examine the
reporting lines, flows of information, means and operational capacities of these
organizations during the period of interest to the Commission. This examination has
given the Commission valuable insight and perspective into these organizations,
which has proved essential to a proper understanding and evaluation of the situation
that existed in Lebanon prior to the assassination.
52. In particular, a number of interviews conducted during the reporting period
with senior Syrian and Lebanese officials have either confirmed or enhanced the
Commission’s understanding of the structures of some of these organizations and
have led the Commission to further refine its investigative priorities. These
interviews have also allowed the Commission to deepen its understanding of the
level of cooperation which existed between Syrian and Lebanese security agencies
during the period of interest.
53. The Commission has also deepened and broadened its understanding of the
possible involvement of a number of persons of interest, including persons who
have recently been identified by the Commission, who may have been involved in
some aspects of the preparation and commission of the crime or who may have
known that a plan to carry out the crime was being prepared. In addition to the
progress made in linking various persons of interest to the commission of the crime,
the Commission has also established links between some of these persons. This line
of inquiry will continue to be a priority in the next reporting period.

B.

Technical assistance in other cases
54. As mandated by the Security Council, the Commission has continued to
provide technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in their ongoing

07-61693

11

S/2007/684

investigations of 18 other cases, including the assassination of Member of
Parliament Antoine Ghanem on 19 September 2007.
55. During the reporting period, the Commission focused on the implementation of
the workplans developed on the basis of the consolidation of the Commission’s
information and findings on each of these cases. Of the 100 priority interviews
identified in the workplans of the 18 cases, 40 were conducted in the reporting
period. The Commission also conducted follow-up visits to the crimes scenes of the
targeted attacks and to associated locations in order to complete further crime-scene
assessments.
56. Taking into account the fact that the Commission’s principal focus remains the
Hariri assassination, as well as the limited resources it has to provide assistance to
the Lebanese authorities in their investigations of a growing number of other cases,
progress during the reporting period has been satisfactory.
57. During the reporting period, the Commission started to assemble crime
reference reports for each of the 18 cases, commencing with the nine attacks
targeted at Marwan Hamedeh, Samir Kassir, George Hawi, Elias El-Murr, May
Chidiac, Gebran Tueni, Pierre Gemayel, Walid Eido and Antoine Ghanem. These
reports bring together the most relevant statements, photographs, crime-scene
sketches, forensic reports and other crime-related information for each case. While
the consolidated reports have successfully focused and directed the investigation by
identifying gaps and leads, the crime reference reports will provide a
complementary resource which will enable investigators to easily access all relevant
case-related material in a single location. These reports will be passed on to the
Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon to allow the Prosecutor to evaluate
the existence of any links in the light of the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
58. In the past four months, the Commission has held meetings with each of the
investigating judges in charge of the nine targeted attacks and the Prosecutor
General to discuss investigative leads, evaluate the status of each investigation and
identify areas where the Commission can provide additional technical assistance.
The meetings also served to ensure that the steps taken by the Commission and by
the Lebanese authorities are coordinated. These discussions have proved productive,
and the results are currently being reviewed. Appropriate follow-up action will be
taken by the Commission and the Lebanese authorities. Meetings with the
investigative judges in the other cases are also being planned during the next
reporting period. A large number of additional technical reports were recently
handed over to the Lebanese authorities.
1.

Areas of technical assistance
59. The Commission provided technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities in a
number of areas, including the conduct of forensic examinations, communications
analysis and witness interviews on the 18 cases. During the reporting period, the
Commission sent 29 requests for assistance to the Lebanese authorities regarding
these cases. The Commission has renewed its efforts to ensure that the results of the
Commission’s inquiries in the 18 cases are communicated promptly and regularly to
the Lebanese authorities.

12

07-61693

S/2007/684

Forensic examinations
60. During the reporting period, the Commission conducted several key forensic
examinations related to the 18 cases, some of which have yielded important results.
61. For these 18 cases, 39 forensic investigation projects were initiated, mostly
related to crime-scene investigations, explosives analysis, fingerprint research,
ballistic examinations, DNA profiling, bloodstain research, digital imaging,
seismological analyses and forensic biological examinations. A total of 19 of these
projects were completed, and the final results were shared with the Prosecutor
General and the investigating judges.
62. The analysis of seismological data recorded by the National Centre for
Geophysics in Lebanon allowed the Commission to conduct some useful
comparisons on the seismological properties of the blasts in some of the nontargeted bomb attacks. This analysis shows, for example, that the seismic waves
recorded after the explosions in Broumana, New Jdeidh and Jounieh show some
similarities to the blast in the Hariri case and show different characteristics
compared to the explosion in Zalka. These differences confirm some of the
Commission’s previous conclusions regarding the position and size of the
improvised explosive devices used in each of these cases.
63. In the investigation of the assassination of Minister Pierre Gemayel, the
Commission conducted several important new examinations during the reporting
period. The Commission has conducted an analysis of several DNA profiles found
on the crime scene and has isolated the DNA profiles of several unidentified
individuals as belonging to potential perpetrators. Acting on a request for assistance
from the Lebanese authorities, the Commission conducted extensive forensic
examinations on the bodies of two deceased individuals considered as suspects
based on witness interviews conducted by the Lebanese authorities. The
Commission’s expert findings indicate that the DNA profiles of these two deceased
individuals do not match the DNA profiles of the unknown individuals identified as
possible perpetrators.
64. In connection with the Gemayel investigation, the Commission has conducted
detailed investigations on a black Honda CRV vehicle originally seized by the
Syrian authorities and then handed over to the Lebanese authorities and which is
suspected, according to one witness statement, of having been used by the
perpetrators and of having come into contact with the victim’s vehicle. International
experts working with the Commission conducted extensive forensic examinations
linked to this vehicle, including examinations of fingerprints, hair, fibre, glass,
plastic and paint as well as analysis of gunshot residues, DNA sampling, detailed
examinations of the vehicle’s exhaust pipe and ballistic investigations. On the basis
of preliminary results, the Commission is not able to draw meaningful conclusions
at this stage on this vehicle’s connection to the crime.
65. The Commission also obtained more detailed information regarding the
different types of weapons used in the attack as well as bullet trajectories and the
approximate location where each weapon was used. The Commission and the
Lebanese authorities have conducted comparisons with similar weapons seized by
the Lebanese authorities in other cases.

07-61693

13

S/2007/684

66. In the investigation of the Ain Alaq bus bombings of 13 February 2007, the
Commission has conducted examinations of 175 exhibits recovered from the crime
scene, including DNA samples, explosives samples, ball bearings and transfer
traces. Among the 13 DNA samples taken from the crime scene, three particularly
relevant genetic profiles have been obtained from four different locations on the
buses. The DNA analyses conducted by the Commission in the Ain Alaq case have
produced interesting results directly linked to possible perpetrators. The
Commission has also reached some additional conclusions about the type and
position of the improvised explosive device as well as the exact modus operandi
used by the perpetrators. All results of these examinations have been provided and
continue to be provided to the Lebanese authorities, which are in the process of
prosecuting several suspects.
67. The Commission has obtained further results from examinations conducted on
exhibits recovered from the scene where Member of Parliament Walid Eido was
killed on 13 June 2007 in central Beirut. The Commission has transmitted to the
Lebanese authorities a number of forensic reports containing information related to
the explosives used, the vehicle which was allegedly used to carry the improvised
explosive devices as well as the victim’s vehicle.
Communications analysis
68. The Commission applies the same communications analysis techniques used in
the Hariri case to the 18 other cases. During the reporting period, the Commission
conducted cell site surveys of the locations where the nine non-targeted attacks
occurred, in Kaslik; Sid-El-Bouchria; the Plaza shopping centre in Broummana; at
the premises of the “Voice of Charity” radio station in Jounieh; on Monot Street in
Ashrafieh; the Zalka area; Naoum Libki Street in Ashrafieh; Ain Alaq in the Metn
region; and New Jdeidh. The data obtained from these surveys as well as data
related to particularly relevant call records have been incorporated into the
Commission’s integrated communications analysis tools and are being analysed for
each case. In addition to assisting the Commission in understanding the
communications activities of potential perpetrators, it also allows for comparisons
among the 18 cases and with the Hariri case itself.
2.

Identification of linkages
69. In conjunction with the technical assistance provided to the Lebanese
authorities in these cases, the Commission has focused on identifying possible links
among these cases and between these cases and the Hariri case. The Commission
continues to examine commonalities between the profiles of the victims, the modus
operandi and the possible motives for these attacks. In order to assist in this
endeavour, the Commission has successfully created several analytical tools and
projects aimed at highlighting possible links as well as any potential differences
between these cases.
70. During the previous reporting period, the Commission initiated a number of
investigative projects which are common to both the Hariri investigation and the
18 other cases. These projects include forensic and communications analysis,
comparisons of the type of explosive used, examinations of the vehicles used in
some of the attacks, inquiries into possible commonalities in the supply and
registration of vehicles used in several of the attacks, a comprehensive analysis of

14

07-61693

S/2007/684

the available data pertaining to the entry into and exit from Lebanon of certain
individuals as well as other common analytical projects.
71. As outlined in the Commission’s previous report to the Council, the
Commission has given specific attention to the investigations into the possible
motives for these crimes, in particular regarding the public and political activities of
the victims of the targeted attacks, as it is likely that these may have played an
important role in shaping the motives for the crimes. In order to advance this line of
inquiry, and among other common projects, the Commission has initiated a media
analysis project which will examine the public stances, declarations, statements and
articles by or about the victims of the targeted attacks. This project, which will also
include the Hariri investigation, will be developed in the next reporting period.
72. By evaluating the evidence obtained thus far and utilizing the analytical tools
and projects described above, the Commission has been able to focus the ongoing
investigations on the most productive lines of inquiry establishing links.
73. Investigative steps taken during the reporting period have confirmed the
Commission’s hypothesis that operational links may exist among some of the
possible perpetrators of these different crimes. These inquiries will be pursued as a
priority in the next reporting period, bearing in mind the Commission’s approach
regarding the management of sensitive information. Additionally, the consolidated
reports, supported by the crime reference reports, will be updated to reflect
advances made in each of the cases and the identification of potential links.
74. These tools and resources will ultimately assist the transition to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon by providing cogent information to the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Tribunal which reflects both the investigative history of the cases
as well as the analytical work of the Commission to date.
3.

Antoine Ghanem case
75. On 19 September 2007, Member of Parliament Antoine Ghanem was killed
along with five other persons when a car bomb exploded close to his vehicle as he
was leaving a meeting in the Horsh Tabet area of eastern Beirut. More than
70 people were wounded in the attack. Ghanem, a member of the parliamentary
majority, was the sixth Member of Parliament killed in Lebanon since 2005.
76. On 21 September 2007, following a request from Prime Minister Siniora to the
Secretary-General, the Commission was mandated to provide technical assistance to
the Lebanese authorities in their investigation into this attack. A team of experts
from the Commission was immediately dispatched to the crime scene.
77. International forensics experts working with the Commission arrived on
22 September 2007 and worked for 10 consecutive days on the crime scene in
coordination with the Lebanese authorities. A total of 108 exhibits were recovered,
and most of them were sent for further scientific analysis. Although the
investigation into this attack is still at an early stage, the Commission was able to
isolate four DNA profiles of interest to the investigation as well as 12 shoe prints
taken from locations which could have been used to conduct surveillance. Initial
expert findings indicate that the type of explosive used in this attack was RDX. The
Commission also determined the exact time of the explosion to be 17:21:12.

07-61693

15

S/2007/684

78. Two key interviews were conducted in this case, and several others are
planned for the next reporting period. The Commission has also put together a
profile of the victim and a timeline of the events preceding the attack. The
Commission has started to examine possible links with other attacks.
79. Antoine Ghanem had returned to Lebanon from a prolonged trip overseas only
three days prior to his assassination, indicating that the perpetrators had quickly
established surveillance of his movements. At the time of the attack, Ghanem was
leaving a meeting with a friend. The meeting had been scheduled on very short
notice and lasted approximately one hour. The preliminary findings of the
investigation indicate that, within a very short period of time, the perpetrators were
able to conclude their surveillance and mobilize a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device in order to carry out the attack. This is an indication of the
advanced operational capabilities of the perpetrators and may suggest that a number
of vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices were prepared in advance, possibly
in several locations, in order to be mobilized on short notice.

III. External cooperation
A.

Interaction with the Lebanese authorities
80. The Commission interacts closely with the Lebanese authorities on matters
related to both the Hariri case and the 18 other cases. Regular meetings are held
between the Commission and the Prosecutor General and his staff and with the
recently appointed investigating judge in charge of the Hariri case. During the
reporting period, the Commission also met with all the investigating judges in
charge of the investigations into the targeted attacks. These meetings with both the
Prosecutor General and the investigating judges have provided an excellent
opportunity to ensure cooperation and communication. Moreover, this close
coordination will facilitate a smooth transition to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
81. During the reporting period, the Commission renewed its efforts to ensure that
the Lebanese authorities are kept abreast of the Commission’s activities and of the
progress made in its investigations. The Commission has had regular meetings with
the Lebanese authorities to coordinate activities and review evidence relevant to the
investigations. In addition, the Commission has continued to share significant
amounts of information with the Lebanese authorities, including witness interviews
and forensic reports. The Commission has endeavoured to provide the competent
Lebanese authorities with all the information collected by the Commission to enable
them to make an independent assessment of the evidence acquired to date and to act
in accordance with that assessment.
82. During the reporting period, 98 requests for assistance were sent by the
Commission to the Prosecutor General requesting assistance in scheduling
interviews, obtaining documents, providing access to exhibits and making
arrangements for the Commission’s activities in Lebanon. The Lebanese authorities
have continued to respond fully to these requests, and the Commission is grateful
for this productive cooperation.
83. The Commission also maintains a close working relationship with the
Lebanese authorities which provide security to the Commission’s staff and facilities.

16

07-61693

S/2007/684

The Commission is grateful to the Lebanese army and to the Internal Security
Forces for their unfailing support.

B.

Cooperation with the Syrian Arab Republic
84. In line with the obligations of the Syrian Arab Republic under Security
Council resolutions 1636 (2005) and 1644 (2005), and the common understanding
reached between the Commission and the Syrian Arab Republic in 2006, the
cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic with the Commission remains generally
satisfactory.
85. A total of 11 requests for assistance have been addressed by the Commission to
the Syrian Arab Republic in the past four months, bringing the total number of such
requests addressed to the Syrian Arab Republic since January 2006 to 68. During the
reporting period, the Syrian Arab Republic has provided the Commission with
assistance in response to its requests within the appropriate time frames. The
Commission also acknowledges the support provided by the Syrian Arab Republic
in the organization of the Commission’s various investigative activities in that
country, including nine missions during this reporting period.
86. The Commission will continue to request the full cooperation of the Syrian
Arab Republic in the discharge of its mandate.

C.

Cooperation with other States
87. In the previous reporting period, 14 requests for assistances were sent to
11 States in addition to those sent to Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic,
bringing the total number of requests for assistance addressed to other States since
January 2006 to 120. When responses have been provided in full and on time, the
Commission has been able to make considerable progress thanks to the assistance
provided by these other States.
88. The Commission is grateful for the support, information and expertise it has
received from a number of States and international institutions during the reporting
period. As noted in the Commission’s previous reports to the Council, the
Commission will be able to effectively complete its mandate only if it can rely on
the cooperation of all States to provide it with the support and information
requested.

IV. Transition activities
89. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 1757 (2007) calling for
the establishment of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, and in line with the report of
the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to resolution 1757 (2007), the
Commission has devoted resources in the reporting period to planning the handover
of its work to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The
Commission’s activities in this regard are geared to ensuring a seamless transition
between the two institutions.

07-61693

17

S/2007/684

A.

Preparation of data, documents, files and exhibits
90. The Commission has undertaken several projects related to the management,
storage and eventual handover of the substantial amounts of data, documents,
exhibits and other information currently held by the Commission.
91. As indicated in the previous report to the Council, the Commission has carried
out a thorough inventory of its data and documentary holdings. At the end of the
reporting period, the Commission had collected approximately 1,500 gigabytes of
data in approximately 850,000 files. In addition, the Commission has about 1,100
gigabytes of data related to its communications analysis work and 960 gigabytes of
forensic data, including more than 40,000 pictures relating to the investigations.
92. The majority of the Commission’s electronic data holdings are stored,
retrieved and analysed using specialized analytical software. The process of
importing the data into this software is both resource-intensive and time-consuming,
but it is expected that once it is complete, this will be an important resource for the
Office of the Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
93. The Commission also has large volumes of physical evidence and documents
in its possession, as well as corresponding databases, which are being stored in
order to facilitate access and transport while ensuring the integrity and chain of
custody of this material.
94. As indicated previously, the Commission’s consolidated reports
comprehensively document the investigative history of each case. In addition, the
Commission has started to compile crime reference reports which bring together all
of the pertinent information, including witness interviews and photographs, for each
case. These reports are designed to assist in the transition by providing the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon with a comprehensive, organized, indexed and accessible
resource for each case.
95. Procedures to ensure the integrity and ease of transfer of all of the information
currently in the custody of the Commission are being put in place, and the
Commission expects that such a transfer will be able to take place on relatively
short notice. The Commission continues to work with the transition team established
within the United Nations Secretariat on these issues.

B.

Witness protection issues
96. As the Commission indicated in its previous report to the Council, measures to
ensure the safety of possible witnesses who may be called upon to provide
testimony to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon must be put in place in order to
guarantee that potential witnesses can cooperate with the Tribunal without fear of
retribution. In coordination with the transition team, the Commission has designed a
draft witness-protection strategy which suggests some of the first steps to be taken
towards the creation of a comprehensive witness-protection programme adapted to
the specific circumstances of the transition to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. This
draft strategy will need to be refined and several additional steps taken before the
programme can be implemented. The Commission stands ready to work with the
transition team in order to ensure that this important aspect of the transition is in
place at the appropriate time.

18

07-61693

S/2007/684

C.

Administrative issues
97. The Commission has also started to prepare for the eventual completion of its
mandate and the drawdown of its activities in Lebanon by updating its inventories
and plans for the liquidation of its assets, in accordance with the appropriate United
Nations regulations.
98. The Commission notes that the success of the transition from the Commission
to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon will depend not only on an efficient handover of
the Commission’s findings and evidence but also on the institutional memory of the
Commission. It is the view of the Commission that the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon will be able to start working immediately and
effectively if it can rely on the experience gained by the Commission’s staff since
2005. The Commission is currently working with the transition team and the
relevant United Nations departments to establish adequate bridging mechanisms
between the two institutions.

V. Security
99. The reporting period was characterized by a high degree of tension and
uncertainty about the political future of Lebanon. The most significant security
incident since the Commission’s previous report to the Council was the
assassination of Member of Parliament Antoine Ghanem and five others on
19 September 2007.
100. On 2 September, the prolonged battle between the Lebanese Armed Forces and
the Fatah al-Islam group in the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp near the northern city of
Tripoli ended after several months of intense combat. More than 160 Lebanese army
soldiers and over 220 Fatah al-Islam fighters were killed in combat. The fighting left
the camp’s infrastructure badly damaged and caused hundreds of families to be
displaced. The situation in the Palestinian camps throughout Lebanon remains tense,
with sporadic fighting between various Palestinian factions.
101. At the time of finalizing this report, despite weeks of protracted negotiations
between the parliamentary majority and the opposition, Lebanon’s parliament had
not elected a new president to replace President Emile Lahoud, whose term expired
on 23 November. Although the security situation remained calm in the immediate
aftermath of the expiration of President Lahoud’s mandate, the level of tension in
Lebanon has risen considerably as a result of this situation, and the prospect of a
rapid deterioration cannot be excluded.
102. Given the general political and security environment in Lebanon as well as
certain other specific indirect threat warnings received by the Commission during
this reporting period, the Commission, working in conjunction with the Lebanese
authorities as well as other United Nations agencies in Lebanon, has conducted a
thorough review of its security risk assessment, adopted additional security
measures and increased the level of caution with which it conducts all of its
activities.
103. Even with these additional precautions in place, this tense security
environment continues to have a negative impact on the ability of the Commission
to carry out its mandate.

07-61693

19

S/2007/684

VI. Organizational support
104. During the reporting period, the Commission faced some difficulties regarding
staff retention owing to a degree of uncertainty regarding the future prospects of
staff currently employed by the Commission given the expected transition to the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon. Of the approved 188 international posts, 141 are
filled, compared with 125 at the end of the previous reporting period. Of the
51 approved national posts in the Commission, 47 have been filled. The
investigation division currently consists of 47 international staff, including
30 investigators, analysts and technical experts. The Commission expects that, given
the short period of time remaining in its mandate and the expected transition, it may
face some difficulties in retaining and recruiting staff in the next reporting period.
105. As highlighted in previous reports, the Commission also continues to face
difficulties in attracting and retaining enough qualified language staff to interpret,
translate and revise statements and documents into and from Arabic. At the end of
the reporting period, 21 international language staff members were working for the
Commission, seven on a part-time basis. Although some measures have been taken
to remedy this situation, the Commission notes that this has been and remains an
area of concern.

VII. Conclusions
106. As a growing number of investigative projects are concluded and as the
investigations narrow, the Commission has taken an increasingly cautious approach
to the management of information linked to the investigation. The Commission has
implemented a number of measures in this direction and has sought to avoid
jeopardizing the integrity of the investigation and the legal process as well as the
safety of individuals by enforcing appropriate information-management procedures.
As a result, the Commission is of the opinion that only limited information can be
placed in the public domain regarding its ongoing investigations.
107. Since its previous report to the Council, the main focus of the Commission has
been the implementation of the detailed action plans drawn up at the end of the
previous reporting period. Thanks to the progress made in the past four months, the
Commission is increasingly able to draw preliminary conclusions on an important
number of aspects of the investigation of the assassination of Rafiq Hariri, including
issues related to the crime-scene examinations, the type of improvised explosive
device used, the Mitsubishi Canter van used in the attack and the individuals
involved in the surveillance of Rafiq Hariri. The Commission has also advanced its
understanding of the profile and involvement of Ahmed Abu Adass, the identity of
the alleged suicide bomber and its grasp of the possible motives for the
assassination of Rafiq Hariri. These steps have allowed the Commission to identify
additional persons of interest to the investigation.
108. The Commission will devote the next reporting period to those areas of the
investigation where a number of important questions remain unanswered. In
particular, on the basis of its understanding in several areas of the investigation,
including of the factors which may have shaped the motive to carry out the attack,
the Commission will concentrate its efforts on continuing to establish additional
links between crime-scene evidence, possible motives and persons of interest who

20

07-61693

S/2007/684

may have been involved in some aspects of the preparation and commission of the
crime. Several promising avenues emerged in the previous reporting period and will
be pursued as a priority.
109. The Commission has also continued to support the Lebanese authorities in
their investigations in 18 cases of targeted assassinations and bombings in Lebanon
since October 2004, including the assassination of Member of Parliament Antoine
Ghanem on 19 September 2007. Despite the growing number of cases and limited
investigative resources, the Commission has been able to provide the Lebanese
judicial authorities with assistance, particularly in the area of forensic examinations
and witness interviews. In line with the jurisdiction of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon, particular emphasis has been placed on identifying possible links and
commonalities between the Hariri case and the other cases under investigation.
Several results obtained during the reporting period have confirmed the
Commission’s hypothesis that operational links may exist between some of the
possible perpetrators of these crimes. Confirming these links and establishing new
links will also be a priority for the Commission in the next reporting period.
110. The Commission notes that evidence uncovered in the Hariri case and some of
the other attacks, including the recent assassination of Antoine Ghanem confirms the
fact that the perpetrators or groups of perpetrators had and still have advanced and
extensive operational capacities available in Beirut and built on very specific
expertise, equipment and resources.
111. During the past four months, the Commission has continued to enjoy a close
and collegial working relationship with the Lebanese authorities, including the
Prosecutor General and his staff and the investigative judges assigned to the
different cases. The pace of the investigation has increased again during the
reporting period, as highlighted by the number of interviews conducted and requests
for assistance made, to which the Lebanese authorities have continued to respond
fully.
112. The Commission also notes that the Syrian Arab Republic and other States
have continued to provide responses to the Commission’s requests for assistance.
The Commission acknowledges these responses and reiterates its call on all States to
provide the required information and support to the Commission in a timely manner.
113. Given the acute and ongoing political tension in Lebanon, as well as certain
specific threats the Commission faces due to the nature of its mandate, the
Commission is particularly grateful to the Lebanese Armed Forces for the protection
they afford to the Commission’s staff and premises. That support is essential to the
Commission’s ability to carry out its mandate effectively.
114. The Commission is actively preparing to hand over the results of its
investigation to the Prosecutor of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon when the
Tribunal starts functioning. The data, documents, files and exhibits held by the
Commission are being inventoried, archived and packaged in a way which will
facilitate handover and transport on short notice. The Commission is also working in
cooperation with the team established to oversee the transition on a number of
issues which will need to be addressed to ensure that the transition between the two
institutions is successful.

07-61693

21
