62

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

5. Calls upon the Government of South Africa to
co-operate with the Secretary-General in implementing
the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate in
South West Africa and elsewhere information concerning the scholarship programmes ;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to consult
with the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples concerning the implementation of the Programme and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session.
1400th plenary meeting,
17 December 1965.
2107 (XX). Question of Territories under Portuguese administration

The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories under Portuguese administration,35
Having hrard the statements of the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling also Security Council resolutions 163
(1961) of 9 June 1961, 180 (1963) of 31 July 1963,
183 (1963) of 11 December 1963 and 218 (1965) of
23 November 1965, and General Assembly resolutions
1807 (XVH) of 14 December 1962, 1819 (XVII)
of 18 December 1962 and 1913 (XVIII) of 3 December
1963, as well as the relevant resolutions of the Special
Committee, adopted on 3 July 196436 and 10 June
1965, 87
Noting with deep concern that, in spite of the measures laid down by the Security Council in the aforementioned resolutions, the Government of Portugal is
intensifying the measures of repression and military
operations against the African people of these Territories with a view to defeating their legitimate aspirations to self-determination, freedom and independence,
Further noting with deep concern that the activities
of the foreign financial interests in these Territories
are an impediment to the African people in the realization of their aspirations to freedom and independence.
Considering that the evidence submitted by the petitioners confirmed that the Government of Portugal
has continued to use the aid and weapons that it receives
from its military allies against the populations of
Angola, Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea and
other Territories under its administration,
Convinced that the attitude of Portugal towards the
African population of its colonies and of the neighbouring States constitutes a threat to international peace and
security,
811 [bid .. Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter V; ibid., Twentieth Session, An11exes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter V.
36 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex "Jo. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter V, para. 352.
37 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter V, para. 415.

1. Reaffirms the right of the peoples of the African
Territories under Portuguese administration to freedom
and independence and recognizes the legitimacy of their
struggle to achieve the rights laid down in the Charter
of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Declaration on the Granting of
Tndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Approves the chapters of the reports of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories under Portuguese administration and
endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
3. Appeals to all States, in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, to render the people
of the Territories under Portuguese administration the
moral and material support necessary for the restoration
of their inalienable rights ;
4. Condemns the colonial policy of Portugal and its
persistent refusal to carry out ;Jw resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council ;
5. Condemns the policy of the Government of Portugal which violates the economic and political rights
of the indigenous population by the establishment, on
a large scale, of foreign immigrants in the Territories
and hy the exporting of workers to South Africa;
6. Requests all States to prevent such activities on
the part of their nationals in the foreign financial interests which arc an impcdinwnt to the attainment by
the people of their legitimite rights of freedom and
independence;
7. Urges Member States to t:1ke the following measures, separately nr collectively:
(a) To break off diplomatic and consular relations
with the Government of Portugal or rcfrnin from establishing such relations;
( b) To close their ports to :ill vessels flving the
Portuguese flag nr in the serYice of Portng;i 1:
(c) To prohibit their ships from entering any ports
in Portugal and its coloni;il territories:
( d) To refuse landing and transit facilities to all
aircraft belonging to or in the service of the Government of Portug·al and to companies registered under
the laws of Portugal:
( e) To boycott all tracle wit! 1 Portugal:
8. Requests all States, and in particular the military
allies of Portugal within the framework of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organiz;ition. to take the following
steps:
(a) To refrain forthwith from giving the Portuguese
Government any assistance which would enable it to
continue its repression of tlw African people in the
Territories under its administration;
(q) To take all the necessary measures to prevent
the sale or supply of arms and military equipment to
the Government of Portugal :
( c) To stop the sale or shipment to the Government
of Portugal of equipment ;ind materials for the manufacture or maintenance of arms and ammunition:
9. Appeals to all the specialized agencies, in particular to the Tnternationa 1 nank for Rt"constrnction and
Development and the International Monetary Fund.
tn refrain from granting Portugal any financial, eco•rnmic.- or technic;il assistance so long as the Government

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committ~

of Portugal fails to implempnt (---;enPral AssPmhly reso ·
lution 1514 (XV);
10. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the specialized agencies concerned
and other international relief organizations to increase
their assistance to the refugees from the Territories
under Portuguese administration and to the people who
have suffered from military operations;
11. Requests the Security Council to con?ider putting into effect against Portugal the appropriate measures laid down in the Charter, for the purpose of
carrying out its resolutions concerning the Territories
under Portuguese domination;
12. Decides to include the question of the Territories
under Portuguese administration in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-first session.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2108 (XX). Speaal training programme for
Territories under Portuguese administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1808 (XVII) of 14 December 1962 and 1973 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
by which it established a special trainin~ P:ogramme
for the indigenous people of the Terntones under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of
resolution 1973 (XVIII) ,38
Noting with deep regret that, notwithstanding paragraph 10 of resolution 1808 (XVII) and paragraph 8
of resolution 1973 (XVIII), the (',overnment of Portugal has not co-operated in the implementation of the
special training programme,
Noting iuith satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting that only a few applicants from Territories
under Portuguese administration have the necessary
qualifications to enable them to enter institutions of
higher education,
Noting further that many of the scholarships offered
by Member States are for higher education only and,
consequently, are not accessible to most applicants from
Territories under Portuguese administration, whose
qualifications cannot meet the requirements set for the
use of such scholarships,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to take all appropriate measures with a view to making the benefits
of the special training programme available to as many
indigenous inhabitants nf the Territories under Portuguese administration as possible;
2. Invites the United Nations programmes of technical assistance and the specialized agencies to continue
to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme mentioned above, by offering every
possible assistance and such facilities and resources
as they may be able to provide to the recipients and
the Governments participating in the programme;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
which have extended offers of scholarships to students
from Territories 1mder Portuguese administration ;
38 Ibid., agenda item 71, documents A/5783 and Add.1, am!
A/6076 and Add.1 and 2.

6S

4. Tnvites the Member States which have offered
scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider
ofTeri11g in the first place scholarships for secondary
<'duration nnd for vocationnl and technical training;
5. Requests Member States to inform the SecretaryGeneral of any scholarships offered and of awards made
and utilized;
6. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
administration who are seeking to avail themselves of
the educational opportunities offered ;
7. Reiterates its request to the Government of Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the special
training programme for inhabitants of Territories under
its administration ;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty-first
session.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2109 (XX). Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it dissolved the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories and,
inter a1ia, requested the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information
transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance
with Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
and to take it fullv into account in examining the
situation with regard to the implementation of the
Drclaration,
Noting the procedures suggested by the SecretaryGeneral89 and adopted by the Special Committee
whereby the latest information transmitted by Administering Members is taken into account by the Committee in its consideration of the Territories concerned
and is reflected in the relevant chapters of the Committee's reports on each Territory,
Having studied those chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter and the
action taken by it in respect of that information,•0
Having also examined the reports of the SecretaryGf'neral on the said information. 41
l. Approves the reports and the procedures adopted
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
for the discharge of its functions under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII);
~- Fxpresses its regret that not all Member States
having responsihilities for the administration of Non3 9 Jbid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.1), chapter II, appendix I.
40 Ibid., chapter II; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 ( A/6000/Rev.1), chapter XXVI.
4 1 Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items 68 and
72, documents A/5843 and A/6038.
