Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2900 (XXVI). Unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financia! year 1972

The General Assembly
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General, with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and subject to the Financia} Regulations of the United Nations and the provisions of paragraph 3 below, to enter into commitments
to meet unforeseen and extraordinary expenses in the
financial year 1972, provided that the concurrence of
the Advisory Committee shall not be necessary far:
(a) Such commitments, not exceeding a total of
$US 2 million, as the Secretary-General certifies relate
to the maintenance of peace and security;
( b) Such commitments as the President of the International Court of Justice certifies relate to expenses
occasioned by:
(i) Toe designation of ad hoc judges (Statute of
the Court, Article 31 ) , not exceeding a total of
$37,500;
(ii) Toe appointment of assessors (Statute, Article 30), or the calling of witnesses and the
appointment of experts (Statute, Article 50),
not exceeding a total of $25,000;
(iii) The holding of sessions of the Court away from
The Hague (Statute, Article 22), not exceeding
a total of $75,000;
(e) Such commitments made in accordance with
paragraph 10 of General Assembly resolution 2816
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971, not exceeding a total
of $200,000, as the Secretary-General certifies relate
to emergency aid in connexion with natural disasters,
with a normal ceiling of $20,000 per country in the case
of any one disaster;
2. Resolves that the Secretary-General shall report
to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session all commitments made under
the provisions of the present resolution. together with
the circumstances relating thereto, and shall submit
supplementary estimates to the Assembly in respect of
such commitments;
3. Decides that if, as a result of a decision of the
Security Council, commitments relating to the maintenance of peace and security should arise in an estimated
total exceeding $1 O million befare the twenty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, a special session of
the Assembly shall be convened by the SecretaryGeneral to consider the matter.
2031st plenary meeting,
22 December 1971.

2901 (XXVI). Working Capital Fund for the
financial year 1972

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
l. Toe Working Capital Fund shall be established
for the year ending 31 December 1972 in the amount of
$US 40 million;
2. Member States shall make advances to the Working Capital Fund in accordance with the scale adopted

131

by the General Assembly for contributions of Members
to the budget for the financia} year 1972;
3. There shall be set off against this allocation of
advances:
(a) Credits to Member States resulting from transfers made in 1959 and 1960 from surplus account to
the Working Capital Fund in a total amount of
$1,079,158;
(b) Cash advances paid by Member States to the
Working Capital Fund far the financia! year 1971
under General Assembly resolution 2740 (XXV) of
17 December 1970;
4. Should the credits and advances paid by any
Member State to the Working Capital Fund for 1971
exceed the amount of that Member State's advance
under the provisions of paragraph 2 above, the excess
shall be set off against the amount of the contribution
payable by the Member State in respect of the financia!
year 1972;
5. Toe Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finan ce budgetary appropriations pending the receipt of contributions; sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon
as receipts from contributions are available far the
purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 2900 (XXVI) of
22 December 1971 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;
(e) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding
for the same purpose, do not exceed $150,000, to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous selfliquidating purchases and activities; advances in excess
of the total of $150,000 may be made with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
(d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, such sums as may be required to finance payments of advance insurance premiums where the period
of insurance extends beyond the end of the financia!
year in which payment is made; the Secretary-General
shall make provision in the budget estimates of each
year, during the life of the related policies, to cover
the charges applicable to each such year;
(e) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances
shall be repaid as soon as credits are available in the
Tax Equalization Fund;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove
inadequate to meet the purposes normally related to the
Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is authorized to utilize, in 1972, cash from special funds and
accounts in his custody, under the conditions approved
in General Assembly resolution 1341 (XIII) of 13 December 1958, ar the proceeds of Ioans authorized by
the Assembly.
2031 st plenary meeting,
22 December 1971.
