46

G<•neral Assembly-Twenty-si,venth Session

and Development, which, inter alia, reaffirms the important role of housing and human settlements in overa11 national development,
Further taking rwte of the recognition by the International Bank far Reconstruction and Development of
the necd to establish appropriate national finance institutions to mobilize domestic capital to finance these
activities,
Reaffirming in particular recommendations 1, 15,
16 and 17 of the Action Plan for the Human Environment"º adopted by the United Nations Conference on
thc Human Environment,
1. Recommends that all dcvelopment assistance
agencies such as the United Nations Development Programmc and the International Bank for Reconstruction
ancl Developmcnt should in their development assistance
activitics also give high priority to requcsts from Governmcnts far assistance in housing ancl human settlements;
2. Recommends that, in its lending policies in this
sector, the Jnternational Bank for Reconstruction and
Development should provide funds on terms and conditions which fully reflect the unique nature and
characteristics of housing and related investments.
3. Recommends that in establishing criteria for
eligibility for loans under more favourable terms and
conditions the Intcrnational Bank for Reconstruction
and Development should take into account, in addition
to economic and monetary criteria, such critica! socioeconomic factors as levels of unemployment, rates of
urban growth, population density, and the general condition of the housing stock in the developing countries;
4. Further recommends that as a matter of priority
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in agreement with requesting Governments, should
implement its stated policy of providing seed capital
loans on favourable terms, taking into account the
recommendations in paragraph 3 above, for the establishment of domestic financia! institutions and organizations to mobilize and allocate capital for housing and
related investments;
5. Requests the Secrctary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

2999 (XXVII). Establishment of an intcrnational
fund or financia] institution for human scltkmcnts

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, 51
Concerned with the lack of improvement in the
de_p~orable world housing situation, particularly the
cnt1cal shortagc of low-cost housing or mínima!
standards of housing in developing countries,
A~qre that the environment cannot be improved in
condrhons of poverty, one of the palpable manifestations of which is the substandard qua1ity of human
settlements, particularly in developing countries,
50 See

A/CONF.48/ 14 and Corr.1, chap. 11.
and Corr.1.

51 A/CONF.48/14

Recognizing the need for intensified and more concrete international action to strengthen national progranunes in the planning, improvement and managcmcnt
of rural and urban settlements, thereby narrowing thc
growing gap between housing needs and available supply
and improving the environmental quality of human
settlcments,
Noting the report of the Secretary-General cntitled
Proposals for Action on Finance for Housing, Huilding
and Planning,5 2
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1170 (XLI) of 5 August 1966 and 1507 (XLVIll)
of 28 May 1970 on a proposed internationa1 institution
to support domestic savings and credit facilities in
housing,
Noting in particular recommendation 17 of thc Action
Plan for the Human Environment,r.:; adoptcd by the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
that Governments and the Secretary-Gencral should
take immediate steps to establish an internatinnal f1111d
or financia! institution that would provide sced capital
and technical assistance for the cffective mobilization of
domestic resources for housing and the environmcnt:11
improvement of human scttlements,
l. Endorses in principle the establishment of an
international fund or financia} institution for thc purposc
envisaged in recommendation 17 of thc Action Plan
for the Human Environment;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, taking into
account the views expressed on this subject at thc
twenty-seventh session of the General Asscmblv, to
prepare a study on the establishment and operátions
of such a fund or institution, together with bis recommendations and proposals, and to report thercon to
the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session through thc
Governing Council of the United Nations Environmcnt
Programme and the Economic and Social Council:
3. Invites the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Devclopment to collaborate in the preparation of
the study referred to in paragraph 2 above.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3000 (XXYII). Mcasures for protccting and enhancing thc cnvironmcnt

The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment, 54
Cognizant of the effective contribution of the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on the Human
Environment and the Preparatory Committcc for the
Confercnce,
Expressing its appreciation to the Governmcnt of
Sweden for acting as host to the Conference,
Convinced that actions at the national lcvel can
complement and perfect the Action Plan for thc Human
Environment 55 adopted by the Conference,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 Decemher 1971 entitled "Development and environment" and
,, 2 United

Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IV.4.

r. 3 See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.1, chap. IT.
~. 4

A/CONF.48/ 14 and Corr.1.

,,5 /bid., chap. II.

Resolutions adopted ou the rep01·ts of the Second Connnilt{'('

the set of recommendations of the Confercncc pertaining
to development and environment, 56
Recalling further paragraphs 2 (e) and 5 (d) of
Conference resolution l (1) of 15 June 1972 57 on
institutional and financia! arrangements,
Bearing in mind Economic and Social Council rcsolution 1718 (LIII) of 28 July 1972,
l. Stresses the importance of action at the national
level for protecting and enhancing the environment;
2. Calls upan the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme 58 to explore at its
first session ways and means of promoting effective
regional programmes in the ficld of the environment;
3. Requests the Govcrning Council of the United
Nations Environment Programmc, in formulating environmental programmes, to ensure the compatibility
of thc implementation of these programmes with:
(a) Thc policy measures and objectives of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade''º relating to science and
technology;
( b) Policy measures and objectives that are to be
recommended by the Committee on Science and Technology for Development upan consideration of the
World Plan of A ction for the A pplication of Science
and Technology to Development; 6 º
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Committee
on Review and Appraisal to keep this matter under
review and to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-ninth scssion, through the Economic and Social
Council, on the steps taken with regard to paragraph 3
abovc.
2 J 12th ¡1le11arv m<'eting
15 December 1972

3001 (XXVII). Unitcd Nations ConfereneeExposition on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 2718 (XXV) of 15 December
1970, in which it recommended broad directions and
measures essential for the improvement of human settlements,
Noting the urgency of the world-wide human settlement problems, present and future,
Taking into account the World Plan of Action for the
Application of Science and Technology to Development,61
Considering the important role assigned to housing
as part of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade, 62
Re.cognizing the need for international efforts to
develop new and additional approaches to these problems, especially in the developing countries,
Desiring to maintain the momentum of the United
Nations Conference on the Human Environment in this
r.ft !bid., chap. II, sect. B.
57 !bid., chap. 111. Paragraphs 2 (e) and 5 (d) were incorporated in resolution 2997 (XXVII) without change (see
sect. I, para. 2 (e), and sect. TI, para. 2 (d), of that resolution).
r,s See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. I.
r,o Resolution 2626 (XXV).
r.o United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.II.A.18.

6t Jbid.

G2 Resolution

2626 (XXV).

47

area through a conference-exposition on human settlements, the preparation for which should generate a
review of policies and programmes for human settlements, national and intcrnational, and should result
in the selection and suppor: of a series of demonstration projects on human settlements sponsNcd by individual countries and the United Nations,
Taking into account recommendation 2.2 of the
Action Plan for the Human Environment 03 adopted by
the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,
l. Decides tn hold a United Nations ConferenccExposition on Human Settlements;
2. Accepts the offer of the Government of Canada
to act as host to the Conference~Exposition in 1975;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
submit to the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programmé 4 at its first session a rcport
containing a plan for, and anticipated costs of, the
Conference-Exposition.
2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

3002 (XXVII).

Development ami environment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 Dcccmber 1971 entitled "Development and cnvironment",
Considering its resolution 2997 (XXVII) of I 5 December 1972 on institutional and financia! arrangemcnts
for international environmental co-operation,
Noting the set of recommendations of the Unitcd
Nations Conference on the Human Environmcnt pcr-·
taining to development and environment, 65
Reaf]irming the importance of implementing the
objectives and policy measures of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development r ecade 66 and the need to provide adequate
resources for their fulfilment,
Bearing in mind that the funds available to the international community for research and action in thc
fields of the protection and enhancement of thc environment will tend to be scarce in relation to the
needs,
1. Stresses that, in the implementation and financing
of the objectives set forth in section III, paragraphs 2
and 3, of General Assembly resolution 2997 (XXVII).
such environmental measures and programmes as may
also constitute a necessary part of the process of
accelerating the economic development of developing
countries should receive special consideration in the
formulation of programmes and priorities by the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the Unitcd
Nations Environment Programme in formulating environmental programmes to ensure, in accordancc with
the principies set forth in General Assembly resolution 2849 (XXVI), the compatibility of thesc programmcs with the objcctives and policy mcasures of
global strategies and sectoral guidelines for the economic
R:¡ See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.t, chap. II.
0 ~ See resolution 2997 (XXVII), sect. l.

º" See A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.t, chap. II, sect. B.
oo Resolntion 2626 (XXV).
