S/2011/7

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 January 2011
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Uganda and the
Sudan, 4 to 10 October 2010
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 4 October 2010 the President of the Security Council informed
the Secretary-General of the intention of the Council to send a mission to Uganda
and the Sudan from 4 to 10 October 2010. The members of the Council approved the
terms of reference for the mission (see S/2010/509, annex). The composition of the
mission was as follows:
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda (Uganda), co-leader of mission
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland), co-leader of mission
Ambassador Susan Rice (United States of America), co-leader of mission
Ambassador Christian Ebner (Austria)
Ambassador Ivan Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina)
Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti (Brazil)
Ambassador Li Baodong (China)
Minister Martin Briens (France)
Ambassador Alfred Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon)
Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida (Japan)
Ambassador Nawaf Salam (Lebanon)
Ambassador Claude Heller (Mexico)
Minister Bulus Paul Zom Lolo (Nigeria)
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan (Turkey)

II. Visit of the Security Council to Uganda
A.

Background and context
2.
On 6 October 2010, the members of the Security Council met with President
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni in Entebbe. The purpose of the visit was to reiterate the
appreciation of the Council for, and to support the invaluable contribution of
Uganda to, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); to express its
encouragement regarding the improvement of relations among the countries of the
region and increased regional cooperation in addressing the security challenges

11-20439 (E) 190111

*1120439*

S/2011/7

posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA); and to discuss the status of the
implementation of the Sudan’s Comprehensive Peace Agreement, including the
holding of the 9 January 2011 referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei.
3.
The members of the Security Council visited the United Nations Entebbe
Support Base and were briefed on the progress made with regard to expanding the
base into a regional logistic hub and on measures taken to better streamline existing
resources.

B.

Meeting with the President of Uganda
4.
President Museveni stated that the two most urgent issues facing the region
were the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and terrorism in
Somalia. The President and the members of the Security Council stressed the
importance of all parties respecting the full implementation of the Agreement, in
particular the holding of peaceful, transparent and credible referendums in Southern
Sudan and Abyei on 9 January 2010.
5.
The President deemed unfounded the fears that the self-determination
referendum in Southern Sudan could create a precedent and cause a domino effect in
other parts of the continent, noting that the referendum was an integral provision of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. The President said that the high-level meeting
on the Sudan in New York on 24 September had reassured him that there was still
strong support within the international community for the timely and peaceful
holding of the referendum in Southern Sudan.
6.
The President and the Security Council delegation agreed that the deployment
of United Nations and other international observers throughout the referendum
process would increase the transparency and credibility of the referendum and
facilitate the acceptance of its outcome.
7.
The members of the Security Council delegation reiterated their commitment
to support the full implementation of the Agreement, including the holding of
peaceful, transparent and credible referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei on
9 January. They agreed with the President that there was an urgent need to
strengthen the capacity of institutions in the South, especially if the referendum led
to the transformation of Southern Sudan into a sovereign country.
8.
With regard to the situation in Somalia, President Museveni stated that
security and stability in Somalia were achievable, if the international community
provided the requisite support to the Transitional Federal Government and
AMISOM to stabilize the country. The African Union, he said, would continue to
support the Djibouti peace process because it was a political process agreed upon by
the Somali people. The President remained confident that the threat of Al-Shabaab
could be definitively eliminated, as AMISOM had demonstrated by rendering the
terrorist group incapable of toppling the Transitional Federal Government.
9.
In the same context, the President stressed that Uganda and other African
countries were in a position to mobilize as many troops as necessary, that they were
committed to doing so in the shortest possible amount of time and that increased
logistical and financial support to AMISOM from the United Nations, the European
Union or other entities was urgently needed. The President suggested emulating the
formula used in East Timor and Burundi, in which Australia and South Africa,

2

11-20439

S/2011/7

respectively, had deployed the bulk of the troops, with the support of additional
contingents from other countries.
10. In addition, the President recommended that countries whose military vessels
and aircraft carriers were currently deployed off the coast of Somalia should
consider establishing and enforcing both a no-fly zone and a maritime blockade in
order to limit the movement of terrorist groups and the flow of weapons.
11. Concerning LRA, the President stated that LRA was not a long-term problem,
since countries in the region were now working closely together. He called on the
international community, and the United Nations in particular, to support regional
efforts. In the same context, the President requested flexibility in some United
Nations procedures regarding deployment of and support to non-United Nations
troops, stating that, during the military operations against LRA, helicopters from the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) could not be used on weekends.
12. The Security Council delegation reiterated its sincere appreciation for the
generous support provided by the Ugandan authorities, including additional space
for the transition of the Entebbe Support Base into a regional logistical support base.

C.

Visit to the Entebbe Support Base
13. The Director of Mission Support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
briefed Security Council members on the progress of the Entebbe Support Base in
expanding into a regional logistics hub, noting that additional space would enable
the expansion of the facilities and more efficiently support neighbouring
peacekeeping missions.
14. Security Council members were also briefed on progress aimed at establishing
a full-fledged regional service centre designed to provide various types of support to
United Nations entities in the region through service-level agreements. In specific
cases, with the approval of the relevant United Nations legislative bodies and the
signing of a service-level agreement, similar services might be provided to
non-United Nations entities such as African peacekeeping missions.

III. Visit of the Security Council to the Sudan
A.

Background and context
15. The Security Council visited the Sudan in order to reaffirm the commitment of
the international community to and its support for the full and timely
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and to encourage a
peaceful, comprehensive and inclusive resolution for the situation in Darfur. The
Council urged cooperation between the National Congress Party and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement on the referendums for Southern Sudan and Abyei
and in resolving the outstanding issues related to the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, including the successful completion of border demarcation and
negotiations on post-referendum arrangements. The Council also emphasized the

11-20439

3

S/2011/7

importance of the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union in
support of the Sudanese peace processes.
16. The visit of the Security Council was also undertaken to reiterate its support
for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as the work of the
African Union-United Nations Joint Chief Mediator, and to assess the assistance
provided by UNMIS and UNAMID within their current mandates and capabilities.
In that context, the Council underlined its concern for the security of humanitarian
aid workers and peacekeepers and reiterated the vital importance of allowing their
full, safe and unhindered freedom of movement and access.
17. The Security Council mission to the Sudan took place in the midst of
increasing expectations for the referendums to be held on 9 January 2011. On
28 October, the media reported that voter registration for the referendum in the
Southern Sudan was to begin on 14 November, according to the Chair of the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. On the other hand, the Abyei
Referendum Commission had not been established, and the parties continued the
negotiation to resolve the issue of residency/voter eligibility, a long-standing dispute
between the Misseriya nomads and Ngok Dinka residents in Abyei. Referring to the
24 September communiqué issued after the high-level meeting on the Sudan that
was chaired by the Secretary-General, the Security Council mission reiterated the
responsibility of the parties to conduct credible, peaceful, free referendums on
9 January 2011 that reflected the will of the Sudanese people, and reminded all
parties and States of their commitment to respect the outcome of the referendums.
18. In Darfur, the Security Council mission took place in the context of a volatile
security situation, including armed clashes between Government forces and rebel
forces in Jebel Marra, criminality, kidnapping and attacks on United Nations
peacekeepers and civilian personnel. The African Union and the United Nations
continue efforts to facilitate the negotiated settlement of the conflict. In the
meantime, the Government has released a political and security strategy for Darfur,
in which it commits to improving the situation on the ground.

B.

Meetings in Juba
Government of Southern Sudan
19. On 6 October, the Security Council mission arrived in Juba and met with First
Vice-President Salva Kiir Mayardit and other members of the Government of
Southern Sudan. The First Vice-President reaffirmed the commitment of his
Government to the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
including the holding of the referendums for Southern Sudan and Abyei on
9 January 2011. He highlighted a number of outstanding issues, including the
demarcation of the border of 1 January 1956 between Northern and Southern Sudan,
the status of Abyei and the negotiation of post-referendum arrangements, and
reiterated that his Government was prepared to accomplish tasks mandated by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, with the support of the international community.
In particular, Vice-President Kiir called on the international community to provide
technical, logistical and financial support to the Southern Sudan Referendum

4

11-20439

S/2011/7

Commission, stating that the Commission had not been able to recruit staff without
funding from the Government of National Unity.
20. On border demarcation, First Vice-President Kiir stated that the Sudanese
Armed Forces had begun to redeploy across the 1 January 1956 border into
Southern Sudan. He proposed the creation of a buffer zone along the border, and
called on the United Nations to deploy in the area to prevent possible clashes
between the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation Army.
21. With respect to Abyei, First Vice-President Kiir maintained that the ruling of
the Permanent Court of Arbitration in July 2009 on Abyei boundaries had reaffirmed
the territory of Abyei as areas consisting of nine Ngok Dinka chiefdoms, which had
been accepted by both parties, and that there should be no further discussions on the
participation of the Misseriya in the Abyei referendum. First Vice-President Kiir
shared his concern that the environment to negotiate post-referendum arrangements
could change after the referendums, and noted that it would be important for the
parties to agree on a framework of continued negotiation, so that discussions could
continue regardless of the outcome of the referendums. He called on the
international community to facilitate that process.
22. The First Vice-President also noted the lack of development, peacebuilding
and reconciliation activities in Southern Sudan. He stated that his Government had
offered amnesty to those who had instigated violence after the April elections, while
pointing out that armed clashes in Southern Sudan had been exacerbated by the flow
of arms from Northern Sudan.
23. The Security Council mission informed First Vice-President Kiir that the
international community was united in supporting the full and timely
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which had been reiterated
in the communiqué adopted after the 24 September high-level meeting. The mission
also underscored the responsibility of the relevant Sudanese authorities to ensure the
safety of peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel and their full freedom of
movement. The mission also encouraged the parties to resolve outstanding issues
through dialogue, and noted that a unilateral declaration of independence could risk
undermining the support of the international community for the process. The
mission also underscored that the referendum process must be inclusive, free and
fair, in order to allow all voices of the Southern Sudanese to be heard.
24. Members of the Government of Southern Sudan offered their reassurance that
United Nations personnel would be protected in Southern Sudan and that the
referendum would be conducted in a free and fair environment to ensure that the
people of Southern Sudan could express their views, be it unity or secession. In
conclusion, the First Vice-President requested the Security Council members to
strengthen the mandate of UNMIS, especially with regard to the protection of
civilians. He offered assurances that his Government would not resort to a unilateral
declaration of independence, but added that, if the National Congress Party refused
to cooperate, the internationally monitored referendum could take place without the
participation of Northern Sudan.
Southern Sudan Referendum Bureau
25. The Security Council mission met with the Southern Sudan Referendum
Bureau in Juba. The chair of the Bureau, who is also the deputy chair of the

11-20439

5

S/2011/7

Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, briefed the mission on the status of
preparations for the referendum, noting that state high committees had been
established in all 10 states in Southern Sudan and that the Bureau was in the process
of identifying locations for country-based referendum centres. He further informed
the mission that materials for voter registration were expected to arrive towards the
end of October, in time for the commencement of voter registration on
14 November.
26. Members of the Bureau underscored challenges associated with preparations
for the referendum, including the difficulty of accessing remote areas, the lack of
funds, the short timeline and challenges related to registration and voting in
Northern Sudan and overseas, namely in Australia, Canada, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Uganda, the United Kingdom and the United States. Despite these obstacles, they
had resolved to hold the referendums on 9 January 2011 and were hopeful that this
task could be achieved with the support of the international community. They
expressed confidence that voter registration could take place in a relatively short
time period owing to the sensitization of voters and the excitement for the
referendum. They stressed the importance of the cooperation of the Government of
National Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan in meeting that goal.
Civil society
27. The Security Council mission met with leaders from civil society in Southern
Sudan, including representatives of church and women’s groups. All civil society
representatives expressed the need for the Security Council to continue supporting
the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement as the basis for peace in
the Sudan. Representatives of civil society also emphasized the importance of the
free and fair conduct of the referendum and popular consultations, and of the
resolution of border demarcation, including in Abyei. Some suggested that there
should be an early warning system, with a United Nations monitoring force
deployed along the border. One of the representatives shared his concern about
threats made by National Congress Party officials to expel southerners from
Northern Sudan, should Southern Sudan vote for independence. Others stated that
unity was not attractive and that independence was the only option. A representative
of women’s groups underscored progress being made in Southern Sudan, including
with regard to the empowerment of women, and called on the international
community to continue supporting development in Southern Sudan.
Training centre of the Southern Sudan Police Service in Rajaf
28. The Security Council mission visited a police training facility in Rajaf, Central
Equatoria state, where 5,400 cadets (more than 300 of them female) were receiving
training over a period of nine months. The inspector-general welcomed the mission
and expressed his gratitude to international partners, such as UNMIS, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United States Agency for International
Development, for their assistance. The minister of internal affairs expressed his
commitment to building a police force that would be able to address internal
security challenges. The mission observed demonstrations on high-risk arrest,
protection of VIPs and crowd control. The mission also visited classrooms and
interacted with trainees who were receiving training in border security and law.

6

11-20439

S/2011/7

C.

Meetings in Darfur
Humanitarian community
29. On 8 October, the Security Council mission met with representatives of
humanitarian agencies in El Fasher. The participants underscored challenges
associated with freedom of movement and humanitarian access, especially in Jebel
Marra, since the beginning of the year. The humanitarian community also noted that
armed clashes between the Government and rebels continued to cause displacement
and prevent a voluntary and sustainable return of the civilian population. The
participants stated that humanitarian capacity had not fully recovered to pre-March
2009 levels in the wake of the expulsion by the Government of Sudan of 13
non-governmental organizations and the closure of various local organizations in
March 2009. They also noted that it had been difficult to monitor the humanitarian
situation systematically, especially for groups working on human rights and
protection issues (e.g., gender-based violence), after the expulsion of the
non-governmental organizations. Emphasizing that aid should be delivered
impartially, the humanitarian agencies stressed that the cooperation of Sudanese
authorities would be essential in order for them to be able to work in all parts of
Darfur, including areas not under Government control.
30. The members of the Security Council expressed their deep concern about the
upsurge in violence in Darfur, the number of civilian casualties and victims of
sexual and gender-based violence, the recruitment of children by armed groups, the
flow of illegal arms into Darfur and the continued restrictions on humanitarian
access. Members also underlined their concern for the security of civilians,
humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers in Darfur. Some Council members
raised the importance of forward planning with respect to issues that involve longterm implications, such as water management and the consequences of climate
change.
Wali of Northern Darfur
31. The Governor of Northern Darfur used the meeting with the Security Council
mission to present the vision of the Government of the Sudan and provide direct
input into the deliberations of the Council on Darfur. The Governor stated that there
was no current conflict in North Darfur, and that the security, humanitarian, political
and economic situation in Darfur had improved dramatically since the previous visit
of the Security Council in 2008. He said that crime was down, primary school
enrolment was up and there were ongoing efforts by the Government to address
justice and reconciliation at the local level and facilitate the voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The Governor stated that those
developments demonstrated the commitment of the Government to resolving the
conflict in Darfur. The Governor stated that the Security Council should put
pressure on all rebel groups to join the peace process without preconditions. The
Governor further stated that the decision of the International Criminal Court to
indict President Bashir had had a negative effect on the peace process, and stressed
that Sudan should be treated as an equal member of the United Nations and the
international community. The Governor asked the Security Council to maintain
unbiased views on the situation and recognize progress being made by the
Government with respect thereto, as reflected in its new strategy for Darfur.

11-20439

7

S/2011/7

32. The Security Council mission expressed its concern about the upsurge in
violence in Darfur, including the lack of security for peacekeepers and aid workers,
and called on the Government and all relevant parties to ensure freedom of
movement and humanitarian access for UNAMID and aid personnel. Some members
of the Security Council also stressed that, according to United Nations statistics,
violence in Darfur had increased by 240 per cent since the previous year. The
mission reiterated its support for the peace process led by the United Nations and
the African Union, urged all rebel groups to join the Doha peace process without
preconditions or further delay, and called on all parties to make progress towards the
immediate cessation of hostilities and a negotiated settlement of the conflict. The
mission underscored its support for UNAMID and called on all parties to cooperate
with UNAMID in the implementation of its mandate, including the protection of
civilians, the facilitation of aid delivery and support for the Doha process. Several
members of the mission emphasized the importance of dialogue between the
Government and various constituencies in Darfur. Various members highlighted the
importance of ensuring accountability for crimes and tackling impunity.
Internally displaced persons: Abu Shouk and Al Salam camps
33. The Security Council mission met with a delegation of internally displaced
persons from Abu Shouk and Al Salam camps outside the UNAMID community
police centre in Abu Shouk. Representatives of the internally displaced persons,
including women and youth, underscored the lack of aid and development in the
camps, including the limited provision of food, medical support and educational
opportunities. Several representatives spoke about their fear of persecution,
referring to reports of assassination and harassment of those who spoke against the
Government, and called on UNAMID to fulfil its mandate and provide more robust
protection. The representatives of the two camps also emphasized the importance of
peace and justice as preconditions for repatriation and development. Some camp
representatives voiced their concerns about the attention of the international
community shifting to the referendums and other North-South issues, at the expense
of peace in Darfur, and urged the implementation of all Security Council resolutions
related to Darfur, including resolution 1706 (2006), and an increase in the strength
of UNAMID. The Council took note of those serious challenges and offered its
reassurance that it was seized of the vital importance of the mandate of UNAMID,
giving priority to the protection of civilians and the facilitation of aid delivery, as
well as to the support of UNAMID for the Doha process, while calling on all
parties, including central and local authorities, to ensure the safety and security of
all citizens and respect their rights.
El Fasher Specialist Hospital for Maternity
34. The Security Council mission visited a hospital in El Fasher. The hospital
provides medical services to women and newborn children, working with UNAMID
and United Nations agencies, receiving close to 4,000 patients and conducting up to
500 operations a month. Council members discussed the various challenges facing
the hospital, such as the scourge of sexual violence against women, the problem of
fistula for many young women and the lack of medical supplies and training.

8

11-20439

S/2011/7

D.

Meetings in Khartoum
Popular consultations
35. On 9 October, the Security Council mission met with the Governor of Blue
Nile state, the Speaker of the Blue Nile State Assembly, the Deputy Governor of
Southern Kordofan state, and the Speaker of the Southern Kordofan State Assembly
in Khartoum. The Council reiterated its support for the popular consultations as an
integral part of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and underscored the
importance of inclusive, timely and credible popular consultations processes in Blue
Nile and Southern Kordofan states.
36. The Governor of Blue Nile state noted that the popular consultations process
provided a “win-win” situation, whereby the people of the two states could express
their views on the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
rectify its shortcomings through negotiations with the central Government. The
Governor warned that the process could have far-reaching security implications,
given the linkage between Blue Nile state, Southern Kordofan state, Abyei and
Southern Sudan, and emphasized that it would be important to manage the popular
consultations process carefully.
37. In response to questions posed by the mission regarding the mechanisms and
processes of the popular consultations, the representatives of Blue Nile state
clarified that consultations with political parties, civil society groups and citizens
would be held through seminars, workshops and other forums, after which the State
Assembly would finalize a report, to be submitted to the central Government. In
Southern Kordofan state, the process had been delayed as a result of the
postponement of the elections. In both states, issues related to autonomy, power- and
wealth-sharing and cultural and religious rights were likely to be major concerns.
Both state representatives called on the international community to provide
technical and financial support, especially in the light of the short time frame in
which to conclude the popular consultations processes.
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
38. The Chair of the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, Muhammad
Ibrahim Khalil, informed the Security Council mission of various challenges related
to meeting the deadline of 9 January 2011. The Chair stated that the referendum
calendar had not been finalized, but that he was proposing a one-week registration
period, from 14 to 21 November. He stated that the Juba-based Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau had already informed key constituencies that voter registration
would begin on 14 November and would last for three weeks He also noted that the
Government had not disbursed any funding for the Commission, including salaries
for the Commission’s staff members. At the end of his briefing, the Chair
emphasized that the referendum was a Sudanese exercise, with only supplementary
assistance from the international community.
39. Members of the Security Council noted that sufficient time should be allocated
for voter registration in order to ensure the credibility of the referendum. The Chair
emphasized that the timeline for the registration and post-registration periods would
have to be condensed in order to abide by the timetable indicated in the Referendum
Act and still meet the deadline of 9 January 2011. The Chair further stated that, if
the date for the referendum remained 9 January 2011, there might not be enough

11-20439

9

S/2011/7

time for voters to register and challenge the voter registry list in a transparent and
accountable manner, which could put the credibility of the process at risk. The
Council mission recalled that both parties had recommitted themselves to holding
the referendum on time, and urged the Chair to seek flexibility in the timetable of
the Referendum Act. In response to a question on the design of the ballot paper, the
Chair stated that the Commission had not yet discussed what the question on the
ballot would be or how it would be depicted for illiterate voters, as the Commission
was preoccupied with preparations for voter registration.
Minister for foreign affairs
40. The mission met with Foreign Minister Ali Karti and other members of the
Government of National Unity in Khartoum. Mr. Karti stated that the current
Government had ended the war that it had inherited and had succeeded in restoring
peace and stability and addressing the root causes of the conflict, even if that meant
that Southern Sudan would have the option of secession. He further stated that the
Government had already implemented the three key areas of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement: power-sharing, wealth-sharing and the status of Abyei, Southern
Kordofan state and Blue Nile state, while the Sudan People’s Liberation Army had
only partially withdrawn from the ceasefire zone.
41. Mr. Karti reaffirmed that the Government was committed to holding the
referendums on 9 January 2011, as evidenced by the decision to breach referendum
law, specifically the provision that registration must be completed 90 days before
the referendums, in order to meet the 9 January date. He informed the mission that
referendum preparations had to be carried out correctly by the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, without any outside intervention, and that this would be
the only precondition for the outcome to be recognized. He also noted that some of
the post-referendum issues should be agreed upon, including border demarcation,
citizenship and wealth-sharing, before the referendums, but that they were not
preconditions for holding the referendums. Mr. Karti emphasized that the
Government did not want a resumption of the war and stated that the Security
Council should be concerned about the statements being made that suggested the
possibility of a unilateral declaration of independence.
42. With respect to Darfur, Mr. Karti observed that, while the international
community had supported various peace initiatives, it had never imposed sanctions
on the rebel groups that had breached peace agreements. Mr. Karti emphasized that
Doha remained the fundamental negotiating forum for the Government and called
on the international community to pressure rebel groups outside the Doha talks into
joining the talks without preconditions.
43. Mr. Karti commended the level of cooperation between the Government and
UNAMID and referred to the Government’s new strategy for Darfur, which included
a proposal to monitor security incidents with UNAMID. Mr. Karti denounced
attacks against UNAMID personnel committed by the rebels and their splinter
groups armed by external actors, and stated that some of those armed groups also
operated inside camps for internally displaced persons. Another Government
representative indicated that the Government intended to take disciplinary measures
against those armed elements.

10

11-20439

S/2011/7

44. Mr. Karti stated that sanctions against the Sudan were unjustified and harmed
civilians. He also noted that it would be important to maintain a balance between
justice and peace, with one not coming at the detriment of the other.
45. Referring to the 24 September communiqué and the terms of reference for the
Security Council mission, members of the Council reiterated their support for the
full and timely implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. Various
Council members emphasized that the parties must exercise flexibility in ensuring
that the referendums took place on time, and called on the Government to provide
all necessary resources, including funding, for the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission. Council members also expressed deep concern with the delay in the
establishment of the Abyei Commission and called on the parties to resolve the
outstanding issues through negotiations, including those taking place in Addis
Ababa. The Council mission also emphasized that it would be essential to address
key post-referendum issues, including citizenship, oil and border management. The
delegation also raised the issue of humanitarian access in Darfur and called on the
Government and all relevant parties to ensure freedom of movement for aid workers
and peacekeepers.
46. Mr. Karti responded by attributing some of the challenges to the lack of
cooperation from the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement and clarifying that the
referendums were to reflect the will of the people, not the opinions of the
Government of Southern Sudan or the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement.
Mr. Karti welcomed the appointment of the panel of the Secretary-General to
monitor the referendums process and encouraged international observation missions
to work with the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission. Mr. Karti also stated
that the July 2009 ruling by the Permanent Court of Arbitration was limited to the
boundaries of Abyei and that it was not up to the Court to decide other issues,
including the definition of residency. With respect to funding for the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission, the minister of finance clarified that the
Government was prepared to support the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
but that the budget had not been submitted by the Commission. The Commissioner
of the Humanitarian Aid Commission denied that aid agencies faced restrictions on
movements, including in Jebel Marra, and informed the mission that the Sudanese
Armed Forces were in control of most areas in Darfur, except for some areas where
the Justice and Equality Movement was present. Mr. Karti and other members of the
Government emphasized that the Government had taken the initiative to develop the
strategy for Darfur, which demonstrated its commitment to peace and stability
throughout the Sudan.
Vice-President of the Government of National Unity
47. Vice-President Ali Osman Taha reassured the Security Council mission that the
Government was fully committed to the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and to peace and stability in Darfur. Vice-President Taha noted
that, while the Government was engaged in the negotiation of post-referendum
arrangements, other critical issues remained unresolved, including the demarcation
of the 1956 border, where there had been a build up of force. In response to a
question posed by the Security Council mission, Vice-President Taha clarified that
those pending issues were not preconditions for the holding of the referendums.

11-20439

11

S/2011/7

48. Vice-President Taha also underscored the need to pressure the rebel groups to
join the Darfur peace process and underlined the efforts of the Government to
address impunity, including through the establishment of domestic mechanisms.
Vice-President Taha asked the Council to recognize tangible progress made by the
Government to improve the situation in Darfur, stating that negative attitudes from
the international community would lead to negative consequences, undermining the
Government and encouraging the rebels to continue acting as spoilers. He also noted
the high level of cooperation between the Government and UNAMID on the ground,
and expressed the appreciation of his Government for the work of UNAMID and
United Nations agencies.
International humanitarian community
49. Representatives of humanitarian agencies raised various concerns, including
security challenges, the denial of access and other bureaucratic impediments. They
emphasized the need to reach the whole population in order to identify priorities
based on needs, and acknowledged the importance of open dialogue with the
Government. In response to the questions asked by some members of the Security
Council on the impact of the expulsion of 13 non-governmental organizations in
March 2009, representatives of humanitarian agencies noted that there had been no
delivery of services in certain parts of Darfur since the expulsion, and that the
quality of services had also been compromised, particularly with regard to
protection, food and health. On the question of child soldiers, the humanitarian
agencies noted that significant numbers of child soldiers were associated with armed
groups other than the two parties and that the majority of the youth lacked
employment or educational opportunities. The humanitarian agencies were in the
process of developing a contingency plan for the post-referendum period in order to
ensure the continued delivery of humanitarian and development assistance. The
Security Council mission expressed its appreciation for the efforts of the
humanitarian community in Sudan and expressed its willingness to continue
facilitating that important work.
Southern Sudanese in Northern Sudan
50. Members of the Security Council mission met with representatives of Southern
Sudanese residing in Northern Sudan. Several participants observed an increase in
hostile rhetoric by both unity supporters and those who favoured separation. Many
noted that the Southern Sudanese in Northern Sudan were fearful of a potential
violent backlash, especially during the referendums or after the results are
announced. Another representative informed the mission that the Southern Sudanese
would continue to fear for a delay or cancellation of the referendums until the day of
the voting, and called on the Security Council to continue pressuring the parties to
hold the referendums on time.
51. Several representatives of the Southern Sudanese in Northern Sudan informed
the mission of the population migration from Northern Sudan to Southern Sudan in
anticipation of the referendums, and shared their concerns about the possible
outbreak of hostilities along the border. A female representative of Southern
Sudanese internally displaced persons stated that many such persons had not
participated in the repatriation programme sponsored by the Government of
Southern Sudan out of concern for the loss of educational opportunities for their
children, who had been schooled in Northern Sudan. Another representative of the

12

11-20439

S/2011/7

internally displaced persons noted that those who had migrated to Northern Sudan
for economic reasons well before the war were more likely to vote for unity, while
those who had come to Northern Sudan to escape violence during the war would
likely support secession.
52. All participants were concerned about potential harassment, intimidation and
fraud during registration and voting in Northern Sudan. They also noted the risk of
losing their properties in Northern Sudan if they registered in Southern Sudan. They
called on UNMIS to monitor the situation closely and to provide protection as
required.

11-20439

13
