United Nations

S/PV.6281

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6281st meeting
Friday, 5 March 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Issoze-Ngondet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Vukašinović
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Ms. Delmer-Lachaussée
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Gümrükçü
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/106)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-26013 (E)

*1026013*

S/PV.6281

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
The President (spoke in French): I should like, at
the outset of the meeting, to extend, on behalf of the
Council, a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Li Baodong, who is joining us today
for the first time. We look forward to working closely
with him.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country
(S/2010/106)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.

2

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/106, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau, and Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, in
her capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. I now
give the floor to Mr. Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: On 1 January 2010, the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in GuineaBissau transitioned into the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS).
It is a great privilege for me to present to the Council
the first report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the Integrated Mission (S/2010/106).
UNIOGBIS is in its third month of operations.
The Secretary-General’s report before the Council
outlines the progress made in the establishment of
UNIOGBIS and the remaining challenges to peace,
stability and development in Guinea-Bissau. Allow me
therefore to take this opportunity to update members of
the Council on developments in the country since the
report was prepared and, in conclusion, to make three
general observations.
In terms of the latest developments on the
political front, on 11 February President Sanha
appointed former President Yalá and the leader of the
opposition party, Partido para a Renovaçao Social

10-26013

S/PV.6281

(PRS), to the State Council, which was a positive step
that will contribute to the much-needed collaboration
and inclusion among the main political parties. The
National Assembly, at the request of the opposition
PRS party, set up two parliamentary commissions on
the revision of the Constitution and local legislation.
Finally, the technical committee established by the
National Assembly to organize a national dialogue
process has begun its work.
On regional cooperation, the Ministers of
Defence of Guinea-Bissau and Senegal met in Dakar
on 12 February. They agreed to review and update the
bilateral security and defence cooperation agreement
signed in 1975. With regard to tensions over border
markers in October 2009, both sides agreed that the
joint commission set up to manage border issues would
meet in this month of March.
With respect to the commission of inquiry, in
February the Judiciary Police submitted to the Office
of the Prosecutor General two reports on the
assassinations of President Vieira and the Chief of
General Staff in March last year. Both reports have
been referred to magistrates in the Prosecutor’s Office
for further investigation.
In terms of socio-economic developments, State
schools were disrupted by a wave of strikes by the two
teaching unions at the end of February over the alleged
failure of the Government to keep its side of an
agreement signed with the unions over pay and
conditions of service in December 2009.
Finally, on the Integrated Peacebuilding Office,
as a follow-up to the joint strategic planning retreat
held between UNIOGBIS and the United Nations
country team in early February, the United Nations
system is finalizing a joint framework for peace and
development in Guinea-Bissau. This joint framework
will contain specific benchmarks to measure progress
in peace consolidation in Guinea-Bissau.
I would like now to turn to more general
observations.
First, the year 2010 could be a turning point for
Guinea-Bissau. The country is enjoying a relatively
stable political environment and growing international
attention. This unprecedented window of opportunity
for Guinea-Bissau should not be missed. There is a lot
to be done, and the Government has continued to make
progress in re-engaging the country’s international

10-26013

partners and pursuing its reform agenda. They are
doing well, but they could do better. The pace of fiscal
reform has improved and there has been progress in
preparation for public administration reform.
Furthermore, the Government is up to date with current
salaries for the first time since 2004. It has also
increased revenue collection and improved fiscal
management. Guinea-Bissau is getting closer to the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative
completion point, which would result in debt relief of
$700 million some time in November. That is slightly
more than half of the country’s total debt burden.
In short, with an overall African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde majority in
the National Assembly, governance improvements and
the prospect of debt relief, the conditions are in place
for political stability and tangible improvements in the
lives of the people of Guinea-Bissau in the short to
medium term.
Secondly, security sector reform remains at the
centre of the country’s stabilization and development
agenda. In the past few months, the Government, with
the support of its international partners, has made some
progress. The legal framework for security sector
reform is now before the National Assembly, as are the
plans for the defence sector pension scheme. The
Security Council has given UNIOGBIS the mandate of
coordinating international efforts in security sector
reform. I am happy to report that the majority of the
United Nations security sector reform team is now in
place and that the recruitment of the remaining
personnel will most likely be finalized by the end of
March.
In addition to implementing its overall
coordination mandate, UNIOGBIS will also take a lead
role in providing support to national authorities in the
reform of internal security institutions, focusing on the
police, and we have in fact already started this.
UNIOGBIS is committed to collaborating closely with
the country’s international partners in a flexible
manner to ensure that our collective contributions are
responsive to the needs of Guinea-Bissau. The mission
will also assist national authorities and international
partners in developing integrated strategies to
implement holistic security sector reform programmes
and mobilize resources. In this regard, I hope that the
Peacebuilding Commission, under the able leadership
of Ambassador Maria Luiza Viotti, Chair of the
Commission’s Guinea-Bissau configuration, will also

3

S/PV.6281

support resource mobilization efforts and strategic
coherence for security sector reform efforts.
Thirdly, as Council members know, GuineaBissau’s journey towards peace, democracy and
prosperity is taking place in a very difficult regional
environment. The political and security situation in
West Africa remains highly precarious, and we see
worrying signs of military coups, of ethnic and
interreligious conflicts and of political intolerance. We
also see increasing threats from international crime,
illicit drug trafficking, smuggling, the unfair
exploitation of natural resources and illegal fishing
taking hold in West Africa. Given the interdependence
of most countries in the subregion, this could further
threaten Guinea-Bissau’s stability at a time when we
think it is on the right track. On the other hand, a
successful and peaceful Guinea-Bissau could have a
positive influence on developments in the region.
Peace consolidation in Guinea-Bissau continues
to require collective and timely action. In this regard, I
would welcome continued support from the Security
Council in ensuring the constructive and coordinated
engagement of all stakeholders. I thank you, Sir, and
the members of the Council for your consideration.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro
Viotti.
Mrs. Viotti: I would like to start by extending a
very warm welcome to Ambassador Li Baodong, the
new Permanent Representative of China to the United
Nations. We look forward to working very closely with
him.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Council today in my capacity as Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). I welcome the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba, and thank him for his remarks and, most
important, for the work he has been doing in the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau (UNIOGBIS).
Since I last briefed the Security Council on the
relevant activities of the PBC, in November 2009 (see
S/PV.6212), the Commission has maintained its
engagement with Guinea-Bissau in several ways.

for Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau. The review’s final
report confirmed the validity of the priorities
established, assessed the progress achieved in pursuing
them and signalled the way forward in critical
peacebuilding areas. Based on that assessment, PBC
members drafted and approved a document
(PBC/4/GNB/3)
with
conclusions
and
recommendations for all actors involved in peace
consolidation in Guinea-Bissau. The Commission
formally adopted the document at the beginning of
February.
From 18 to 21 January, a delegation from the
PBC, headed by the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Brazil, Ambassador Regina Maria Cordeiro Dunlop,
visited Bissau and reiterated the Commission’s
continued support to the peacebuilding process in the
country. The report of the field trip (PBC/4/GNB/4)
provides an analysis of the situation on the ground and
a road map for the Commission’s actions in specific
priority areas.
The inauguration of President Malam Bacai
Sanhá in September 2009 and the formation of a new
Government under the leadership of Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Júnior were hailed by many observers as
the beginning of new phase for Guinea-Bissau. There
was growing recognition that the conditions are now
right for the country to launch a much-needed process
of reconciliation and for stability to take hold.
We are pleased to note the progress made since
then. The National Assembly has taken the lead in the
organization of a national reconciliation dialogue. The
event will bring together all national stakeholders in a
series of debates on the root causes of conflict and will
help to forge a common understanding and a vision for
the future of the country.
Security sector reform has gained momentum.
The Government has submitted to the National
Assembly a number of bills that will provide the legal
framework within which the reform will take place.
The fact that Guinea-Bissau has adopted the 2010
budget in a timely manner for the first time in many
years and has improved fiscal management and
normalized the payment of public servants is very
encouraging. So is the record performance in the
export of cashew nuts, which illustrates the economic
potential the country has yet to achieve.

The National Peacebuilding Steering Committee
concluded the first review of the Strategic Framework

4

10-26013

S/PV.6281

This emerging positive economic and financial
picture was also reflected in the International Monetary
Fund’s conclusion, after the field mission to Bissau last
January, that there are good prospects for moving from
the current post-conflict emergency assistance into a
medium-term programme. This could provide the
impetus for reaching the long-awaited completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative.
As we take the next steps of our engagement on
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, one of the most
important tasks is the launching of a pension fund that
will allow the security sector reform programme to
move forward. The Peacebuilding Commission should
be able to strongly support the creation of such a fund.
In Guinea-Bissau, as in other post-conflict
countries, the interconnection between the security and
economic dimensions of peacebuilding is evident. It is,
therefore, important to combine efforts on the security
side with measures that aim at job creation, especially
among youth, and promote the revitalization of the
economy. These actions will, in turn, generate revenues
that will enable the State not only to fulfil its role of
ensuring the rule of law but also to provide basic
services to the population.
The projects financed by the Peacebuilding Fund
are now on track. In order for the Fund to have a
positive impact on the ground, it is our duty to make
sure that the implementing agencies are endowed with
the necessary human resources to execute these and
other projects the country needs so much.
The youth employment project supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund has been very successful in
providing training for a number of very talented young
people on how to start small businesses. It would be
important to find ways of supporting its continuation,
perhaps through microcredit schemes that would allow
them to put what they have learned into practice.
The time has come to expedite work on the
approval of a second tranche of Peacebuilding Fund
resources for Guinea-Bissau. The message has to be
one of political support, of using the catalytic role of
the Fund to attract more resources for the country in
order to consolidate gains and make more progress at
this crucial stage of peacebuilding. It is important to
work around issues of absorptive capacity so as to take
full advantage of the Fund’s capacity to reinforce the
work of the PBC in a country that has been considered
an aid orphan.

10-26013

Coordination remains an important requirement
to ensure the success of peacebuilding actions in
Guinea-Bissau. It becomes even more important as the
Government starts planning for a donors’ round table
that will have security sector reform as one of its main
targets. The PBC is willing to support the Government
in such an initiative.
Institution-building continues to be an important
part of our efforts. Strengthening the capacity of law
enforcement agencies remains a high priority,
especially taking into account that drug trafficking is
still a matter of serious concern. We appreciate
bilateral and multilateral actions in this field and look
forward to the full implementation of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) antidrugs regional plan.
In this connection, we welcome the launching of
the West Africa Coast Initiative by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime together with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Office for West Africa/Department of Political
Affairs, INTERPOL and ECOWAS. Its focus on the
creation of transnational crimes units, which will
enable countries in the region to share information and
intelligence, is certainly a major step forward in
enhancing cooperation to combat drug trafficking.
We appreciate the strengthening of the United
Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau through the new
Integrated Office. We hope that UNIOGBIS can fill all
the new positions and be fully operational as soon as
possible.
Despite the remaining challenges, Guinea-Bissau
has recently made significant progress. We should
seize this opportunity and step up our support to the
concerted efforts in enhancing stability and promoting
development. I invite all concerned parties, including
the Peacebuilding Fund, to reaffirm, in concrete terms,
their commitment to peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Guinea-Bissau.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
should like, Mr. President, to thank you and to convey
our great pleasure at seeing you, the eminent
representative of the Gabonese Republic, presiding
over the work of the Council during the month of

5

S/PV.6281

March. I am convinced that, owing to your spirit of
brotherly cooperation and to the diligence and, above
all, the comprehension of Council members — and I
convey my greetings to the new members — the
Council will give careful consideration to the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2010/106) before it.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral just recalled, Guinea-Bissau has come a long
way. It has to be said, and we should celebrate this, that
substantial progress has been made in strengthening
democracy and promoting a culture of peace and
dialogue, but above all in establishing a political
climate of accountability and good governance that
will help create conditions that favour lasting
development.
As members will have noted, what emerges from
the report of the Secretary-General is that GuineaBissau is on the road to political stability. GuineaBissau has worked with great determination to
establish a mechanism to firmly enable good
governance, the rigorous management of public funds
through the rigorous monitoring of all tax revenues,
which has had evident success, as Mr. Mutaboba has
just noted. For the first time since 2004, the
Government of Guinea-Bissau was able to ensure the
regular payment of salaries, which represents
substantial progress since the payment of salaries, as
Council members know, contributes to the building of
the psychological climate necessary for peace and
stability in a country insofar as it is salaries that enable
families to live decent lives.
Here I should like to emphasize in particular the
effort being made in Guinea-Bissau — by both the
President and the Prime Minister — to ensure the
harmonious management of State affairs, and,
moreover, to ensure that there can be understanding
and dialogue, along with an inclusive political climate,
which is open to other stakeholders, especially other
political parties, and in which they too can make their
contribution to building a Guinea-Bissau that favours
peace and development.
In this respect, it is important to take note of what
Mr. Mutaboba just recalled: the fact that the President
of the Republic invited the former President,
Mr. Kumba Yala, to take part in the State Council,
which clearly shows the good intentions, and above all
the determination, of the leaders of Guinea-Bissau to
promote an inclusive political climate.

6

This policy of inclusion responds to the need to
ensure ongoing dialogue in Guinea-Bissau. That is
why, at present, all actors and stakeholders — the
Government, civil society, young people and women —
are participating in organizing what we hope will be a
national reconciliation conference. This conference
will be centred on topics focusing not only on the
concerns of the people but also on the need to ensure
that together, through fruitful dialogue, we can get to
the right solutions that will allow us to establish lasting
political stability and mechanisms opening the way for
sustainable development. Everyone in the country must
realize that, without dialogue, without the participation
by all and without the contributions of all the sons and
daughters of Guinea-Bissau, promoting development
will not be possible.
I should also like to say that defence and security
sector reform efforts are under way. The Council will
have realized that everything in Guinea-Bissau is a
matter of top priority. But among the great number of
priorities, defence and security sector reform is a preeminent one, to which we are devoting enormous effort
and particular care. In this regard, I should like to
thank the international community, including the
European Union, for the invaluable cooperation that
our development partners are providing us, in
particular with regard to security and defence sector
reform.
However, while we are aware that defence and
security sector reform is necessary and indispensable,
it is not enough on its own. We must proceed, as we are
doing, to a much broader reform, including of public
administration, so that the skills needed to face all the
challenges we have to address together in GuineaBissau are in place where and when they are needed.
That is why, as I said earlier, we have begun to
establish mechanisms that allow us to meticulously
manage public funds to ensure that what little we have
is spent in an intelligent way and so that, through
transparent accounting, the people of Guinea-Bissau
can have trust in their leaders and be aware of the
Government’s praiseworthy efforts to meet their most
urgent needs.
I should also like point out that we are making
efforts relating to the need to combat drug trafficking
in our country. Here too, substantial progress has been
seen thanks again to reform of the justice sector and in
particular of the judicial police, which, today, equipped

10-26013

S/PV.6281

with far more substantial resources, is tackling this
scourge which affects us all due to its nature as a
scourge afflicting the entire region. For that reason, I
welcome the fact that the West African region has
decided to join in these efforts and place all available
energy and resources at our disposal to address this
scourge. From us, this requires firm discipline, joint
efforts and good coordination.
We are counting on the international community
to support us in these efforts. The challenges are many,
and despite my Government’s endeavours and despite
our awareness of the need to redouble our efforts to
shoulder our primary responsibility to establish the
structures needed to transform Guinea-Bissau into a
stable country that can contribute to peace and stability
in the subregion. We need international assistance in
overcoming all of the many obstacles before us. I am
counting on Security Council members to urge the rest
of the international community to provide sustained
support for the efforts that we ourselves are making in
Guinea-Bissau.

have always shown in Guinea-Bissau. I believe that, on
the basis of the excellent report of the SecretaryGeneral and the excellent clarifications provided this
morning by Mr. Mutaboba, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and by Ambassador Viotti,
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Council members will
have a clear and up-to-date idea of the progress
achieved in my country. I confident that the Council
will continue to provide the necessary support so that
we can complete all the reforms on which we have
embarked, so that we can continue all the necessary
efforts, and so that we can be worthy of the trust the
Council has placed in us.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

I take this opportunity, once again, to thank the
members of the Security Council for the interest they

10-26013

7
