UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/15
19 March 1997
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3753rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 March 1997 in
connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 5 March 1997 (S/1997/195) on Croatia, submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1009 (1995) and 1019 (1995). It also recalls
the statement by its President of 20 December 1996 (S/PRST/1996/48).
"The Security Council remains deeply concerned that, although the
Government of Croatia maintains that it has deployed the necessary number
of police officers, Croatian Serbs continue to live in conditions of
serious insecurity throughout the areas which had been designated United
Nations Protected Areas (UNPAs) and were known as Sectors West, North and
South, particularly in the area of former Sector South around Knin. It
calls upon the Government of Croatia to take further steps to restore a
climate of law and order in those areas.
"The Security Council welcomes the fact that difficult living
conditions for remaining Serbs have been considerably eased during recent
months by intensive humanitarian programmes conducted by international
organizations. In this context, it calls upon the Government of Croatia to
assume fully its responsibilities, in cooperation with all relevant
international organizations, to ensure that the social and economic
situation of all inhabitants in the former Sectors improves.
"The Security Council expresses its concern that there continues to be
little progress with regard to the return of Croatian Serb displaced
persons and refugees to the areas. It calls upon the Government of Croatia
to accelerate its efforts to improve conditions of personal and economic
security, to remove bureaucratic obstacles to the rapid issue of
documentation to all Serb families and to resolve promptly the property
issue, by a return of property or just compensation, in order to facilitate
the return of Croatian Serbs to the former sectors.

97-07491 (E)

190397

/...

S/PRST/1997/15
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls upon the Government of Croatia to remove
uncertainty about the implementation of its amnesty law, in particular by
finalizing without delay the list of war crime suspects on the basis of
existing evidence and in strict accordance with international law, and to
put an end to arbitrary arrests, particularly of Serbs returning to
Croatia.
"The Security Council recalls the obligations of Croatia arising from
relevant universal human rights instruments to which it is a party. It
welcomes the commitments undertaken by the Government of Croatia in
relation to the Council of Europe, including its signature of the Framework
Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and expects that the
Government of Croatia will implement those commitments fully.
"The Security Council is concerned that the Government of Croatia
continues to withhold its full cooperation with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. It underlines the obligation of the Government
of Croatia in accordance with resolution 827 (1993) to respond promptly and
in full to all requests from the International Tribunal. It also calls
upon the Government of Croatia to conduct investigations into and the
prosecution of persons accused of serious violations of international
humanitarian law, especially those committed in the course of military
operations in 1995.
"The Security Council stresses the importance of the effective
implementation of the measures outlined in the paragraphs above for
promoting confidence and reconciliation in Croatia as well as for the
peaceful reintegration of the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium. In this context, the Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue to keep it informed on a regular basis and to report
again on the humanitarian and human rights situation in Croatia within his
report to be submitted by 1 July 1997 as referred to in paragraph 6 of
resolution 1079 (1996)."

-----
