S/PV.8923

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8923rd meeting

Thursday, 9 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

President Bazoum/Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
President Karis
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security in the context of terrorism and climate change
Letter dated 30 November 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/988)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-38454 (E)
*2138454*

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

I wish to warmly welcome Secretary-General
António Guterres, to whom I now give the floor.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security in the context of terrorism and
climate change
Letter dated 30 November 2021 from
the Permanent Representative of Niger
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2021/988)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Albania,
Australia, Bahrain, Belarus, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Chile,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Fiji, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
Maldives, Malta, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chair of the African Union
Commission, and Mr. Mamman Nuhu, Executive
Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin Commission and
Head of the Multinational Joint Task Force.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/988, which contains the text of a
letter dated 30 November 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of the Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
2/31

09/12/2021

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): Allow
me to begin by resolutely condemning the cowardly
attacks carried out on Sunday in against the forces
of the Group of Five for the Sahel in the Niger and
yesterday against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, in the course
of which seven Togolese peacekeepers lost their lives.
An Egyptian peacekeeper succumbed to his injuries
suffered in the course of an attack in Mali last month.
I express my deepest condolences to the families of the
victims of those attacks, as well as the many others that
have cost the lives of innocent people. At this difficult
moment, I should like to reiterate my solidarity and the
support of the United Nations to the Governments and
the peoples of the region in their fight against terrorism.
I thank the Niger presidency for organizing this
very timely debate on the links among climate change,
conflict and terrorism.
First of all, the climate emergency is the vital
issue of our time. Although the twenty-sixth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26)
helped us make some progress in that regard, we still have
a long way to go to meet our objectives. Nevertheless,
we have no choice but to continue our efforts to reach
the goal of limiting the global temperature rise to 1.5°C.
We are in a race against time, and no one is immune to
the destructive effects of climate change.
In Somalia, Madagascar, the Sudan, the Middle
East and North Africa, droughts and increasingly
extreme weather events are making access to scarce
resources more difficult and threatening food security.
The United Nations World Food Programme estimates
that climate change could increase the risk of famine
and malnutrition by up to 20 per cent by 2050. The
World Bank predicts that the phenomenon could
displace more than 200 million people in the same
period. Such events would undermine global peace,
security and prosperity — as the Security Council has
repeatedly emphasized, including in resolutions on
the mandates of five peacekeeping operations and five
special political missions.
Often the regions most vulnerable to climate change
also suffer from insecurity, poverty, weak governance
and the scourge of terrorism. Of the 15 countries most
vulnerable to climate change, eight are hosting a United
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Nations peacekeeping or special political mission.
Climate effects in conflict areas only exacerbate
precarious conditions. When climate change further
burdens institutions and hampers their ability to deliver
public services, it fuels grievances and distrust of the
authorities. When loss of livelihoods leaves people in
despair, it makes the promises of protection, income
and justice — behind which terrorist groups sometimes
hide their designs — more attractive.
In the Lake Chad basin, Boko Haram has been
able to mobilize new recruits, particularly from
local communities where people are disillusioned
by the lack of economic opportunities and access to
essential resources. In central Mali, terrorist groups
have exploited growing tensions between pastoralists
and farmers to recruit members from pastoralist
communities, who often feel excluded and stigmatized.
Environmental degradation enables non-State
armed groups to extend their sphere of influence and to
exploit resources. In Iraq and Syria, for example, Da’esh
has exploited water shortages and taken control of
water infrastructure to impose its will on communities.
In Somalia, charcoal production provides Al-Shabaab a
significant revenue stream.
Climate change is not the source of all evil,
but it has a multiplier effect and tends to exacerbate
instability, conflict and terrorism. We therefore need
to address these challenges in an integrated way
and create a virtuous cycle of peace, resilience and
sustainable development. That is why my report Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) proposes a new agenda
for peace that presents a multidimensional vision of
global security.
In the framework of an integrated approach, I
would like to focus on five areas in which we need to
increase our collective action.
First, we must prioritize prevention and address the
root causes of insecurity. Conflicts and terrorism do
not take place in a vacuum. They are the result of deepseated divisions — poverty, human rights abuses, poor
governance, the collapse of essential public services,
the lack of prospects for human development and, more
broadly, the loss of hope for the future.
To build sustainable peace, we must reduce
inequalities. We must protect the most vulnerable
people and communities, especially women, who are
often disproportionately affected. We must support

S/PV. 8923

investments in human development, from health to
education to social protection, in order to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. We must
foster inclusive governance, with the full participation
of all communities and civil society, including
environmentalists, so that everyone can participate
in their country’s future. Everywhere, we must
take advantage of local know-how and promote the
participation of women and young people. Studies show
that, when women participate in negotiations, peace is
more sustainable; when they participate in legislation,
they adopt policies that protect the environment and
promote social cohesion.
Secondly, we urgently need to increase our
investments in adaptation and resilience. The annual
cost of adaptation in developing countries is estimated
at $70 billion and is expected to rise to $300 billion
by 2030. Developed countries must deliver on their
promise to provide at least $100 billion a year in
climate financing to developing countries, and it is
critical that at least 50 per cent of climate financing for
developing countries be dedicated to building resilience
and adaptation.
COP26 sent a positive signal in that regard. I
now expect developed countries to implement their
commitment to double adaptation funding by 2025
through ambitious initiatives such as the Great Green
Wall, which is reviving degraded landscapes in the
Sahel to increase food security, create jobs and promote
peacebuilding. But funding mechanisms need to be
commensurate with the needs of the people and be
accessible to the most affected populations. Subsidies
are essential, as the debt burden is already stifling the
most vulnerable countries.
At the same time, we need to adapt our peacebuilding
work to climate action. Since 2017, the Peacebuilding
Fund has increased its investments in innovative
initiatives that take into account climate risks. For
example, in Yemen, where water scarcity exacerbated
by climate change is contributing to instability, the
Fund has supported the restoration and strengthening
of local water governance structures in the Wadi
Rima Valley, which has helped reduce intercommunal
tensions. Unfortunately, the Fund is still a long way
from reaching the critical mass that will enable it to
more systematically help Governments and societies
address the risks of complex conflicts.

21-384543/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in English)
Thirdly, we need better analysis and early-warning
systems, Every conflict-prevention initiative must
take into account climate risks. Understanding and
anticipating the cascading effects of climate change
will strengthen our work on peace and security.
A third of the global population lacks earlywarning systems. As discussed with our partners
during the African Union-United Nations conference,
the African Union and other regional organizations are
leading the way in making early-warning mechanisms
operational. We also need to build on existing expertise
in disaster risk reduction and integrate climate risk
into all economic and financial decisions. At the
United Nations, the Climate Security Mechanism is
strengthening the capacity of field missions, country
teams and regional and subregional organizations
to analyse climate-related security risks and shape
integrated and timely responses.
Fourthly, we must promote the development of
partnerships and initiatives linking local, regional
and national approaches. We must make the best use
of on-the-ground expertise, while drawing on the
political, technical and financial capacities of regional
and international actors.
The Regional Strategy for the Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected
Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region is a good
example. Jointly developed by the African Union, the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the United Nations
and other partners, it integrates humanitarian action,
security, development and climate resilience.
In partnership with the International Organization
for Migration, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations
Environment Programme, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel has launched a new
initiative on climate change, security and development
in West Africa. That initiative promotes an integrated
and coordinated approach to climate security in the
region and supports the Economic Community of West
African States, Governments and local authorities in
their risk reduction efforts.
We must also continue supporting the work of
the Special Coordinator for Development in the Sahel
through the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel,
which aims to strengthen cooperation and address the
4/31

09/12/2021

structural problems, such as poverty, underdevelopment
and governance challenges, that make the region more
vulnerable to conflict.
Lastly, fighting terrorism and conflict in the context
of climate disruption requires sustained investment. Yet,
as we have seen in the Sahel and Somalia, African peace
missions often have limited room to manoeuvre and are
faced with great funding uncertainties. Now more than
ever, African Union peace support operations require
Security Council mandates under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as predictable
funding guaranteed by assessed contributions. I urge
Council members again to consider this matter as soon
as possible.
The Security Council and all Member States must
work simultaneously on peacebuilding and the effects
of climate change. The United Nations is proud to stand
with the international community to build a safer and
more sustainable future for all.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would first like to pay tribute to the memory
of the civilian and military victims who fall on almost
a daily basis, in particular in the Sahel.
I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President of the Republic of the
Niger, for having invited us to this important meeting
on the issues of climate change and their interaction
with peace and security. I am pleased to congratulate
him on the organization of this important meeting and
to wish the Niger’s presidency of the Security Council
every success for the current month.
I am sure that the Niger’s proven experience and
the President’s vast understanding of these issues
will provide the Council with relevant analyses that
will enable it, I hope, to take decisions that meet
the challenges, which is all the more relevant given
that the subject of this meeting is being discussed
just a few weeks after the convening of the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in
Glasgow.
Although experts cannot establish a direct causal
link proving that conflicts are caused by climate change,
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

there is no doubt today that deteriorating climate
conditions, a lack of rainfall and subsequent droughts
contribute to exacerbating social and intercommunal
tensions owing to the scarcity of life-sustaining
resources, in particular of water and pastures.
If we take as an example the data provided in reports
on the Sahel region and the Lake Chad basin, we note
that the large-scale increase in the number of young
people, a human result of the demographic explosion,
has added to the pressure on natural resources in a
worrisome way.
In that regard, we must recall that in the Group
of Five for the Sahel countries, military spending
consumes a quarter of the national budget to the
detriment of the social sectors, in particular education
and health care, water and food security. Where does
the frequent violence between herders and farmers
arise from? The access to ever-dwindling resources and
their unequal distribution due to climate change widen
the gaps and inequalities, which lead to all kinds of
terrorist activity. Migration and its criminal networks,
trafficking of all kinds, chaotic transhumance and rural
exodus complete a picture that is already quite bleak.
The failure of many inadequate reforms exacerbates the
risks associated with such phenomena.
The scarcity of resources, water and agrifood
resources in particular fuel intercommunal conflicts.
Let us not forget that conflicts between herders and
farmers have killed six times as many people in the
Middle Belt region of Nigeria as the conflict with Boko
Haram.
Accordingly, such phenomena create conditions
conducive to the proliferation of non-State entities,
led by terrorist groups, which influence, disorient,
indoctrinate, intoxicate, recruit, arm and train
thousands of young people to follow a path of death
and destruction as a way to find salvation and realize
non-existent and delusional destinies. It is on that
ideological, social, economic and existential terrain
that the real confrontation takes place between national
and continental efforts, on the one hand, and terrorism
and other forms of deviance, on the other.
One of the fundamental causes of the phenomena
of violence and trafficking in drugs, arms and human
beings is arises precisely from those conditions. The
dependence on agriculture and livestock in the region,
for example, pushes more than 50 million people in the
Sahel alone into a precarious situation, making them

S/PV. 8923

easy targets for jihadism and other forms of violence,
which are breeding grounds for criminality. If we recall
that employment in the agricultural sector varies from
25 per cent in Burkina Faso to 75 per cent in the Niger,
we may then understand the extent to which people are
vulnerable to the spread of the terrorist cancer and its
various metastases across the continent.
On the other hand, if we recall that women, in
particular girls, represent 40 per cent of the agricultural
and pastoral workforce, then we understand the extent
of another phenomenon of inequality and injustice that
is the cause of the suffering of millions of women and
girls. When we correlate those consequences of climate
change with aggravating, frustrating factors, such as
weak or poor governance, corruption, marginalization
and political, social and community exclusion, we may
understand how the promotion of deviant trajectories
has far-reaching consequences.
From the Lake Chad region to the Horn of Africa,
unprecedented temperatures are being recorded. Their
variability puts undue pressure on rural economies,
vulnerable groups and State capacity. The ensuing
poverty and climate variability are converging in
a mournful symphony that is highly conducive to
violence, criminal networks and terrorists, resulting in
huge fluctuations in population movements. Over the
long term, the effect is to create upheavals that very few
forward-looking development strategies can foresee.
That is the picture that a quick look at the interaction
of climate conditions and peace and security issues in
Africa offers us. The fundamental issue has always
been not so much the description and explanation of the
phenomena that frame our lives but rather the way we
deal with them.
In that respect, I must admit that, in Africa at least,
we are disappointed by the international community’s
responses. There is no point in hiding from Council
members our concern with regard to the fight against
climate change and terrorism and the interlinkages of
these two devastating phenomena.
While Africa’s contribution to global pollution is
minimal, its share of the investments to address the
adverse effects of climate change is very small.
The commitment of the African Union to ensuring
a genuine justice in those areas is unshakeable. We will
never cease to insist on that with all our strength and to
work with our friends who come to our assistance.

21-384545/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

At the same time, we note that, in its fight against
terrorism, Africa continues to suffer the perverse effects
of a veritable double standard; while in other parts of
the world, in particular the Middle East, international
efforts have been mobilized to combat terrorism, efforts
on that scale have been mostly denied to Africa.
The financing of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task
Force in the Lake Chad basin continues to suffer
shortfalls in terms of United Nations resources. I hope
that today’s open debate will advance discussion of
those double standards and unethical shortfalls, and
above all the international community’s recognition of
its obligations. The Council is called upon to address
that challenge. I wish it every success in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Faki
Mahamat for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nuhu.
Mr. Nuhu: First of all, I thank the President of the
Niger for the invitation extended to me to attend this
very important meeting and the opportunity to speak.
Let me start by saying that Lake Chad is a
transboundary lake shared by Cameroon, Chad, the
Niger and Nigeria. As of the 1960s, it was one of the
biggest freshwater lakes in the world, with a surface
area of 25,000 square kilometres. Before its current
predicament, the basin was an exporter of agricultural
products. Both food crops and cash crops are grown.
Food crops include millet, sorghum, wheat, cocoyam,
maize, cassava and sweet potato. Cash crops include
cotton, rice, sesame and dates, which are generally
produced in large-scale farming systems. Livestock
transhumance, as well as fishing, is also in abundance
in the Lake.
Today, however, the effects of climate variability
and change, population pressure and insecurity have
conspired to bring about constant threats to food
security in the basin. Modelling results published by
the German Agency for International Cooperation in
2015 have forecast that, by the end of the century, there
will be an increase in the mean annual temperature for
the central and eastern Lake Chad basin; there will be a
reduction in the available water resources by the end of
the century; the rainy season will become shorter across
the Lake Chad basin; areas that have sufficiently longgrowing seasons, and therefore are today considered as
tropical, will decrease in size and become fragmented
6/31

09/12/2021

or disappear; and climate conditions supporting the
growth of tropical forests may no longer exist by the
end of the century.
Water balances for the period from 1954 to 1969
show that the total inflow into the lake was about 51.6
cubic kilometres a year, 99.4 per cent of which was
lost almost entirely to evaporation. Similarly, during
the period from 1988 to 2010, when the total inflow
was reduced by half to 23.8 cubic kilometres a year,
the loss to evaporation amounted to 99.1 per cent, or
approximately 23.6 cubic kilometres a year. Lake Chad
is vulnerable to increased evaporation associated with
higher temperatures, owing to its large surface area
relative to its volume. The lake started shrinking in the
early 1960s, and that phenomenon is at the root of most
of the challenges facing the region today, including
youth restiveness, terrorism and clashes between
farmers and herders.
The following statistics illustrate the extent of
the challenges. In 1963, the total surface area of the
lake was 25,000 square kilometres. During the drought
for the period from 1972 to 1975 it shrank to 10,700
square kilometres, while during the second drought,
for the period from 1982 to 1985, it shrank to 1,410
square kilometres, or 5 per cent of its 1963 size. Since
then, however, the volume of the lake has increased to
approximately 10,000 square kilometres.
Due to the high birth rate of about 3 per cent and
migration from all over the Sahel region, the population
of the Lake Chad basin increased from approximately
7 million in the early 1960s to 22 million in 1991, and
to 50 million in 2015. The combination of the shrinking
lake and the population explosion has led to reductions
in the means of livelihood, farmlands, grazing lands
and fishing waters, as well as trading activities in
general. The consequences are that we are experiencing
general unemployment, endemic poverty among the
people, youth restiveness and general hopelessness and
anger, especially among young people.
The people of the region are very resilient. They
adopted various coping strategies, including migration
from the dry northern basin to the wetter southern
basin. That in itself created stress, as the southern part
of the basin immediately became overpopulated. People
also practiced a combination of several activities,
combining fishing, livestock-rearing, agriculture and
trade. They also devised ways of using the same farm
for different purposes, depending on the season.
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Among young people, who make up 60 per cent
of the population of the Lake Chad basin, however, we
have observed the emergence of a smuggling industry
facilitated by the porous borders — drug trafficking,
arms trafficking and human trafficking. We have
also observed the vulnerability of young people to
recruitment by terrorists and other criminals. Clashes
between farmers and herders over the destruction of
crops, owing to increased cattle movement in search of
water, has also increased, as have cattle-rustling and,
more recently, kidnapping for ransom and kidnapping
by terrorists.
It was against that background of general discontent
that the Boko Haram ideology was introduced into the
Lake Chad area and has remained there ever since. Boko
Haram activities have caused massive displacements
of people from their means of livelihood, thereby
exacerbating existing water insecurity.
The Multinational Joint Task Force, as currently
constituted, was formally established at the Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, which was held in Abuja on 11 June
2015, although the activities leading up to its creation
had already been under way for a long time. It was
established, as we are all aware, to create a safe and
secure environment in the areas affected by terrorist
activities, facilitate the implementation of stabilization
programmes and facilitate humanitarian operations.
While kinetic operations aimed at neutralizing
terrorists in the battlefield are of high priority, they are,
however, insufficient in the medium and long terms to
eliminate the threat of violent extremism in the basin.
Military actions alone cannot solve the problem of
terrorism. It is necessary to address the root causes
of the problem. That is what is being done through
the Regional Strategy for the Stabilization, Recovery
and Resilience of the Boko Haram-affected Areas of
the Lake Chad Basin Region and other development
projects in the area.
The Regional Strategy was produced by the Lake
Chad Basin Commission with the support of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and the African Union. It is anchored on nine allencompassing thematic pillars of intervention and 40
strategic objectives. Each pillar defines the broad scope
of work to be undertaken and the strategic objectives to
be achieved. As part of the implementation framework,
the specific initiatives to be undertaken are compiled in

S/PV. 8923

territorial action plans by each of the Governors of the
eight affected states and provinces.
Meanwhile, pending the operationalization of
the Regional Strategy, UNDP, in collaboration with
the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African
Union, launched a regional stabilization facility on
18 July 2019 in Niamey. In addition to supporting
the implementation of the Regional Strategy, the
$100 million facility, which is now in its second phase,
is intended to provide immediate stabilization for
specific areas that have been cleared of Boko Haram
control but in which communities remain vulnerable to
continued infiltration and attack.
To mitigate the effects of climate change and
address the root causes of the insurgency, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and its partners have been executing
humanitarian and development projects aimed at
restoring peoples’ means of livelihood, building their
resilience and restoring the environment.
One such project is an emergency development
programme for vulnerable groups in the Lake Chad
region, in particular young people and women. It
comprises 118 microprojects to be executed within a
period of 18 months, at an estimated cost of 37.5 billion
CFA francs. It is expected to generate about 35 billion
CFA francs in revenue and create at least 257,000 jobs.
We also have the Lake Chad Development and
Climate Resilience Action Plan, which is supposed to
span a period of 10 years, from 2016 to 2025, and is
designed to turn the lake into a pool of regional rural
development. The €916 million plan was presented at
the United Nations Climate Change Conference held
in Paris in 2015, at which the World Bank pledged
$300 million but no further contributions were received.
The World Bank contribution is now being used for
another project known as the Lake Chad Recovery and
Development Project, at a cost of $170 million.
In addition to that, we have a project to improve the
hydraulic capacity of the lake and its tributaries, which
is intended to increase the capacity of the lake and
reduce the loss of water through evaporation and the
damage caused by annual flooding along the Chari and
Logone Rivers. The project involves desilting a number
of sections of the lake and its tributaries, the removal
of invasive weeds and embankment stabilization. It is
the first phase of the inter-basin water transfer from the
Congo basin to Lake Chad.

21-384547/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

I now turn to my prayers.
The numerous challenges facing the Lake Chad
basin and the Sahel region in general — environmental
challenges, humanitarian challenges, security and
development challenges — are beyond what the region
can handle alone. There is an urgent need for the United
Nations to step up its current efforts to mobilize the
international community to redouble its support for
the region, especially to strengthen support for the
war against terrorism and other criminal activities by
providing the necessary equipment to enable our troops
to effectively prosecute the war.
We also need support for the Regional Strategy for
the Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience of the Boko
Haram-affected Areas of the Lake Chad Basin Region
in order to enable the eight affected states and provinces
to implement their territorial action plans.
We also need the support of the United Nations
to mobilize resources for the project to improve the
hydraulic capacity of Lake Chad and its tributaries to
reduce flooding and evaporation. We are also asking for
support to provide the necessary funding for the Lake
Chad Development and Climate Resilience Action Plan.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Nuhu
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
President of the Niger.
I would like to thank all participants most sincerely
for agreeing to take part in this debate, which marks a
high point in my country’s presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December.
I wanted to come personally before the members
of the Security Council to deliver a message of peace
and solidarity, as well as to express the hope that the
people of the Niger have for all the peoples of the world
beset by the crises on the Security Council’s agenda. I
also wish to deliver that message on behalf of Africa,
whose crises unfortunately occupy the majority of the
Council’s deliberations and where, despite everything,
the future of the world is at stake.
Finally, I have come to deliver a message of
gratitude from my country, the Niger, for the excellent
relationships it has enjoyed with all the countries
represented here during its two-year mandate on
the Council.
8/31

09/12/2021

Since I was sworn in as President of my country
on 2 April, following an election that marked the first
democratic changeover in the Niger, my commitment to
peace and security for my country, for the Sahel region
and for our continent has been matched only by my
ambition to see Africa overcome its current challenges
and to work to implement the commitments made within
the framework of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In my region, the Sahel, as members know, a major
challenge is the fight against terrorism, the heinous
acts of which continue to undermine the foundations
of democratic States on a daily basis. These challenges
also include the impact of climate change, which, by
reducing the natural resources available, increases
poverty and all the scourges that go with it.
I wish to say that the choice of the theme of our
debate today is an expression of our desire to see the
Council establish the clear nexus that exists between
peace and international security, on the one hand, and
the fight against terrorism and the effects of climate
change, on the other. By deciding to organize today’s
debate on the theme of international peace and security
in the context of terrorism and climate change, the Niger
wishes to urge the Council to continue to reflect on and
take appropriate initiatives in the search for lasting
solutions to threats to peace and international security
and their interaction with the effects of climate change.
It seems to me imperative that, in the aftermath
of the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, the Council should capitalize on
the various consensuses reached in order to encourage
strategies aimed at mitigating the effects of climate
change, in accordance with its mandate to maintain
international peace and security. I recently recalled at
the Dakar International Forum on Peace and Security
in Africa that more than any other region in the world,
the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin eloquently illustrate
the interaction between the effects of climate change
and peace and security. The consequences of this
phenomenon, the full extent of which has not yet been
fully assessed, have led to the disintegration of the
social fabric and the way that people live together, as the
population has been pushed into a frantic competition
for access to resources, which are unfortunately
becoming drastically scarce.
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

This situation has often resulted in intercommunity
conflicts with tragic consequences and increased
migration with its share of refugees and internally
displaced persons condemned to live in makeshift
camps. More worryingly, this situation has helped to
fuel violent extremism and large-scale banditry, which
has drawn many young people who once lived off the
region’s rich biodiversity into the networks of criminal
and terrorist organizations.
The over-armament of terrorist organizations,
their violence against the civilian population and the
plundering of which they are guilty have created a real
psychosis among the populations directly affected, as
well as among the general public. Such an atmosphere
is very detrimental to the States, and it threatens their
stability. It discredits in real terms the international
community, which is suspected of deliberate impotence,
and favours the most fantastic theses as to the basis of
this reality, opening the way to a dangerous escalation
of political conflict.
Nevertheless, we remain prepared and determined.
For its part, the Niger is increasing the capabilities of its
defence and security forces, and the military situation
is evolving towards an increasingly favourable balance
of power. This is the reason for the terrorist groups new
way of behaving, which consists in the use of cruel
violence against the civilian population.
At this point, I would like to express our gratitude
to all our partners, whose precious support and
commitment to our cause have contributed to the
improvement of our performance on all levels. To
achieve our goals of defeating terrorism in the Sahel,
we need even greater support from the international
community in terms of substantial funding, provision
of equipment and materials, and military intelligence.
If the establishment of a Group of Five for the Sahel
support office, funded by United Nations budget
resources, does not meet with the approval of all States
members of the Security Council, we are willing to
work on any alternative initiative that will help the
Sahel countries to adequately address the needs I have
expressed heretofore.
Furthermore, peace and security in the Sahel
depend on regional dynamics, particularly in Libya, a
sister country that has been facing a decade of conflict.
It is in fact from this country that, since resolution 1973
(2011), everything began. It is for the most part from
this country that the weapons that fuel the violence in

S/PV. 8923

the Sahel are still coming today. The normalization of
the situation in Libya, which depends on the holding
of democratic elections, will undoubtedly contribute
to peace and security in neighbouring countries,
particularly in the Sahel region.
That means that the 24 December deadline is
crucial. My country hopes that the presidential election
scheduled for that date will be held under favourable
conditions and that it will pave the way for a dynamic of
peace and stability. Similarly, the successful completion
of the transition process in Mali, another sister country,
through the rapid organization of inclusive and
democratic elections, as a result of which the country
will have democratically elected authorities, will
strengthen the region’s ability to fight terrorist groups
more effectively.
In addition to the demands of counter-terrorism,
the dynamics in the Sahel and Lake Chad basin regions
are being complicated by the effects of climate change.
Indeed, the resurgence of extreme weather events,
including increasingly hot temperatures, severe fires
and floods, rising sea levels and melting glaciers in other
regions of the world, as reflected in the conclusions
of the 2021 report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, should not leave us indifferent,
as these are issues that will determine the future of
humankind. The sooner we engage in the fight against
these scourges, the less costly and more effective the
solution — that solution is still within our reach.
It is clear that the effects of climate disruption
manifest and are felt in particular ways in different
parts of the planet. In the Sahel region, the situation has
long been part of the daily life of the populations, and it
undermines the development efforts that our countries
are making in a context made even more difficult
by the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is therefore
imperative for the international community to respect
the commitments made to finance adaptation and
mitigation policies, particularly for the most vulnerable
countries, which are collateral victims of the activities
and excesses that have led to climate degradation.
The establishment of a special fund to support
Sahelian countries suffering from desertification as
well as small island States that are literally threatened
by the rise of the oceans seems to me to be an urgent
necessity. For the Sahel region in particular, effective
action should be taken to follow up on the conclusions
and recommendations of the various round tables and

21-384549/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

other forums that have been created to radically change
the major trends observable in the region. To that end,
the Group of Five for the Sahel Priority Investment
Programme and the development and climate-resilience
action plan adopted by the Lake Chad Basin Commission
deserve special attention.
In its capacity as Chair of the Climate Commission
for the Sahel Region, the Niger works for the effective
implementation of the various recommendations and
arrangements that have been jointly agreed by the
international community. I would therefore like to
reaffirm the Niger’s commitment to the consensus
resulting from the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
following the twenty-first session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, which enjoys the commitment
of the overwhelming majority of the international
community. The twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties, held recently in Glasgow, was another
opportunity for the international community to reiterate
its firm commitment to addressing the challenges of
climate change.
In parallel to those efforts, it is high time for the
Security Council, as part of its preventive mandate, to
take into account the security risks of climate change
as an additional element of our peace and security
architecture. We hope that the Security Council will
adopt the draft resolution proposed by the Niger
and Ireland to finally provide our organ with an
integrated and coordinated approach to strengthening
its understanding of the impact of climate change
through an in-depth analysis of current and future
risks in order to make relevant and action-oriented
recommendations. Once adopted, I am convinced
that the resolution will effectively contribute to the
integration of climate risks into existing peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations, as well as mediation and
conflict-prevention work.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the President of Estonia.
President Karis: I wish to express my appreciation
to the Niger for convening this important meeting
today, and I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Guterres,
and the other briefers for their remarks.
10/31

09/12/2021

Climate change and terrorism pose a significant
threat to international peace and security. The scope
and intensity fluctuate geographically, but it is clear
that both phenomena know no borders or continents.
Allow me to start with a telling example — the case
of the Himalayan glaciers. Scientists have described
that dust blowing from as far as the Sahara is one of the
main drivers of the accelerating melting of the glaciers.
That, in turn, changes the monsoon patterns in the
region and has upset the ecosystem in the Arabian Sea,
leading to a near collapse of the fish stocks on which
millions of people depend. What will those people
do next?
Research has identified multiple pathways through
which climate change interacts with political, social
and environmental stresses to compound existing
vulnerabilities and tensions. Rising temperatures and
extreme weather put pressure on natural resources
and undermine livelihoods, causing tensions and
displacement. For example, in 2020, nearly 31 million
people were displaced within their own countries
because of natural disasters caused by extreme
weather events and climate change. Again, persons in
vulnerable situations were hit harder. The World Bank
recently estimated that the total number of climate
migrants could be as high as 216 million by the year
2050. Research indicates that, already today, most
areas that experience net-negative migration also have
high environmental stress and a low capacity to adapt
to changes.
Climate change, as well as other forms of
environmental degradation, prepare the ground for
social instability, conflicts, terrorism and extremism.
They act as threat multipliers, amplifying security risks
and provoking human rights violations. We therefore
also welcome the activities of the Alliance for the Sahel
in dealing with the consequences of climate change
by increasing food security, as well as dealing with
unemployment among young people.
Tackling the root causes of terrorism is just one of
the benefits when we make a global concerted effort to
mitigate the effects of climate change. We see conflicts
for natural resources within and among States. We also
see people who have become desperate due to the loss of
their livelihoods, homes, loved ones or hope for a better
future. That opens up opportunities for illegal trade and
creates conditions for terrorist organizations to take
advantage of the unstable situation and desperation of
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

people. That is what we are also currently witnessing,
for example, at the European borders.
Social and economic conditions play a significant
part in enabling the rise of terrorism and extremism.
Therefore, in order to counter terrorism and extremism,
we must understand and address the root causes at the
national, regional and global levels — causes such as
global inequalities, forced migration and the scarcity
of vital resources, including clean water, agricultural
land, et cetera. We believe that all mechanisms that
help to reduce poverty, inequalities and adaptation
problems brought about by rapid social, cultural and
environmental changes also help to fight terrorism by
nipping it in the bud.
Countries that are facing armed conflicts have
limited resources for initiatives that could bring the
country out of conflict. Building climate-resilient
societies requires a much more concerted international
effort in order to ensure international peace and
security. However, the Security Council has the relevant
tools and the mandate to respond to climate-related
security risks. It is time to go beyond the holding of
thematic debates and take a more ambitious notion
of climate and security. We need a Security Council
resolution on climate and security. That is the only way
to advance our discussions and make a difference. We
reiterate that it is of the utmost importance that the
Secretary-General receive a mandate to collect data and
coordinate policy to that end. Regular reporting would
be a major step forward towards developing tangible
prevention measures.
As mentioned many times before, women and
girls are disproportionately affected by climate change
and are frequently targeted by terrorist groups. The
recognition of the importance of women’s leadership
and participation and the engagement of young people
is key to developing strategies to counter terrorism and
the effects of climate change. That is the only way to
build resilient communities for everyone.
In conclusion, we can no longer ignore such
challenges, which pose a threat to international peace
and security. We must prevent the unavoidable effects of
climate change from contributing to the destabilization
of countries and entire regions, which risks leading to
new armed conflicts or worsening existing ones.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Permanent Representative of the United States and
Member of President Biden’s Cabinet.

S/PV. 8923

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank you for hosting the Security
Council in October. The hospitality that you and your
team provided to us there was very much appreciated.
The United States commends the Niger for its
leadership in keeping this important topic — the
implication of climate change on international peace and
security — on the Security Council’s agenda. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing this
morning, as well as Chairperson Faki Mahamat and
Executive Secretary Nuhu for the important information
and perspectives they have provided the Council today.
Climate change is a challenge for every person in
every nation in every continent. The climate crisis is a
security crisis. It is a threat to international peace and,
therefore, a threat and a crisis that this organ needs to
address. Only the Security Council can ensure that the
security impacts of climate change are integrated into
the critical work of conflict prevention and mitigation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding, disaster reduction and
humanitarian response. It is the responsibility of the
Security Council to ensure that it — and through it
the Secretariat — has the tools and data necessary
to confront one of the century’s greatest and fastestgrowing threats to peace and security.
As we all know, unpredictable and extreme
weather makes vital resources like food and water even
more scarce in impoverished regions. Scarcity spurs
desperation, and desperation leads to violence. The
logic is clear, and so is the intelligence. Early this year,
President Biden commissioned the first-ever National
Intelligence Estimate — the most comprehensive
intelligence product we have in the United States
Government — on the security implications of the
climate crisis. In October, the Director of National
Intelligence released an unclassified version of the
report to ensure that as many people as possible could
get a better sense of what the world is facing. The report
made his points very clearly — climate change will
increase instability and internal conflict. Moreover,
at its current pace, the climate crisis is set to drive
millions from their homes, propelling mass migration.
Not only is that a human catastrophe, but these
are the exact kinds of vulnerable populations that
terrorist organizations prey upon. Violent extremist
groups exploit weak governance, systemic corruption

21-3845411/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

and societal fractures in order to embed themselves
in communities and develop sources of income.
Climate change could exacerbate these challenges and
provide openings for those terrorist organizations.
In addition, violent extremist organizations may
target critical infrastructure and aid workers, thereby
undermining activities intended to mitigate the impact
of climate disasters.
Fortunately, the Security Council, clearly
recognizing the link between climate change and
conflict, has taken necessary action in some of these
cases. But the time for half-measures is over. The truth
is that this global crisis requires a global response by
the entire international community. We saw important
progress at the twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, including national
and international commitments to keep within reach of
the 1.5°C limit on global warming. Now we need to do
more, and we need to do it fast.
For our part, the United States will continue to
work with all countries, under the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and through the annual Conference of
the Parties, in order to advance global efforts to mitigate
and adapt to climate change. In order to lead by example,
President Biden announced the President’s Emergency
Plan for Adaptation and Resilience (PREPARE) in
order to support developing countries in adapting and
managing the impacts of climate change. The President
will work with Congress to provide $3 billion in
adaptation financing annually to PREPARE by 2024.
Through PREPARE, the United States will urgently
and significantly bolster adaptation efforts to save lives
and reduce instability across the world. The goal is to
ensure that we are not only writing a check, but we are
also working with countries to ensure that every dollar
goes as far in those communities as possible.
It is time for us to stop debating whether the
climate crisis presents a threat to international peace
and security. That debate is over. The impact on the
continent of Africa is clear. The deep and serious link
between the climate crisis and our collective security is
also clear. Now it is time for the Security Council to use
our unique powers to address this issue head-on. We
must take action and, instead, start asking ourselves
what we need to do — not whether, but what. We need
to take that action now.
12/31

09/12/2021

To that end, we strongly encourage all members to
support and co-sponsor the draft resolution on climate
and security that the Niger and Ireland have put forward
and that the United States is proud to co-sponsor. The
draft resolution is a good first step to real action on the
security impacts of the climate crisis. It is the least we
can do.
I thank you once again, Mr. President, for raising
this important issue today during the Niger’s last month
on the Security Council. The United States will work
with other Council members to carry your hard work
forward in the months and years to come.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to commend the Niger for its
unswerving commitment to the fight against climate
change and for organizing this debate.
This debate provides another opportunity to
emphasize that this is environmental fight is also a
fight for international peace and security. That is why
it is appropriate for the Security Council to address the
threats linked to climate change.
I welcome the Secretary-General to today’s
meeting and thank Mr. Faki Mahamat and Mr. Nuhu
for their briefings.
Because our world is facing a climate emergency, it
is also in permanent danger and is exposed to increased
security risks and new threats.
The links between climate and security have been
firmly established for a long time. We can confirm that
everywhere — in the Horn of Africa, in the Sahel and
in the Middle East. Desertification, reduced access to
water and broader issues related to access to natural
resources in rural areas, food shortages and climate
insecurity are all factors that allow armed extremist
groups to grow by exploiting people’s frustration.
We know that in the Sahel terrorist groups exploit
inter-ethnic and community conflicts, as well as
economic conflicts between farmers and herders, in a
context where climate change has significantly changed
agropastoral systems.
We must do all we can to prevent terrorist groups
from taking advantage of the distress caused by the
effects of climate change, land degradation and the loss
of biodiversity in areas already marked by tensions and
fragility. That obviously requires better allocation of
natural resources. That is an absolute necessity because
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

we must not leave the field open for terrorist groups to
exploit these conflicts.
Furthermore, where there are serious security
threats, we must build a virtuous circle between
sustainable development and action to preserve
the climate. That is the purpose of the Great Green Wall
project in the Sahel, a flagship programme to combat
the effects of climate change, desertification, food
insecurity and poverty from Senegal to Djibouti. The
sum of $19 billion has been earmarked for the project,
which should make it possible to restore 250 million
hectares of degraded land by 2030, create 10 million
jobs and capture 250 million tons of carbon.
We must also assist regional and subregional
organizations and initiatives, in particular those of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Supporting
the G-5 Sahel means providing its Joint Force with
the predictable and sustainable logistical and financial
support it needs from the United Nations, as well as
responding to the essential issues of development and
combating climate change that the region faces.
The Security Council must be able to anticipate,
prevent and seek solutions to counter the effects of
climate change, in particular for the most vulnerable
populations. The Council’s unity and spirit of
compromise are essential in the face of such a challenge.
Climate change is a major test for multilateralism. Only
coordinated action by all actors, in particular the United
Nations, can lead us in the right direction. The Council
must therefore be able to better assess and address the
impact of climate change on international peace and
security and to draw all the necessary conclusions,
region by region and subject by subject, for the issues
on its agenda.
To do that, we cannot rely solely on the commitment
of the armed forces and peacekeepers deployed in the
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, I would like to
commend once again their commitment and sacrifice.
To build long-term responses, we also need a way to
better understand how climate change and crises are
linked and how they reinforce each other so that we may
strengthen the resilience of States and their populations.
Lastly, as the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change ended a few days ago in Glasgow,
we must remember that the cost of inaction would be
immense for any of us. That is why France calls on each
State to make firm and lasting commitments to reduce

S/PV. 8923

greenhouse-gas emissions in line with the challenges
facing our planet. The international community can
count on France’s full and complete commitment in
that regard.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for attending this meeting, which
demonstrates the importance your country attaches to
the topic of this open debate, which is a priority that
we share.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission for their briefings. I also recognize the
presence of the President of Estonia.
Today’s meeting certainly builds on the analysis
that the Security Council has developed recently with
regard to the impacts of climate change, as well as the
actions that it can take to more adequately address
climate-related security risks. The reality is that the
current climate crisis that we are living through has the
potential to broaden the causes of conflict in general.
In order to make the Council’s preventive work more
effective, we need to better understand the scientifically
based contexts in which the effects of climate change
may exacerbate the underlying causes that lead to the
radicalization of individuals or groups and may even
encourage the perpetration of terrorist acts.
For example, sea-level rise may have legal
implications with regard to the continuity or even the
loss of State status in cases in which the territory of an
island nation is totally submerged by the sea or becomes
uninhabitable. That possibility raises issues relating to
the protection of those affected by rising sea levels.
The evacuation, relocation and migration of people
abroad and the protection of the human rights of
internally displaced persons and people who migrate as
a result of the adverse effects of sea-level rise are issues
that the current international system must take into
account more than ever before. That is why the study
on that subject being conducted by the International
Law Commission is so relevant. Therefore, I think it is
true to say that the concept of human security has been
expanded de facto to include environmental security
and the security of natural resources.
We have been witness in the Council to how illicit
trafficking in natural resources, the impact of natural

21-3845413/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

disasters, the loss of biodiversity, the worsening water
shortages, the desertification of land and the resulting
famines have been triggers for armed violence and the
occasional proliferation of terrorist groups that exploit
those unstable situations to conduct their operations.
In that context, we are very concerned by the
data provided by the United Nations Development
Programme indicating that 70 per cent of the countries
that are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change
are also among the most fragile and unstable countries
in the world. Those countries face a dual threat: on the
one hand, conflicts and insecurity; and on the other
hand, the impacts of climate change.
In order to address that double threat, we need
preventive approaches that promote social and
environmental justice and support countries in
their needs for adaptation and resilience while also
promoting sustainable peace. The Peacebuilding
Fund has successfully implemented that approach in
the Lake Chad region by promoting more responsible
management of natural resources, supporting
reforestation and improving access to sustainable ways
of life.
In the same way, the United Nations bodies that
follow up the prevention and counter-terrorism agenda
must include a climate change perspective in their
overall analysis of underlying causes. Sometimes
control over natural resources and illicit trafficking in
those resources are also linked to illegal trafficking in
arms and munitions. Therefore, those phenomena are
interrelated and require an integrated approach.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore that as we
have said with regard to other similar topics: the idea
is not to address the general impact of climate change
in the Security Council — there are other platforms for
that purpose — but to identify those situations in which
climate change can have multiplier effects that affect
international peace and security.
If we truly want to practice more preventive
diplomacy, we need to base ourselves on comprehensive
analyses that take account of all those concerns. That is
why we thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this debate.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
On behalf of the Government and the people of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, allow me to convey at the
outset our deepest appreciation to the Republic of the
14/31

09/12/2021

Niger for convening today’s discussion. I also thank
our briefers.
Amid the ebbs and flows of these tumultuous
times, as the social and economic costs of the
coronavirus disease multiply, as more lives and
livelihoods are disrupted globally by climate change
and as the consequences of terrorism escalate in terms
of the global security implications and the political
repercussions that ensue, urgent multilateral action is
clearly needed.
It is no coincidence that the countries most
affected by underdevelopment, oftentimes preceded by
colonization, are also the most subjected to the security
risks of climate change and terrorism. Indeed, in
fragile contexts, poverty, unemployment, hunger, food
insecurity, socioeconomic and political marginalization
and other social ills intertwine to create fertile
breeding ground for terrorism and organized crime.
And as those conflict drivers are further compounded
by climate change, the most vulnerable among us
often become trapped in painful cycles of insecurity
and underdevelopment.
These woes of insecurity and underdevelopment
cannot be solved in isolation of each another. We must
avoid short-term planning and superficial approaches
that merely circumvent, and fail to address, the root
causes of conflict and insecurity. We will overcome these
challenges only through comprehensive development
plans and strategies that reinforce sovereignty, rebuild
public trust, restore social contracts and adorn all
nations and peoples with peace and prosperity.
In pursuit of such noble aims, we cannot be divided
in purpose and separated by narrow national interest.
Neither can we rely on militaristic means or a narrow
economic calculus. They will prove both elusive and
illusory. The only solution is for the international
community to work together in unity and solidarity
to deliver on existing agreements, particularly
the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change.
Developed countries and the international financial
institutions ought to scale up overseas development
assistance and capacity-building initiatives. Practical,
people-centred and climate-sensitive solutions should
be developed and extensively delivered in line with
the needs, priorities and developmental imperatives of
States concerned. All stakeholders, including powerful
States, should conduct their affairs in accordance with
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

the guiding principles of international law. And major
and historical emitters must take ambitious action to
set and meet climate targets, including our target of not
exceeding a temperature rise of more than 1.5°C above
pre-industrial levels, which is already upon us.
Developed countries must also significantly
scale up support for adaptation and mitigation. We
also encourage further efforts by all Member States
to meaningfully advance climate action through the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
The thematic draft resolution that has been
put forward within the Council can also bolster a
comprehensive approach on those multidimensional
challenges. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a
sponsor of the draft resolution and encourages all
States to stand in solidarity with those affected by
climate-related security risks today and in the future if
we do not drastically change our trajectory.
We also take this opportunity to express our
support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel, which is critical in the fight against terrorism in
the Sahel.
It has become abundantly clear that the challenges
of terrorism, climate change, underdevelopment and
insecurity can be solved only through fresh ideas,
innovative solutions and modern developmental
narratives that tell a different story than the one that
we lament today. Let us work together to build a better
future for all countries and peoples.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by sincerely thanking the Niger
through you, Sir, for the warm and generous welcome
that you extended to us during the Security Council’s
visit to the Niger last month. I express my deepest
condolences to you and the families of the Nigerien
soldiers who were killed this week and the communities
affected by the recent attacks. I would also like to
offer my condolences to the families of the seven
Blue Helmets of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, who were
killed yesterday in central Mali. I wish those who were
injured a speedy recovery. I am deeply saddened by
the death of another peacekeeper who was killed this
week in a heinous attack that led to the deaths more
than 30 civilians, including women and children, in
central Mali.

S/PV. 8923

(spoke in English)
I want to start by thanking President Bazoum for
convening us today. Ireland has been proud to work
hand in hand with the Niger over the past 12 months in
advancing the critical issue of climate and security at the
Security Council. I want to thank the Secretary-General
for once again sounding the alarm on the urgent need
to address climate change in all of its manifestations,
including in relation to peace and security. I can assure
the Secretary-General that his calls have not fallen on
deaf ears.
I thank Chairperson Faki Mahamat and Executive
Secretary Nuhu for demonstrating the very real and
present challenges of the interplay of climate and
conflict from the perspective of their respective
organizations. The African continent has long been at
the forefront of the crisis. Their experiences as well
as those of others, such as the small island developing
States, are absolutely critical to shaping our collective
response to the growing threat. We should listen to
those who know what this means every day.
In 1945, our forebears came together in a spirit
of unbridled optimism to pursue a common and noble
agenda. Their goal — their vision —was as ambitious
as it was inspiring. Their promise — the promise of the
Charter of the United Nations — to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war is as relevant
today as it was then. Seventy-five years later, the
responsibility on the shoulders of the Council is just as
momentous. As we know, however, time does not stand
still, and neither should our ambition. We are now faced
with a new challenge that is global, immediate and puts
our collective security at risk. It is our responsibility,
as we sit around this symbolic horseshoe table, to step
up and deliver on that promise, which has given hope to
millions across the globe — and to step up now.
Put simply, climate change is the defining challenge
of our time. It acts as a threat multiplier. It exacerbates
existing inequalities, vulnerabilities and insecurities. It
impacts the enjoyment of human rights. And it is felt
most acutely by those who are already living in poverty
and conflict, those who are marginalized and those
who lack the capacity and resources to build resilience.
Women and girls are disproportionately affected.
Women and girls bear the brunt, whether in Niamey in
the Sahel or Apia in Samoa.
We know that, in any given context, climate change
can exacerbate existing socioeconomic tensions. Its

21-3845415/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

effects can degrade environments and livelihoods and
weaken political institutions. In certain situations,
those effects provide the space for terrorist groups to
flourish and extend their reach, particularly where
governance is weakened. That is a tragedy. We are
seeing that the lack of adequate Government response
to increasingly frequent and extreme weather events
can also weaken the social contract between citizens
and the State. Such weakening helps provide traction
to cynical terrorist initiatives and narratives. In turn,
situations of conflict exacerbated by climate change
provide breeding grounds for such terrorist groups.
We heard what President Bazoum said clearly to us
this morning. We at the Council have a responsibility
to break that vicious and self-reinforcing cycle. As
President Bazoum said this morning, we should remain
mobilized and determined.
As vital resources such as water and fertile land
diminish in certain regions, we also see the threat of
their weaponization growing. Terrorist groups show
that they can leverage access to those resources to
increase their influence and generate funds. Economic
incentives may be exerted to recruit those whose
traditional livelihoods are adversely affected by
climate change.
The Council has already acknowledged the adverse
effects of climate change and ecological challenges
on the stability of certain regions, such as the Lake
Chad basin. What is needed now is a better grasp of
the problem and further empirical analysis. With the
right information in hand, we can take the bold and
decisive action needed to address that complex and
growing challenge. That is our responsibility here at
this table — no more, no less.
We have some concerns about the risk of counterterrorism being misused to criminalize environmental
human rights defenders and civil society organizations
working on climate change issues. Counter-terrorism
legislation should not be misused to target those
defending or exercising their human rights — and, of
course, counter-terrorism measures should always be in
full compliance with international law.
In order to be effective, steps to address climate
change need to be sufficient and transparent.
Importantly, they should be administered through
inclusive,
accountable
and
non-discriminatory
approaches. They need to be fit for purpose and be
16/31

09/12/2021

aimed at assisting those people and communities most
in need.
I want to emphasize that all of our efforts simply
must ensure the full participation of women. Women
are key actors in this challenge of our lifetime, as they
represent half of our global population. We already have
evidence that with nothing less than the meaningful
participation of women can we ever expect to deliver
on the scale of that challenge. Women should be in the
room and at the table where these issues are discussed.
Moreover, we cannot afford not to harness the leadership
already shown by youth on climate action.
The Council has taken important strides in
recognizing the complex links between climate and
conflict. This year alone, 13 Council products have
addressed and included important language on the
adverse impacts of climate change. However, to
prevent and resolve conflicts that are exacerbated by
the effects of climate change, we need to do more. We
need a basic structured and systematic approach. We
are struggling to play our part here at the Council, as
well as, critically, on the ground. I call on all Council
members to support the work under way and the climate
security adviser in South Sudan, which Ireland has
directly supported through the United Nations Climate
Security Mechanism.
Meaningfully addressing this complex issue means
that we must also deepen our understanding of it.
Ireland’s draft resolution is an important opportunity
to strengthen the Security Council’s ability to better
understand and address climate-related security risks
within its mandate. Increasing the data and evidence
base over time will allow the Council to take informed
actions. It will also increase the Council’s capacity to
understand its own responsibilities in relation to the
implications of climate-related security risks. I echo the
call of President Bazoum and others here this morning
to all colleagues, both at the table now and joining the
debate today, to support that critical draft resolution.
In conclusion, it is clear that the threats to
international peace and security have changed since
the Council first came together in 1945. However, our
responsibility to tackle them has not. The Council
must recognize and accept its role in the fight against
climate change. We need to integrate climate-related
security risks into our conflict resolution, prevention
and mediation efforts. Doing so will help maintain
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8923

international peace and security, while failure to do so
is unconscionable.

and operationalized in the mandates of relevant peace
operations by the Council.

To those on the front lines of the crisis, I want to
say that we hear them and we believe their testimonies.
To our fellow Council members, the time to act is now.

While every situation is complex and contextspecific, we believe that successfully fighting climate
change and preventing and countering terrorism
both depend on good governance and reducing
vulnerabilities. We need to meaningfully include
all effective stakeholders in our response, including
women, youth, civil society and the private sector. We
must strengthen partnerships with national and regional
actors, especially the African Union, and encourage
a stronger approach by local, national, regional and
international organizations through the transparent
exchange of information and forward-thinking analysis.

Ms. Juul (Norway): First, let me acknowledge
the Niger’s leadership on the issue of climate change
and security during its term on the Security Council,
and also the presence of its President here today. Your
efforts have certainly helped move the agenda forward.
You have our full support.
I also thank the briefers for sharing their valuable
insights on the complex topic of climate change and
terrorism and the interlinkages between those two issues
that, by themselves, do not receive enough attention.
Climate change exacerbates vulnerabilities
throughout the world. That dynamic could explain why
many climate-vulnerable countries are also dealing
with terrorist insurgencies — for example, in Mali and
Somalia. However, as with all climate and security
issues, interlinkages are complicated and highly
context-specific.
Climate change can accelerate the same underlying
drivers as those identified as drivers of terrorism.
It drives displacement, weakens governance and
fuels political and social instability. It drives food
insecurity and hunger and competition over resources
and increases tension among communities. It also
undermines livelihoods and exacerbates inequality.
Combined, those factors can create fertile ground
for radicalization, spur recruitment to armed groups
and hinder the return of populations that were forced
to migrate.
The underlying factor is fragility. Climate change
undermines the ability of communities to cope with
crises, and many of the communities hit hardest by
both climate change and conflict are already the least
equipped to deal with their impacts. The amplifying
effects of conflict and climate change also highlight
the need for the protection of civilians, especially in
situations of displacement and hunger.
Let me underline that the climate security agenda
is, at its heart, a preventative agenda. It is aimed at the
inclusion of climate risks in our analysis and responses,
which can enhance our peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts. We therefore emphasize that climate risk
assessment and management need to be mainstreamed

We also need to increase the capacity of the climate
and security work of the United Nations, especially in
the field, and best practices and other experiences need
to be brought back to the Council. Norway will provide
dedicated support to this, and we encourage others to
do the same.
Applying a holistic analytic perspective will also
strengthen our response to terrorism, as it will focus
our attention on the underlying drivers of radicalization
and strengthen efforts to prevent violent extremism.
While vulnerabilities overlap, solutions tend to overlap
as well.
When it comes to climate change, there are no
hard security solutions. Our common goal should be
for a peace effort to be climate-sensitive, our climate
action to be conflict-sensitive and our peacebuilding
to be climate-proof. For this to happen, we need a
coordinated approach by the United Nations and the
Security Council. That is why we fully support and
have co-sponsored the draft resolution on climate and
security.
Climate action depends on concerted and
coordinated multilateral cooperation with its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. We believe the Security Council has a pivotal
role to play in these efforts.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you, Mr. President,
presiding over the Security Council.
The Russian Federation wholeheartedly shares the
common international concerns about the issues that
are at the centre of our debate today. The consequences
of climate change, natural disasters and terrorism are

21-3845417/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

catastrophes that are cross-border in nature and require
active international cooperation. We are committed to
working on these priorities. In addition, our colleagues
from the Niger raised another subject for discussion,
namely, the possible connection between terrorism and
climate change and issues of security, as well as the role
of the Security Council in this context.
First, climate change is an issue that holds a very
important place for us both in the national context and
in terms of international cooperation. According to our
calculations, the climate in Russia is changing 2.5 times
faster than the global average. At the same time, we
see ever more destructive natural phenomena, and the
need to cut greenhouse gases and adapt to the negative
consequences of climate change is increasingly obvious
to us. On 29 October this year, the Russian Federation
a government order that established a strategy for lowcarbon socioeconomic development until 2050. This
strategy sets the specific goal of achieving a balance
between human-made greenhouse-gas emissions and
the mitigation thereof through carbon capture by 2060.
In the spirit of such approaches, the Russian
delegation played an active role at the twenty-sixth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC), in Glasgow in November, and helped
achieve a consensus. We think that the success in
Glasgow possible was due to the balance struck between
climate- and environmental-protection efforts and the
socioeconomic interests of countries at different levels
of development and therefore at different levels of
vulnerability.
Help in protecting countries from climate change
and natural disasters is an important element in national
efforts and international global cooperation, especially
in the framework of the United Nations development
system. Nevertheless, there is a range of different
sub-issues on the agenda, from sea-level rise, which
is an issue for island States, to the desertification in
countries in Africa. Those require different approaches
to assistance for the States in question.
There is no disagreement that cooperation in the fight
against international terrorism should also be global in
nature. In this context, we think that States Members of
the United Nations are able to define threats and issues
with the support of the counter-terrorism monitoring
activity of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED), which helps to prepare reports
18/31

09/12/2021

on States’ implementation of specialized counterterrorism resolutions, in particular resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). This mechanism has been able
to keep up with its work despite the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
On the basis of CTED’s recommendations, States
can be provided with technical assistance through such
specialized United Nations structures as the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We stress that this
assistance should be provided upon the request of local
authorities and taking into account the specifics of
the country and the region, and there are indeed many
specifics. Accordingly, despite the active fight going on
with the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria
and Iraq, we are also seeing the terrorist threat spread
from the Middle East and North Africa to neighbouring
countries and regions, particularly deeper into Africa.
The reasons for that are problems of border security,
given that the borders are porous, socioeconomic
conditions are difficult, the COVID-19 crisis is
deepening, and the central authorities on the ground are
showing weakness. Terrorists are successfully taking
advantage of this, broadening their propaganda and
finding new recruits from the dissatisfied population,
above all, young people.
There is also no disagreement that, in the Sahel,
for example, a great many factors, including problems
of extreme poverty, a lack of jobs, population growth,
desertification, natural disasters, migration, internal
conflicts and terrorist activity, have come together into
a single knot. The current situation with the coronavirus
is also making the situation more difficult.
A completely logical question therefore presents
itself. In order to solve the aforementioned problems,
what should the United Nations and the Security
Council do?
We have to recognize that our approach differs from
the opinion of many of our Security Council colleagues.
First and foremost, we are convinced that each country
or region needs to be looked at individually as well as
in connection with other often more significant factors
that give rise to socioeconomic or political instability,
including foreign intervention in States, or the lack
of outside assistance in situations where the local
authorities and State institutions cannot cope with the
task at hand. A generic one-size-fits-all approach or
some kind of automatic attribution of cause and effect
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

will only lead the Security Council down the wrong
path in solving these problems. We are convinced that
each of the negative factors in this context should be
analysed and overcome with the consent of the national
Governments of recipient countries and the use of
the specific expert potential and the toolkit that the
United Nations can bring, once again without some
one-size-fits-all approach.
We defended and will continue to defend the
notion that the United Nations works effectively
when its labour is properly divided. Forcing climate
monitoring detached from fundamental scientific work
into the mandate of peacekeeping operations or special
political missions would be a disastrous politicization
of the climate agenda and lead us away from unified
and genuinely global cooperation, which is what the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the UNFCCC
are aiming to achieve. Let us be honest: cutting
greenhouse-gas emissions in region A is not going to
stop floods or droughts in region B over the next 50
or 100 years. Furthermore, in looking for the deeprooted reasons for terrorism, moving the focus from
poverty, sanctions or weak State institutions to climate
simply means going away from an open discussion of
the reasons for the extreme vulnerability of States,
in particular those that have suffered from foreign
intervention.
Can this really be helped by moving the discussion
to the Security Council? For us, the direct connection
between terrorism and climate change is not clear.
Perhaps our colleagues, by including this subject in
the Security Council agenda, simply want to raise
the profile of debate on climate. However, I think
that Council members would agree that whether any
particular issue is included or not on the Security
Council agenda should not serve as a yardstick as to
whether or not it is important.
Climate change is certainly an issue where this is
a concern. As part of its specific nature, it should be
looked at with the involvement of all States Members
of the United Nations. Nothing can really be helped by
including it on the agenda of the Security Council, with
its limited membership and very specific toolkit, but it
certainly could lead to a muddling and a doubling of
efforts.
On the whole, we think that working on this
issue within the UNFCCC, the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, the High-level

S/PV. 8923

Political Forum, and the Peacebuilding Commission
and other United Nations forums — and respecting the
division of labour within the Organization — has great
potential for addressing the socioeconomic recovery of
developing countries.
In particular, developing countries need to
strengthen their capacities to overcome the obstacles
to development that are relevant to them, as well
as increased and better access to financing and to
participation in the global trading system, vaccines
against COVID-19, the best available technologies and
early-warning systems for extreme natural phenomena,
humanitarian assistance, education and vocational
guidance for the younger generation, particularly
women. We call for working along those lines in the
frameworks that I mentioned, leaving it to the Security
Council to address the root causes of conflicts and
resolve existing ones.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by conveying
best wishes and greetings from the Prime Minister
of India, Shri Narendra Modi, to the President of the
Republic of the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Bazoum, on the Niger’s presidency of the Security
Council. I also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and Ambassador
Mamman Nuhu, Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, for their respective briefings.
The briefing by His Excellency the President
of the Niger again drew the attention of the Security
Council to the threat of terrorism in the Sahel region
and beyond. That is indeed a serious global concern.
The fight against terrorism remains significant even
after 20 years since landmark resolution 1373 (2001)
was adopted in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
The threat of terrorism in Africa has adversely
impacted African countries in their pursuit of economic
progress and development. The security situation in the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
in particular has deteriorated in the past three years, as
is evident from the scores of attacks by terrorists and
armed groups targeting civilians and security forces.
Furthermore, the threat posed by terrorist groups
in the Sahel region and beyond is well documented,
including in the Secretary-General’s periodic reports.
Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin, affiliated to
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara,
has expanded its activities. Groups linked to Al-Qaida

21-3845419/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and Boko
Haram have also continued to expand around the
eastern and northern shores of Lake Chad. The attacks
against the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali a few days ago, which
resulted in the killing of seven peacekeepers from Togo
and a Malian national, demonstrate the danger posed
by terrorist and armed groups to the Sahel region. India
strongly condemns the attack on peacekeepers and
expresses its deepest condolences to the families of
those who lost their lives.
India appreciates the initiative of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, a joint effort of countries in the Sahel,
including the Niger. However, the Joint Force continues
to be plagued by multiple challenges, such as a lack of
training, resources, logistics and access to sustainable
and predictable financing, all of which have hampered
the full operationalization of the Force. The current
model of support to the Joint Force is inadequate and
unsustainable — a reality that was highlighted by the
Secretary-General in his recent reports and echoed
by His Excellency the President of the Niger just now.
We believe that it is high time that regional security
initiatives such as the G-5 Sahel Joint Force be provided
adequate and sustainable resources, as well as training
and logistics support. A resource-constrained counterterrorism strategy can be a recipe for failure. The
Council needs to take effective measures, including by
supporting regional and subregional organizations in
their security initiatives.
Climate change is one of the defining challenges
of our time. Over the past several decades, Member
States have engaged purposefully in a focused manner
to put in place commitments relating to mitigation,
adaptation, financing, the transfer of technology,
et cetera so that climate change can be addressed
holistically, as is done by the process led by the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) with annual meetings of the Conference
of the Parties (COP). The measures to tackle climate
change have been built on an integrated structure
that is equitable to all parties, especially developing
countries. In addition to that, countries across the globe
have taken on many commitments under the nationally
determined contributions.
Given that background, we do not think that it is
appropriate to draw a separate link between security
and climate change, especially when all aspects of
climate change are already being dealt with holistically
20/31

09/12/2021

under the mandate of the UNFCCC. Any action in the
Security Council ignoring the basic principles and
provisions relating to climate change has the potential
to disrupt the nature of our overall discussion on this
important topic. To move the climate change discourse
from a consensus-driven template to a possibly divisive
process may not be advisable. Let us not deviate from an
established and inclusive process of decision-making,
with all developing countries participating, and attempt
to create an alternative platform for climate change.
While we recognize the fact that climate change has
impacted the lives of people and exacerbated conflicts
in many places, viewing conflicts only through
the prism of climate change presents a misleading
perspective. The report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change clearly states that the effect
of climate variability on violence is contested. There
is also no clear scientific pronouncement directly
equating climate change with security concerns. It is
therefore important that matters of climate science be
discussed in the relevant forums under the UNFCCC.
The oversimplification of causes of conflict will not
help to resolve them, and neither can it justify terrorist
acts or extreme policy measures.
We recently completed the twenty-sixth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP26)
in Glasgow, the United Kingdom, where we adopted the
Glasgow Climate Pact by consensus. That document
contains the collective will of the international
community on all aspects related to climate change
in a holistic manner and the climate action envisaged.
We are firmly committed to achieving the outcome of
COP26 based on the Glasgow Climate Pact.
We now need to bring our focus back to where
it should be — combating climate change. India is
a leader in climate action and is on track to meet its
commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. India’s climate-responsive development is
evident in the announcements at COP26, where India
also committed to reducing the emissions intensity
of its gross domestic product by 45 per cent by 2030
from the 2005 level; achieving 50 per cent cumulative
electric power installed capacity from non-fossil-fuelbased energy resources by 2030; achieving 1 billion
ton reductions in the projected emissions between now
and 2030; achieving 500 gigawatts of non-fossil fuel
energy capacity by 2030; and achieving the target of
net zero by the year 2070, which our Prime Minister has
collectively called the panchamrit, or five goals.
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Apart from domestic actions, India has also taken
the lead in bringing together international coalitions to
generate long-term impacts through partnerships. The
International Solar Alliance (ISA) is a leading example
of how collective action translates into positive
global action. We recently launched the Green Grids
Initiative — One Sun One World One Grid, together
with the United Kingdom, endorsed by the ISA,
which will facilitate cross-border renewable energy
transfer projects. The Coalition for Disaster-Resilient
Infrastructure (CDRI) is another successful initiative
by India for enhancing cooperation and building
resilience against natural disasters. At COP26, a new
initiative for technical assistance and capacity-building
in island States, called the Infrastructure for Resilient
Island States, was introduced under the CDRI.
What we now need is to enhance action on all
important policies that address climate change,
including the fulfilment of commitments on climate
finance and technology transfer. Developed countries
cannot pass on their obligations to developing countries
and must meet their commitments equitably, on both
mitigation and adaptation. Today it is necessary that,
as we track the progress made in climate mitigation, we
should also track climate financing and urge developed
countries to begin providing climate financing of
$1 trillion at the earliest.
In conclusion, the threat of terrorism to the Sahel
region is far greater and more severe than many other
challenges facing the region today. India has always
been willing to extend and expand its capacity-building
assistance to the armed forces of the affected countries
to support them in their fight against terrorism. India’s
recent initiatives in that regard have been the inclusion
of Chad in our training under the Indian Technical and
Economic Cooperation Programme, with 10 military
training slots last year, and a specialized in-situ
training programme in counter-insurgency and counterterrorism for nearly 200 Nigerian army personnel
this year. We believe that it is important that the Council
continue to extend all possible assistance and support
to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in the overarching interest
of peace, security and stability in the region.
Both terrorism and climate change are complex
issues that the global community is grappling with.
After decades of painstaking international efforts,
today we have institutional mechanisms to address
each of these issues. We should continue to work

S/PV. 8923

through those established mechanisms. That should be
the way forward.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
the Niger for its initiative to convene this open debate
and welcome Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President of the
Republic of the Niger, as he presides over this meeting.
I also thank Secretary-General Guterres, Chairperson
Moussa Faki Mahamat and Executive Secretary
Mamman Nuhu for their very illuminating briefings for
today’s discussion.
Peace and security present constant, but novel
challenges for humankind. At present, factors of
uncertainty and instability are significantly increasing
around the world. Terrorism, infectious diseases and
other non-conventional security threats are on the
rise, compounding traditional security challenges
and affecting many countries, particularly African
countries.
Lasting peace and stability is the fervent aspiration
of African people, but it is also the responsibility of
the international community, particularly the Security
Council. China has always been a staunch supporter of,
constructive participant in, and active contributor to the
cause of peace and security in Africa. Over 80 per cent
of Chinese peacekeepers are deployed in Africa. We
have sent more than 30,000 peacekeepers to 17 United
Nations peacekeeping missions in Africa.
At the recent Eighth Ministerial Conference of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China and Africa
jointly formulated the China-Africa Cooperation
Vision 2035 and decided to launch nine projects,
including a peace and security project. China will
deliver 10 projects in the field of peace and security
for Africa, continue to provide military assistance to
the African Union and will support African countries’
efforts to be self-sufficient in preserving regional peace
and security and countering terrorism. China will also
extend cooperation through the conduct of joint and
on-site trainings of China/Africa peacekeeping forces
and on the management and control of small arms and
light weapons. On the road to peace and security, China
will always walk side by side with our African brothers.
In recent years, terrorism has posed a major threat
to Africa, particularly the Sahel. In order to confront
that challenge, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) united to enhance their capacity and their
counter-terrorism cooperation and to play an important

21-3845421/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

role in regional security — to some success. China
expresses its deep appreciation in that regard.
We strongly condemn the recent terrorist attacks in
the Fantio community of the Niger and in several areas
in Mali and express our deepest condolences to the
soldiers of the Niger, the peacekeepers of Togo, Egypt
and others, as well as Mali civilians.
China endorses the continued joint counterterrorism cooperation between the Niger and other
countries in the region, supports sustainable and
predictable funding for the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel
and calls on the international community to lend more
help in the form of logistics and capacity-building. A
military approach alone is not sufficient, in the longterm, to definitively eliminate the security threats in the
Sahel. Efforts must be made to address the root causes
of conflicts. The international community should help
African countries address various difficulties, such as
economic problems, food insecurity and tribal tensions,
eliminate all potential breeding grounds for terrorism,
continue to support the countries of the region in
enhancing security capacity-building, provide security
protection to the local populations and ensure that
civilian facilities, such as schools and hospitals, are
protected from conflicts.
The United Nations can make use of its own
advantages to help the countries concerned, protect
the rights and interests of women, children and
vulnerable people so that they can fully enjoy the fruits
of development and in order to cut off the impact and
infiltration of extremist ideologies.
Climate change poses a grave challenge to Africa’s
sustainable development. In recent years, the African
Union (AU) has adopted a series of measures to
respond to climate change. On 9 March, the AU Peace
and Security Council adopted a specific communiqué
addressing topics such as mitigation, adaptation and
capacity-building and focusing on real challenges
such as water shortages, illegal trading in fauna and
flora and developing climate-friendly infrastructure.
The communiqué proposed many targeted responses,
including the establishment of the Africa Climate
Change Fund.
Like other developing countries, African countries
also suffer from the greatest deficit in funding,
technology and capabilities. We call for more attention
and support to Africa’s response to climate change under
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
22/31

09/12/2021

Change. We align ourselves with the comment made just
now by the Secretary-General in that regard. We call on
developed countries to effectively fulfil their historical
responsibilities and honour their commitments with
regard to climate financing, technology transfer and
capacity-building so that commitment can be translated
into practical actions.
Climate change has had a significant impact on the
countries in the Sahel and has exacerbated the conflicts
in the region. We call on the Security Council to take the
perspective of peace and security, in accordance with its
own mandates, as well as a situation-based approach in
their thorough analysis of the impact of climate change
on the Sahel — country by country and situation by
situation — so as to have an accurate understanding of
the mechanism of security risks driven by climate and
examine practical and viable solutions in that regard.
In that context, the principle of common but
differentiated responsibility must be respected, as
should the principle of depending on one’s own
capabilities, so that we can provide the necessary
funding and technological support to countries in need
in order to address climate change. We should move
beyond slogans. We support further consultation on
this matter by the members of the Council and urge
unity in the Council’s actions.
China attaches great importance to climate change
and has always actively participated in international
cooperation, playing a responsible and constructive
role in that regard. We have also made important
contributions to the success of the twenty-sixth
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
held in Glasgow. As an active supporter of African
countries and their climate response, China has signed
15 cooperation documents with 14 African countries
in order to operationalize mitigation and adaptation
projects and jointly combat the smuggling of wildlife.
The recently held eighth Ministerial Conference
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation adopted a
declaration on China/Africa cooperation on combating
climate change, with a new blueprint and practical
initiatives to that end. Over the next three years, China
and Africa will jointly implement the green development
project. China will provide assistance to Africa on 10
environmentally friendly green climate projects and
support the construction of the Africa Great Green
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Wall by building of low-carbon demonstration zones
and climate adaptation in Africa.
China has always actively supported Africa and
will continue to make contributions to peace and
development in Africa with its practical action.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me thank the Niger for convening this
meeting and to thank Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President
of the Niger, for presiding over this important debate.
(spoke in English)
I also thank the Secretary-General and the other
briefers for their insightful contributions.
In its latest report, the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change confirms that climate change is
accelerating and that, in some cases, the changes in the
climate are irreversible. It calls for our urgent actions to
cut emissions, build resilience and adapt to and mitigate
the inevitable impacts of climate change.
Half of the 20 countries considered most vulnerable
to climate change find themselves on the agenda of
the Security Council. Climate change is increasingly
becoming a dangerous threat multiplier. Their adverse
effects deprive people of livelihoods, lead to food and
water insecurity, cause mass displacement, generate
instability and create tensions and violence.
Some situations, such as that in the Sahel region,
are fraught with the existing threats of terrorism and
fragilities, while struggling with the adverse effects
of climate change, environmental degradation and the
depletion of natural resources. During its visit to the
region in October, the Security Council witnessed this
first-hand.
We must not allow terrorist groups to exploit the
tensions and grievances exacerbated by climate change
to further erode State governance, increase recruitment,
radicalize disenfranchised people and draw them to
violent extremism. Countering terrorism has been at
the very core of the agenda of the Security Council.
Much progress has been achieved over the past 20
years, most notably the Council’s commitments, unity
and solidarity in the fight against terrorism.
Over the past two years, there have been many
thematic debates on climate and security in the
Council, with growing engagement from its members.
The important work of the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security, chaired by

S/PV. 8923

the Niger and Ireland, has contributed to promoting
discussion on, and an understanding of, security risks of
climate change in specific contexts — and much more.
To address risks posed by climate change and terrorism,
we would like to make the following observations.
First, a holistic approach to address all aspects of
these issues can help ensure the sustainability of our
response and long-term success. At the global level,
it means whole-of-organization collaboration by all
United Nations bodies and missions, with long-term
vision and strategies. Among those, the Security
Council has a special role to play to address security
risks and threats, including by working closely with
others to prevent conflict from happening, addressing
the compounding threats, including climate change
and terrorism, and ensuring sustainable peace. The
Security Council must demonstrate its leadership,
unity and solidarity and act swiftly in fulfilling its
responsibility. At the national level, that involves a
whole-of-Government approach and whole-of-society
engagement. In all those processes, inclusivity is key.
It is important to ensure the active participation of
vulnerable countries, communities, groups, women
and youth.
Secondly, anticipation and resilience are most
effective and should be adequately invested in.
Anticipation helps us better prepare well in advance,
be ready to face the challenges and be more efficient
in our response to both climate change and terrorism.
Resilience helps communities adapt better to climate
change and boosts our people’s immunity to the spread
of terrorist ideology. It should strengthen and diversify
livelihoods, contribute to poverty eradication and
ensure equity.
Thirdly, equality should be ensured by equity
through international cooperation and solidarity.
No single country can deal with those threats alone,
especially climate change. Developing countries
have limited resources and capacities, but often face
worse impacts. International commitments should be
based on the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and on the specific circumstances
and capacities of the countries concerned. In that
connection, international cooperation should be
enhanced to contribute effectively to the translation of
commitments into action.
The twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate

21-3845423/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/12/2021

Change has generated momentum on the commitments
on cutting greenhouse-gas emissions. Climate
financing is central to their implementation. Developed
countries should take the lead in making and honouring
their commitments to providing climate financing and
development assistance. Resources should be set aside
to provide developing and least developed countries
with assistance in financing, technologies and knowhow, so that no country is left behind.

the hope of limiting the rise in global temperature to
1.5°C. We saw strong commitments made at COP26
on net zero, ending and reversing deforestation, the
doubling of adaptation financing and meeting the
$100 billion goal by 2023 at the latest. That will help
countries increase their preparedness to climate risks
and protect vulnerable communities from some of
the worst impacts of climate change and its effects
on stability.

According to the World Bank, Viet Nam is among
the six countries most severely affected by climate
change. An active and effective response to climate
change reflects the strong political resolve of our
Government. We stand ready to engage in all collective
actions to address climate-related challenges at the
United Nations and other forums.

Secondly, we need the United Nations system to
report comprehensively on the links between climate
and security so that we have the best information to
inform our decisions. The Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate has a clear role in that
regard and should continue to examine the conditions
and environments in which terrorism develops and
thrives. But all parts of the United Nations, including
the Security Council, have a critical role to play to meet
the challenge. Therefore, we support the draft resolution
submitted to the Council as an important first step.

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Mr. President, in particular for your clear
account of the impact of climate change and terrorism
in the Niger. And I thank the other experts too for their
valuable briefings.
It is a cruel reality that many of the nations most
affected by climate change are also among the world’s
most fragile. As the Secretary-General made clear, the
impacts of climate change act as a multiplier of the
threats already facing vulnerable populations. And
countries enduring conflict are hit especially hard. With
institutions under pressure, communities displaced and
societies insecure, those nations are less equipped to
cope with the impacts of climate change.
As you highlighted, Mr. President, in the Sahel,
changes in rainfall have fuelled conflict between farmer
and herder communities. That can create the conditions
for violent extremism. In Iraq and Syria, farming
communities affected by climate-induced crop failures
and droughts were thought to have been an important
source of recruits for the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant between 2014 and 2016. We therefore welcome
the United Nations efforts to address both terrorism
and climate change. With the climate crisis posing
an existential threat to our future — not only to our
environment, but to our common security — we must
act. I want to emphasize three ways we can do this.
First, at the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (COP26), we saw that countries
can work together to deliver ambitious commitments.
Through the Glasgow Climate Pact, we have kept alive
24/31

Thirdly, we wholeheartedly support a fully inclusive
approach, in particular with respect to women and
girls, who suffer disproportionately from conflict and
climate change, so that they can play a meaningful role.
In conclusion, we must act effectively, urgently and
together to address the climate crisis and reduce the
increasing risks of climate insecurity.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I welcome you to New
York, Mr. President. I congratulate you on the Niger’s
leadership of the Security Council this month, and I have
the honour to transmit to you a message of gratitude
from His Excellency President Uhuru Kenyatta for
your delegation’s effective advocacy on behalf of
Africa during the entirety of your term. Your key role
as one of the three African members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as well as
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, has benefited the
peace and security of the African States and peoples.
As you leave the Security Council, we will continue to
work together to build a more secure and prosperous
Africa.
I also thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Executive
Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin Commission for
their briefings.
We have come to this open debate to debate. Today
we debate climate change and terrorism, only a short
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

time after the adoption of the outcome of the twentysixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, held in
Glasgow. Even as all delegations here make statements
on the role of the multilateral system, dealing with the
specific question that has been posed, we are forced to
wonder whether multilateralism itself can truly move
beyond the rhetoric of celebrating itself to bold action.
We all know that the world’s scientists and
policymakers embrace the consensus that climate
change is exacting its greatest costs in the countries
and regions that are least responsible for causing it.
Yet that knowledge is not leading to ambitious global
action on adaptation in Africa. Past commitments, such
as the pledge of $100 billion a year in financing made in
Paris, which cover only a small portion of the necessary
response, are being reversed.
If there is a reluctance to act on what global leaders
call the greatest threat to humankind, will there be a
will to truly respond to the impact of climate change
on the security of our citizens? I put it to those
gathered here today that our greatest challenge is
not climate change, or even the coronavirus disease
pandemic. It is the moving goalposts, double standards
and false hierarchies between the developed and
developing regions.
Enlightened self-interest, solidarity and even
science do not appear to be sufficient to overcome that
short-sightedness. From unscientific travel bans to
jumping the queues for vaccines and stockpiling them
while others are suffering from their scarcity, to the
dithering on adaptation in Glasgow — the evidence of a
failing multilateralism is glaring.
The world’s peoples are yearning for leadership
that can rescue multilateralism from its present rut
and reposition it as a source of solutions that are fit
for purpose. As a member of the Security Council, we
certainly hope that multilateralism’s shortcomings and
failures will not so easily be reflected in its actions as
we fear is increasingly the case.
Kenya condemns the recent terrorist attack against
the peacekeepers of United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
which claimed seven lives and left three injured. We
express our sincere condolences to the families of the
deceased and to the Government and the people of Togo.

S/PV. 8923

Such relentless heinous attacks demonstrate even
more profoundly the need for a robust force that can
take the fight to the terrorists. It is clear — and was
made even clearer during the Council’s recent trip to
the Sahel — that the region’s armies must be assisted
to raise their competence and their equipment and
finances should be upgraded. MINUSMA is doing
a commendable job, but that will not assure the
stabilization of the Sahel against terrorism. Dedicated
African forces are required. We all know that.
However, once again multilateralism is faltering.
Since the 9/11 attacks on the city of New York, we
have known that effective counter-terrorism requires
global cooperation, as terrorism affiliated with
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
has a transnational and global footprint. When the most
powerful are attacked, we all close ranks with them and
fight together. When the most vulnerable are attacked,
the multilateral system is grudging in its response.
Instead, we would like to see the instruments
deployed by the Council against that unique crime
utilized to their fullest effect. For instance, we need to
see United Nations-assessed contributions to African
forces that deliver on the mandate of international
peace and security when they have limited budgets that
are urgently required for developmental needs.
We call on the Council to reject the uneven
application of sanctions regimes. Some groups, such
as Al-Shabaab, that are self-admittedly Al-Qaida
affiliates, are kept off the appropriate sanctions listing
even as members of the Council unilaterally sanction
those groups as Al-Qaida.
A false divide between humanitarian access and
counter-terrorism has arisen that ignores the fact that
terrorism is one of the greatest causes of humanitarian
crises. Victims of terrorism are being told that the
utmost was not done by the Security Council to save
them. The world is being told that the Council’s counterterrorism architecture is applied on a case-by-case
basis in relation to interests, not facts. Every delegation
to the Council has analysed the growing conflicts for
resources between pastoralists and farmers and among
groups responding to the effects of changing weather
patterns. Every security agency with a global outlook
understands that those impacts are part of the growing
crisis in the Lake Chad basin.
The problem is not how to convince the Security
Council that there is a link between the effects of

21-3845425/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

climate change and resource conflicts that may offer
terrorists new opportunities to exploit. The problem is
how to convince the Council that African crises require
and deserve that it fully lives up to its mandate — and
that it is for the countries that are most responsible for
climate change to live up to their responsibilities.
We can speak at length about what the responses
on the ground in the Sahel should be, but it is far more
important to meet our responsibilities, which the whole
world witnessed being short-changed in Glasgow.
We need the Security Council to provide solutions
that respond to the challenges we face in line with its
mandate. Otherwise, its relevance will disappear with
every passing day.
You are absolutely correct, Mr. President, that our
region and the world cannot wait forever for adequate
responses. We doubt that there will be ambitious action
on climate change and terrorism when such action is
lacking even on countering terrorism. If African forces
like the Group of Five for the Sahel do not receive the
predictable and adequate financing they need to deliver
international peace and security, then what real actions
on climate and security can we expect?
Allow me to conclude with five proposals that I
believe we can all appreciate, if not embrace.
First, we cannot talk of the impacts of climate
change without paying equal attention to its causes. The
present conversation about the climate-security nexus
is almost exclusively about the suffering countries,
most of which are in Africa, and does not sufficiently
link to the cause of climate change. If that continues, it
will allow responsibility to be shifted from those that
have caused the crisis to those who are suffering the
most from it.
Secondly, climate change mitigation efforts in
the global North should not cut off the development
path for the global South. Affordable, accessible and
at-scale energy is required for development. Attempts
to frustrate energy justice for the global South assure
continued poverty, which will translate to continued
crises and States that lack the resources to solve those
problems. Instead, mitigation should be underpinned
by understanding that it will only be afforded
and undertaken if countries in the global South
become developed.
Thirdly, climate change adaptation is the most
peace-positive and peacebuilding undertaking in
26/31

09/12/2021

regions such as the Sahel. States and the private
sector in the region must design public and private
investment-ready projects that require investment
and that clearly accord to environmental, social and
governance criteria. United Nations bodies such as
the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Global Compact can help shape the way forward. There
will need to be investment and capacity-building to
identify and prepare those projects for investment. As
was made clear by our field trip to the Niger, one such
project that needs immediate investment is quality
education that allows young people from the Niger to
be part of a thriving green economy.
Fourthly, grants and cheap financing must be made
available to the projects I mentioned. Where conflicts
are raging, grants and actions by international financial
institutions need to be undertaken so that the private
sector can subsequently find a path to investing.
Fifthly, effective counter-terrorism will not
emerge from climate action. It is rooted in competent
security services that actively integrate their counterterrorism and criminal justice efforts with those of
their neighbours. It calls for a Security Council that
understands that those regional capabilities require
international financing, otherwise United Nations
peacekeeping will fail to prevent State collapse in
multiple countries.
It also requires the inclusive management of
diversity as a core State capability that is as important
as that of providing security and basic services.
Effective counter-terrorism requires that the State be
able to support local livelihood uplift. It is in that arena
that climate action — specifically adaptation — can
play an important role.
As I conclude, Kenya commends the Niger and
Ireland, as co-Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security, for the thematic draft resolution
they submitted, which represents a good starting point
in this debate.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to sincerely thank you, Mr. President, and
the sisterly Republic of the Niger for convening today’s
meeting to shed light once again on climate change and
terrorism, which constitute two of the major threats to
international peace and security and exacerbate existing
problems, especially in conflict-afflicted regions.
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

We commend your valuable briefing and the
accurate evaluation of the issue, along with your
practical proposals. We are aware of what the brotherly
people of the Niger have faced and continue to face due
to those two scourges. We appreciate the role that your
country has always played in drawing the attention
of the international community to the dangers that
threaten security and stability in the Sahel region.
I would like to thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral for his valuable briefing. I also thank
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat and Mr. Mamman Nuhu for
their briefings.
We wish to express in the strongest terms Tunisia’s
condemnation of the terrorist attack on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali. We offer our sincere condolences to
the families of those who lost their lives and to the
people and the Government of Togo.
Throughout our membership on the Security
Council, Tunisia has paid special attention to the need to
consider the deep and interrelated causes of conflicts and
the various factors that fuel violence, prolong conflicts
and threaten security and peace in the world. Tunisia
has also often reiterated the importance of addressing
those factors by strengthening multilateral action and
adopting a holistic approach based on an integrated
concept of collective security and innovative tools and
mechanisms that are capable of dealing effectively with
those common and cross-border challenges. That is one
of the priorities that Tunisia will continue to monitor
within the framework of various United Nations and
other regional structures.
There is no doubt that climate change represents
one of the major factors that deepens fragility and
threatens stability, sometimes leading to the outbreak of
conflict. It fuels tensions and violence and contributes
to protracted and complicated conflicts, especially on
the African continent.
Given the current climate change-related challenges
that the world faces today, it is necessary to go beyond
the context-based approach in addressing the situation
and to work to include climate risks systematically in the
Security Council’s exercise of its primary responsibility
to maintain international peace and security.
We support the practical proposals contained
in the draft resolution submitted for the Council’s
consideration by Ireland and the Niger. We hope that

S/PV. 8923

it will be adopted unanimously, thereby sending a
clear and strong message from the Security Council in
that regard.
Although climate change is a global phenomenon,
the severity of its repercussions varies. Some regions of
the world, especially those that have contributed least
to such changes, are most affected, as is the case of the
African continent, in particular the Sahel region. Their
peoples face difficulties in withstanding and adapting to
the impacts of climate change. From that point of view,
when addressing the security repercussions of climate
change, it is necessary to take into consideration the
importance of the development dimension in strategies
for maintaining peace and security, as well as the need
to build the capacity of the peoples of those regions
to adapt to the effects of climate change, thereby
preventing them from slipping into spirals of violence
and conflict.
Twenty years have passed since the establishment
of the international regime to counter terrorism
through the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) and
the various measures that followed it, as well as the
creation of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which
Tunisia has had the honour to chair during the past two
years. Despite the significant achievements made in
terms of bolstering legal frameworks and international
cooperation mechanisms to combat that scourge,
terrorism and violent extremism remain among the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
Over the past two decades, the world has witnessed
an evolution in the working methods of terrorist
organizations and their ability to adapt and exploit crises
and conflicts, the fragility of certain communities and
marginalized groups and the weakness or absence of
State authority in order to expand and implement their
plans. They have also harnessed modern technologies
and social media to promote their ideologies, recruit
members and obtain financing. That has led to the
exacerbation of the scourge of terrorism and the
emergence of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters on an unprecedented scale.
The severity of the terrorist threat has also been
increasing in Africa especially in conflict zones.
Terrorist organizations are trying to exploit the
situations in those regions by reorganizing their
ranks and establishing regional affiliates that pledge
allegiance to such organizations. At the same time, they

21-3845427/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/12/2021

also benefit from organized crime and trafficking in
arms and persons to fund their operations.

independence and sovereign equality of States and
non-interference in their domestic affairs.

Tunisia reiterates the need for continued
international cooperation to counter terrorism as well
as violent extremism in all its forms and to redouble
efforts aimed at eliminating the root causes that fuel
it through an integrated approach that takes into
consideration all its dimensions. Promoting human
development and eradicating poverty, marginalization
and exclusion, as well as ensuring the participation of
youth and women, are important means of countering
terrorism and violent extremism in the medium and
long term. As for the short term, the international
community must today assist the countries concerned
in building their capacity to counter this threat through
tangible measures in line with their needs.

The negative effects of climate change and
their consequences for the well-being of nations
are undeniable. They become severe when other
underlying factors in conflict-ridden countries come
into play. Addressing such challenges requires a
systematic and coordinated response by all States
Members of the United Nations. We share the view that
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change is the most appropriate platform for such a
coordinated response.

In that context, we recall the need of the Group
of Five (G-5) for the Sahel to receive strong and
effective United Nations and international support in
order to foster its ability to counter shared challenges,
including by promoting the Joint Force backed by the
African Union. Such support would provide it with the
necessary operational and logistical support, in line
with the Secretary-General’s recommendations, with
a view to enabling it to continue to play its important
role in fighting terrorism and transnational organized
crime. The success of the Joint Force will have a
positive impact on peace and security not only locally
but also at the regional and international levels.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Today the international community faces pressing
challenges related to terrorism and climate change.
Through its numerous resolutions, the United Nations
has repeatedly affirmed that terrorism is one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security
and that the primary responsibility for combating that
threat rests with Member States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran remains committed
to its international obligations and continues its
efforts aimed at effectively preventing and combating
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. Combating
terrorism must be carried out in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
while ensuring full respect for the principles of the
28/31

The Islamic Republic of Iran has taken significant
steps to address and mitigate the negative impacts
of climate change. Nevertheless, the imposition of
unlawful sanctions by the United States against Iran,
in flagrant infringement of the basic principles of
international law, has not only prevented our access to
much-needed financial resources and the technological
means to tackle challenges associated with climate
change, but it has also adversely affected our national
capacity to carry out our respective undertakings in
that regard.
While terrorism as a serious criminal offense
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security, climate change is essentially a development
issue, and there is no scientific evidence establishing
a direct link between climate change and international
peace and security. Accordingly, the challenges of
climate change should be addressed within the context
of sustainable development. At the same time, in certain
conflict situations, the impacts of climate change might
create an environment conducive to terrorist groups
exploiting the situation and recruiting vulnerable
people for their sinister terrorist purposes.
We need to be extremely cautious about establishing
a linkage between international peace, security and
climate change. In order to prevent such challenging
situations from occurring, addressing the underlying
causes is imperative. To that end, all Member States
must adhere to their respective obligations, based on the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
Likewise, developed countries must uphold their
promises to provide affected developing countries with
timely and sufficient financial support and technical
assistance, including by facilitating the transfer of
required technologies.
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, we reiterate our principled position
that climate change is primarily an issue related to
sustainable development, and it is therefore outside
the purview of the Security Council. Moreover, the
Council’s engagement, which lacks the requisite
expertise and tools in this sphere, would be an
encroachment upon the mandate of other main organs of
the United Nations, further complicating their work in
effectively addressing the challenges of climate change.
The President (spoke in French): Before I give the
floor to the representative of Japan, I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars
of the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a conclusion after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Osuga (Japan): Allow me to start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for holding today’s important
meeting. Japan appreciates the contribution of the Niger
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council.
Today’s
security
landscape
has
become
increasingly complex. Terrorism remains a serious
threat to international peace and security in many parts
of the world, including the Sahel. In conflict-prone
areas, human insecurity, exacerbated by such impacts
of climate change as environmental degradation and
natural disasters, becomes a multiplier of risk of
violent conflict.
Terrorism and climate change have one thing in
common: they both pose a serious threat to human
security and to the survival, livelihood and dignity of
people. Japan has formulated its policy of assistance to
conflict-prone areas with the human security approach
to protect and empower people and build the resilience
of communities. More attention should be paid to the
human dimension of our security paradigm by putting
people at the centre.
(spoke in French)
Considering both terrorism and climate change,
I would like to stress the importance of conflict
prevention through institution-building at the national
and local levels. In our view, effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions are the best protection against
today’s diverse security risks. Let me explain why.

S/PV. 8923

First, effective and impartial institutions in the
security and justice sectors are key to the rule of law
and the fight against impunity. In 2021, Japan provided
approximately $3 million each to the Niger, Burkina
Faso and Chad in order to strengthen their security
sector capacities. Since 2013, Japan has been assisting
seven countries in West Africa and the Sahel, including
the Niger, to build credible criminal justice institutions
through the training of police, prosecutors and judges
in order to improve their expertise in fair, effective and
timely criminal justice processes. Building the capacity
of personnel who manage and use the institutions is an
integral part of institution-building.
Secondly, building social-sector institutions that can
ensure equal access to basic services will help address
the root causes of conflict and terrorism. For example,
Japan has promoted a primary education programme
called “School for All” in which all community
members actively participate in decision-making
processes involved in jointly managing a school
system. Launched in Niger in 2004, the initiative has
built or improved 53,000 schools in eight African
countries in partnership with the World Bank and civil
society organizations.
Japan showed its commitment to increasing its
support for strengthening institutions in Africa by
launching the New Approach for Peace and Stability in
Africa at the seventh Tokyo International Conference
on African Development, which is aimed at providing
assistance in developing robust judicial, administrative
and legislative systems so that nation-building does
not move backwards because of conflicts. With regard
to climate change, Japan will continue to support
countries that have been the most severely affected in
Africa, the Asia-Pacific region and Latin America and
the Caribbean in their efforts to strengthen resilience,
in particular through institutional capacity-building.
(spoke in English)
It is evident that the United Nations system should
break silos and respond in a comprehensive and seamless
manner in dealing with today’s security challenges
that encompass the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus. In that respect, the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) should be further explored to
realize a holistic approach under United Nations
system-wide coordination and partnership beyond the
United Nations system. The Security Council should
make use of the PBC’s advice to mobilize the whole

21-3845429/31

S/PV.8923

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations system to address the multifaceted
security challenges.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Japan’s readiness
to play its part in the global efforts to respond to the
evolving security challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks the Niger
for organizing this open debate. We also thank the
briefers for their presentations.
The debate on terrorism and climate change
represents an opportunity to reflect on the role of the
Security Council with regard to both topics. Terrorism
is not directly linked to climate change, and climate
change cannot be seen through the security lens,
disassociated from the systemic elements that cause it.
Terrorism continues to represent one of the greatest
challenges for the international community. We
reiterate, in the strongest terms, our firm condemnation
of that phenomenon in all its forms and manifestations.
Nevertheless, an effective counter-terrorism strategy
cannot rely only on security measures. It also needs
to address the underlying causes of the phenomenon,
in particular those associated with protracted social,
political, economic and cultural dissent. In addition,
the Security Council should always reiterate that any
counter-terrorism action must abide by international
law, particularly international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.
In the case of climate change, we understand that
increasing temperatures and rising sea levels, changing
precipitation patterns and more extreme weather are
threatening human health and safety, food and water
security and socioeconomic development everywhere.
Particularly in the Sahel, the depletion of resources,
aggravated by severe droughts, are some of the factors
exacerbating tensions and pushing populations to
migrate. Such extreme events can devastate social
groups and cause severe disruptions to production
systems and local economies — a breeding ground for
dangerous social consequences, such as the emergence
of terrorist threats.
However, Brazil takes a cautious stance when it
comes to approaching climate change from a strict
security angle. In doing so, the international community
might distance itself from an adequate response.
30/31

09/12/2021

We must strive to avoid duplication of work and
ensure that specific mandates and responsibilities
within the United Nations system are respected. The
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change is properly equipped to discuss and address any
specific new concerns of the parties regarding climate
change issues in an inclusive and balanced manner,
having a clearly established mandate and adequate
tools and mechanisms to do so.
The time and energy diverted to reallocate the
climate agenda to the Security Council would be
better spent in fostering financial flows to support
existing commitments and enhanced climate action.
The mobilization, scaling-up and timely delivery
of financing by developed nations are the need of
the hour to support developing countries affected by
climate change.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Gabon.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to extend to you, Mr. President, the fraternal
congratulations of President Ali Bongo Ondimba to his
brother, President Mohamed Bazoum, and to thank you
for your leadership in steering the work of the Security
Council. I would also like to express Gabon’s solidarity
with the brotherly people of the Niger following the
recent barbaric terrorist attacks.
Once again, we are highlighting in this forum the
close link between the daunting challenges of terrorism
and the adverse effects of climate change faced by
many regions in the world, particularly in Africa. Your
assessment, Mr. President, shows the significance and
scale of the challenge.
Indeed, there is a relentless increase in tensions,
crises, armed conflicts and terrorist acts in areas
where climate change is evident. On 9 March this
year, the African Union highlighted the negative
effects of climate change, in particular the growing
threat that it poses to socioeconomic development,
as well as sustainable peace, security and stability in
Africa. The effects of climate change are known to be
linked to socioeconomic and political problems in the
poorest countries.
The climate change cycle highlights four risk
factors: political instability, economic weakness, food
insecurity and large-scale uncontrolled migration.
Political instability makes it difficult to adapt to the
21-38454

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

physical effects of climate change, as conflicts that occur
without violence become difficult to manage. Economic
weakness reduces the range of income opportunities for
people and deprives States of resources to meet people’s
needs. Food insecurity undermines the very basis of
continuing to live in some areas where living conditions
become critical. Large-scale migration carries a high
risk of conflict because of the fearful reactions that it
often provokes and the humanitarian crises that ensue.
Many of the world’s poorest countries and
communities therefore face the double-edged problem
of climate change and violent conflict. There is a real
risk that climate change will increase the likelihood of
violent conflict, which, in turn, will leave communities
poorer, less resilient and less able to cope with the
consequences of climate change.
That devastating observation is one of the drivers
of Gabon’s ongoing advocacy for the recognition of
the climate-security nexus. I take this opportunity
to reaffirm, on behalf of my country, our firm
determination to combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. In the same vein, we support the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2560 (2020).
The direct link between security and climate
change must be addressed by the international
community. The regions of the world most affected by

S/PV. 8923

climate change, such as the Sahel, should be the focus
of our collective action. Subregional initiatives aimed
at establishing and maintaining peace and combating
terrorism, such as those by the Group of Five for the
Sahel, merit being supported by the international
community and receiving the logistical and financial
support commensurate with the commitments and
responsibilities undertaken. It is clear that climate
change has a compounding effect on violent conflicts,
with the capacity to assail communities that are poorer,
less resilient and less able to face up to the consequences
of climate change.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for organizing
this important debate. I would like to underscore our
firm belief that terrorism and climate change entail a
collective responsibility that should be embraced by
everyone and be at the centre of our priorities. Gabon
reiterates its firm commitment and ongoing advocacy to
that end, so as to respond to the suffering of the countless
victims of the negative effects of climate change.
The President (spoke in French): There are a
number of speakers remaining on my list. Given the
lateness of the hour, I propose, with the consent of
the members of the Council, to suspend this meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

21-3845431/31
