4

General ÁHembly-Twenty-fourth Se11ion

2505 (XXIV). Manifesto on Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
H aving received the Manifesto on Southem Africa, 8
adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Govemment of the Organization of African Unity at its
sixth ordinary session, held at Addis Ababa from 6 to
9 September 1969,
Convinced of the need for intensifying international
efforts for the elimination of apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in order that peace and security in southern Africa may be assured,
Recalling its resolution 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965 on co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of African Unity,
1. W elcomes the Manifesto on Southern Africa and
recommends it to the attention of all States and all
peoples;
2. Expresses once again the firm intention of the
United N ations, acting in co-operation with the Organization of African Unity, to intensify its efforts to find
a solution to the present grave situation in southem
Africa.
1815th plenary meeting,
20 November 1969.
2519 (XXIV). lnstallation of mechanical means
of voting

The General Assembly,
RecalUng its resolution 1957 (XVIII) of 12 December 1963 regarding the installation of mechanical
means of voting in the General Assembly Hall on an
experimental basis and the carrying out of additional
work of a preparatory nature in one or two committee
rooms so as to permit an eventual expansion of the
system,
Recalling also its decision of 7 December 19669 to
approve the use of the mechanical voting system in the
General Assembly Hall on a permanent basis,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryOeneral conceming the installation of mechanical means
of voting in one committee room,1º as well as the
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions 11 and the report of the Fifth
Committee12 on the administrative and financia! implications thereof,
1. A uthorizes the Secretary-General to proceed, as
outlined in bis report, with the design and construction
of a mechanical voting system for installation in one
main committee room, on the understanding that no
expenditure shall be incurred until a demonstration
model has been completed and confirmation of the
tecbnical accuracy of the design has been established;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
report to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the progress achieved in the design, construction and installation of a mechanical voting system in
a main committee room, together with bis recommendations on any further steps to be taken.
1820th plenary meeting,
4 December 1969.
8 Ibid., agenda ítem 106, document A/7754.
• tbid., Twenty•first Session, Plenary Meetings,

1486th
meeting, para. Sl.
10 lbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 26,
document A/7737.
11 lbid., document A/7755.
11 Ibid., document A/7771.

2520 (XXIV). Participation of States which are
parties to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice, hut are not Memhers of
the United Nations, in the procedure for
effecting amendments to the Statute

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, under Article 69 of the Statute of the
Intemational Court of Justice, the Security Council
may recommend to the General Assembly for adoption
provisions concerning the participation of States which
are parties to the Statute, but are not Members of the
United Nations, in the procedure for effecting amendments to the Statute,
Having received the recommendations of the Security
Council in this regard, contained in Council resolution
272 (1969) of 23 October 1969,
Decides that:
(a) A State which is a party to the Statute of the
Intemational Court of Justice, but is not a Member
of the United Nations, may participate in the General
Assembly in regard to amendments to the Statute in
the same manner as the Members of the United
Nations;
( b) Amendments to the Statute of the Intemational
Court of Justice shall come into force for all States
which are parties to the Statute when they have been
adopted by a vote of two thirds of the States which
are parties to the Statute and ratified in accordance
with their respective constitutional processes by two
thirds of the States which are parties to the Statute
and in accordance with the provisions of Article 69
of the Statute and Article 108 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
1820th plenary meeting,
4 December 1969.
2521 (XXIV). Special programme of activities
in connexion with the tenth annivenary of
the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory
Committee for the Tenth Anniversary of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, 13
Mindful of the need on the occasion of that anniversary to evaluate the progress so far made in the implementation of the Declaration and, taking into account the various existing obstacles, to formulate specific
proposals for the elimination of the remaining manifestations of colonialism,
1. Approves the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Tenth Anniversary of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and endorses the recommendations contained therein14 conceming the programme of activities
to be undertaken in connexion with the tenth anniversary of the Declaration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
ali Member States, the specialized agencies and other
international organizations concemed the above-mentioned recommendations for appropriate action and to
report on their implementation to the Special Com13 lbid.,

B lbid.,

agenda item 24, document A/7684.
para. 22.
