United Nations

53rd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Wednesday, 11 November 1981.
at 3.20 p.m.

THIRTY-SIXTH SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

role. It gives me specia! pleasure to have presided over
the General Assembly dming this session when three new
Member States have been admitted.

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 20:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations (conclud~d)
Agenda item 130:
Anned Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations
and its gThve consequences for the established international
system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security (continued)

923

7. In welcoming the delegation of Antigua and Barbuda
to our midst, I am confident that its presence among us
will enrich the Organization and that it will make a valuable contribution to the work of the United Nations towards the achie"ement of the objectives set forth in. the
Charter.

929

8. Several delegations have expressed a desire to speak
at this juncture. I call first on the representative of the
United Kingdom.

President: Mr. Ismat T. KITTANI (Iraq).

9. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): Yesterday
my delegation voted in favour of resolution 492 (1981)
adopted unanimously in the Security Council, recommending that Antigua and Barbuda shoulld be admitted to
membership of the United Nations and it gives us equal
pleasure to acclaim in the General Assembly, only 24
hours later, the resolution admitting the new State to full
membership of the Organization.

AGENDA ITEM 20
Admission of new Members to the United Nations

(concluded)
I. The PRESIDENT: This afternoon I invite the Assembly to consider the positive recommendation by the Security Council for the admission of Antigua and Barbuda
to membership of the United Nations. In this connection a
draft resolution has been submitted in document A/36/
L.l3.

10. This is the third time in the course of the thirtysixth session that the General Assembly has welcomed a
former dependent Territory of the United Kingdom. The
ceremonies of admission for the delega1tions of Vanuatu
and Belize earlier on in the session were happy occasions
for all of us and it is now with particular pleasure that we
welcome Antigua and Barbuda as the forty-third ind:pendent member of the Commonwealth to join us. Before
independence on I November, it had been a self-governing State in association with the United Kingdom and
fully responsible for its own internal affairs since 1967.
Antigua and Barbuda now follows the same path as Dominica, Grenada, Saint Lucia and Sain~ Vincent and the
Grenadines in its transition from associ.'lted statehood to
full independence and United Nations membership.

2. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts the
draft resolution by acclamation?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 36/26).
3. The PRESIDENT: I therefore declare Antigua and
Barbuda admitted to membership in the United Nations.
4. I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the delegation of Antigua and Barbuda to its place in the General
Assembly Hall.

The delegation of Antigua and Barbuda was escorted to
its place in the General Assembly Hall.

11. I should like to say a few words about the status of
association enjoyed by Antigua in the period before independence. This was a completely voluntary arrangement
under which Antigua was fully self-governing, but the
United Kingdom retained ultimate responsibility for foreign affairs and defence. In practice, a wide measure of
executive authority in the field of external affairs was delegated to Antigua over the years and the remaining responsibilities of the British Government were discharged
in close consultation with the Government of Antigua and
with regard to its interests at all times. The British Government made clear at the outset that the status of association could be terminated at any time and by either
party. In accordance with successive British Governments'
decolonization policies, my Government undertook to
grant independence whenever this was the will of the majority of the people so long as the proposed independence
constitutiOn made proper provision for the preservation cif
fundamental rights and the rule of law. So when the present Government was ele:.::ted in April last year on a platform of early independence, consultations were quickly

5. The PRESIDENT: It is a great honour for me once
again to welcome a new Member of the United Nationsthis time the State of Antigua and Barbuda, which is represented here today by Mr. Lester Bird, Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister, who is accompanied by
Mr. Vere C. Bird, Jr., Deputy Speaker and Adviser to the
Prime Minister, and Mr. Hugh Marshall, Minister of State
in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Economic Development, Tourism, Energy and Supply.
.
6. The admission of Antigua and Barbuda as the one
hundred and fifty-seventh Member of the United Nations
is a joyous occasion for us all because it brings us closer
to the goal of universal membership. It is all the more
gratifying because it marks yet another advance towards
the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, a
process in which the Assembly has played the leading
923

A/36/PV.53

t

s
t
t

i
c

o
f
t

w
c
a

924

General Assembly-Thirty-siXih Session-Plenary Meetings

started and a Constitutional Conference was held in
London from 4 to 16 December. That Conference was
attended by delegations representing the United Kingdom,
the Antiguan Government, the Antiguan Opposition and
Barbuda, and the basis of their discussions was a draft
independence constitution prepared by the Government of
Antigua. This document was revised in the light of the
Constitutional Conference's deliberations, and certain constitutional safeguards were introduced to protect the interests of the people of Barbuda. The Independence Constitution was then approved by the Antigua Parliament in
April and May, and the British Parliament approved an
Order in Council in July this year to prepare the way for
full independence on I November.

12. Many distinguished visitors from all over the world
attended the festivities at the beginning of this month.
They witnessed the proud and joyful beginnings of a new
Caribbean nation, and I am confident that Antigua and
Barbuda will play its full part in international affairs. The
links between the United Kingdom and Antigua and Barbuda will of course go from strength to strength. A web
of commercial, cultural and economic links has been built
up over the 300 years of our association. Even more
important, the ties of friendship and real affection will
endure, only to be enhanced by the new status of Antigua
and Barbuda in the international community. The aid and
technical co-operation programmes which have been administered in co-operation with the Government of Antigua over the years will continue; and in the Commonwealth and the international community we shall find new
areas for co-operation and partnership.
13. It is a parricubr pleasure for me to see in this Hall
Mr. Lester Bird, the Foreign-Minister of Antigua and Barbuda, and Senator L10yd Jacobs, who, I understand, will
be the first Permanent Representative of Antigua and Barbuda to the United Nations. They will find many friends
here, both amongst their Caribbean colleagues, who play
such a vital role in the work of the Organization, and in
the membership at large. Antigua and Barbuda has a
strong parliamentary tradition and its democratic institutions are lively and firmly entrenched. We look forward
to the role its representatives will undoubtedly play in
New York and wish them, their Government and their
people all good fortune _in the years ahead.

14. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Benin, who will speak on behalf of the group of African
States.
15. Mr. SOGLO (Benin) (interpretation from French): I
am honoured and privileged, as chairman of the African
group, to express from this rostrum the joy felt throughout
Africa at this solemn moment when the Organization is
welcoming to its fold its one hundred and fifty-seventh
Member State, the new State of Antigua and Barbuda,
which yesterday was still on the list of dependent Territories falling under the historic Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in resolution 1514 (XV).

16. Africa, eternal Africa, which has the honour of having been linked for generations with this young State by
close ties based on cultural traditions and common ways
of life; Africa, militant Africa, which has just emerged
from the long colonial night and which continues even
today to fight to rid its continent once and for all of those
who follow the retrograde policies of colonialism, neocolonialism and apartheid; Africa cannot but rejoice
above all others at the accession to independence and full

sovereignty of a Territory which, thanks to the farsightedness and vigilance of its sons and the courage and sacrifices of its people, has been able to throw off the colonial
yoke.
17. That is why it is a particularly pleasant duty for me
to address to this young State our warmest congratulations
and sincerest good wishes for a future marked by peace
and prosperity. I ask the leader of the delegation of this
new State, Mr. Lester Bird, and the members of his delegation to be kind enough to pass on these good wishes
and congratulations to the people and the Government of
Antigua and Barbuda. Their State's admission, by bringing the Organization closer to its goal of universality, can
only strengthen the determination and revive the hopes of
all the colonized and oppressed peoples throughout the
world which have resolved to do everything they can to
rid themselves of the colonial yoke.
18. Henceforth, as a fully fledged member of the international community, this young State, drawing on the creative genius of its people and the values derived from its
native- soil, will, I am sure, make a positive contribution
to the work for peace and development which is the
raison d'etre of the Organization.
19. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Pakistan, who will speak on behalf of the group of Asian
States.

25.
as chai
extend
Nations

26.

E

the s
striving
colonia
ticular
process
remnan
same ti
univers
gaining
secure
nations.

27.

T

and B
new M
peacefu

28.

M

Antigua
cess in
being 0

20. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): It is a matter of special pleasure and an honour for the delegation of Pakistan to extend on behalf of the States members of the Asian group
a warm welcome and sincere felicitations to Antigua and
Barbuda on its admission as a Member of the United
Nations.

21 . Antigua and Barbuda attained independence on I
November 1981, thus advancing the irreversible process
of the complete and total elimination of colonialism and
giving new hope to nations and peoples still under colonial domination. The Government-of the newly independent country has pledged its adherence to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly declared its willingness to carry out its obligations as a Member of the Organization. We are confident
that Antigua and Barbuda~ by its presence in the United
Nations as an equal partner, will make a positive contribution to the cause of international peace and the economic and social progress of mankind.
22. The admission of Antigua and Barbuda has brought
the United Nations still closer to attaining complete universality in its membership. The presence of Antigua and
Barbuda will also not only enrich the gl'Oup of Latin
American States but strengthen the Group of 77 and other
third-world activities within the United Nations forum.
23. On behalf of the group of Asian States, we express
our full solidarity with the Government and people of
Antigua and Barbuda, wish them success in all their endeavours for national progress and prosperity and look
forward to developing relations of close friendship and
co-operation with the delegation of Antigua and Barbuda, _
which is today led by its distinguished Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister.
24. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of Poland, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Eastern European States.

31. It
tion beg
ful and
through
taken to
endeavo
nial do
ploitatio

32. In
and ne
Powers
dominati
bean are
being de
people t
path to

33. Th
mixture
phies, t
nomyan
is incre
State tha
lenge to
tablished
hope tha
as will 0
and all

5Jrd meetlng-II November 1981

25. Mr. WYZNER (Poland): It gives me great pleasure
as chairman of the group of Eastern European States to
extend a warm welcome into the family of the United
Nations of its new Member, Antigua and Barbuda.
26. Ever since the establishment of the Organization,
the socialist States of our group have been earnestly
striving for the final abolition of colonialism and neocolonialism in all its forms. That is why it gives us particular satisfaction to witness a steady development in the
process of decolonization and of the liquidation of the last
remnants of the old colonial rule ill the world. At the
same time, we consider it as corresponding with the truly
universal character of the United Nations that the States
gaining their independence join us here in our efforts to
secure peaceful coexistence and co-operation among all
nations.
27. The socialist States of our group welcome Antigua
and Barbuda to the United Nations in the hope that the
new Member of the United Nations will contribute by its
peaceful policy to the achievement of those goals.
28. May I also convey ta the people and Government of
Antigua and Barbuda our warmest wishes for every success in the development of their statehood and the wellbeing of their nation.
29. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Mexico, who will speak on behalf of the group of Latin
American States.
30. Mr. MUNOZ LEDO (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): It is a high honour for me to welcome a new
Member State, Antigua and Barbuda, to the United
Nations on behalf of the countries of Latin America, the
region to which it historically and geographically belongs.
3 I. It is on our continent that the process of decolonization began and where it has been the longest, most painful and most conflict-ridden. Latin America has lived
through nearly two centuries since the first efforts undertaken to attain political independence, and even now it is
endeavouring to eliminate unacceptable vestiges of colonial domination and disgraceful forms of neo-colonial exploitation.
32. In Latin America, we have had to fight against old
and new empires simultaneously. When some colonial
Powers begin to decline, others, with new designs for
domination, emerge. This is particularly true in the Caribbean area, where even today the right to independence is
being denied, a right which is, in essence, the ability of a
people to determine its own political regime and its own
path to development.
33. The international community is richer today in its
mixture of cultures, races, political systems and philosophies, the things that give the Organization its physiognomy and its universal nature. Latin America, for its part,
is increasing its membership a'nd responsibility. Every
State that emerges in our region represents a further challenge to the mechanisms of co-operation that we have established. At the same time, however, it also represents a
hope that our will to independence will be strengthened,
as will our determination as Latin Americans to reject any
and all overt or covert forms of hegemonism.
34. Almost half of the Latin American States are Caribbean countries, and approximately to are geographically

925

a part of the Caribbean basin. This means that a clear
majority of the countries of Latin America are directly
involved in the problems of a geographical area that is
particularly subject to upheavals and that deserves the full
attention of the international community and the great respect of the major Powers.
35. The first colonial settlements on this continent were
in the Caribbean. It was there that the elimination or absorption of the indigenous races began. It was there where
the transplantation of inhabitants from Africa and Asia
began. The Caribbean has been the melting pot of civilizations, a model of colonial exploitation and a prey to
ambitions of all kinds. That is why the peoples of the
Caribbean have, historically, fully deserved their full freedom, their complete decolonization and a life of dignity
based on international co-operation. It is the respon~ibility
of the United Nations to assist them in that endeavour.
36. On behalf of all their brothers in Latin America,
therefore, I welcome the people and the Government of
Antigua and Barbuda. Upon their entry into the Organization, they acquire the best guarantee of their independence, and they offer to us a new, fresh voice in the
struggle for peace and world security, as well as for the
establishment of the new international economic order.
37. On behalf of all the countries of our region, I wish
to express the fervent hope that the State which is today
raising the membership to 157 may, in the application of
the principles of the Charter and in active international
co-operation, find good reasons to believe in the United
Nations.
38. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of Finland, who will speak on behalf of the group of
Western European and other States.
39. Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): As Chairman of the
group of Western European and other States, I wish to
extend a most cordial welcome to Antigua and Barbuda
as the one hundred and fifty-seventh Member of the
United Nations. In the annals of the United Nations, the
admission of a new Member is always a solemn occasion
for the State itself, as well as for the United Nations. It is
not only a final recognition by the international community of the birth of a new nation; it also puts a formal seal
on a· covenant of mutual commitment between the new
Member and the Organization, based on the Charter of
the United Nations. The members of the group of Western
European and other States attach special importance to
occasions like this. They are further steps towards universality, towards a United Nations representing the international community as a whole. This aim can only be
achieved if all nations on the earth belong to it.
40. We further welcome the membership of Antigua and
Barbuda as another demonstration of the success of the
efforts of the Organization in the peaceful 'dismantling of
former colonial empires. The former administrative Power,
the United Kingdom, is to be cornmended for the manner
in which it has acted in accordance with its re~pon­
sibilities under the Charter of the United Nations in bringing the inhabitants of Antigua and Barbuda to self-government and now to independence.
41 . The group of Western European and other States
warmly congratulates the Government and peopl~ of Antigua and Barbuda on the attainment of their independence
and on their admission to the United Nations.

926

General ~mbly-Thirty.sixth Sessioll""-Plenary Meetings

42. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of Qatar, who will speak on behalf of the group of Arab
States.

.. 4:{

Mr. AL-DOSERI (Qatar) (interpretation from Ara-

bic): On behalf of the group of Arab States and of the

delegation of Qatar, it is my great pleasure to convey sincere congratulations to Antigua and Barbuda now that it
has become a Member of the United Nations. We are certain that this new State will play an important part in
achieving the goals of the Charter of the united Nations.
44. On this occasion, now that a new Member is being
admitted to the United Nations family, I should like to
say that this admission is one more step in the process of
decolonization and strengthens the faith of those peoples
who are still victims of colonialism. At the same time it
strengthens the concept of universality of the United
Nations. This underlines the desire of the majority of the
Members of ·the Organization that people should enjoy
their sacred right to self-determination and national independence.

45. In welcoming the new Member and congratulating it
on its independence, we should not overlook the fact that
decolonization is not yet ended, because there are still
peoples· who continue to fight heroically to enjoy their
sacred right to self-determination and national independence, particularly in Africa and the Middle East. We are
referring especially to Namibia and Palestine.
46. Once again I should like, on behalf of the group of
Arab States and of Qatar, to congratulate the people of
Antigua and· Barbuda on their admission to membership
of the United Nations, and I wish them every success in
their struggle to promote their independence and to build
prosperity. We. hope that the delegation of Antigua and
Barbuda will succeed in its new responsibilities here
within the United Nations family, an<! we assure them of
every co-operation on the part of the group of Arab
States.
47. .The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of Trinidad and Tobago to speak on behalf of the member
States of the Caribbean Community [CAR/COM).
48. Mr. ABDULAH (Trinidad and Tobago): It is with
very great pleasure that, on behalf of the Commonwealth
Caribbean, I today welcome the delegation of Antigua
and~Barbuda to the United Nations and offer congratulations to the Government and people of this sister Caribbean State upon its membership of this world body.
49. It says much for the continuing relevance and influence of the United Nations that, while newly independent
States face the challenges posed by such factors as small
size, underdeveloped economies and infrastructures and
Umited natural and manpower resources, their Governments attach great importance to membership of the
United Nations. There can be no greater indication of
faith in the. Organization and in its continuing ability to,
act asa catalyst and moral force for the attainment of a
more· balanced, equitable and peaceful world order. We
trust that as each new Member State brings the United
Nations closer to achieving universality, progress towards
this goal will be increasingly discernible.

50.

We., the independent States in the Caribbean grouping of· C~RIC9M,. have achieved independence peacefully but not without the dedication, hard work and s~ri­
fice of several generations. We have sought to create

societies founded on the values and aspirations of our
peoples and, in spite of the disadvantages of small territorial size and populations and traditionally agricultural
and very limited economies, we have made discernible
progress in expanding our economies, developing our industrial bases and improving our infrastructures. There remains much to be done and we recognize that the development for which we strive can best be achieved in an era
of peace, stability and mutual respect among all nations.
From this recognition stems our commitment to the principles of the United Nations.
51. The islands of the Caribbean are strategically located at the crossroads between North and South. These
islands have seen the passage of peoples between the two
regions since the days of Columbus, and possibly earlier,
although records do not remain. As a result, their populations have been enriched by the diversity of their racial
and cultural heritage. Living in harmony, they have a
breadth of outlook which is not likely to be found in the
inhabitants of a more isolated group of islands and thus
they are uniquely placed to serve as a bridge of understanding between North and South, between East and
West.
52. As a part of this environment, Antigua and Barbuda
is well placed to make an excellent contribution to the
efforts of the United Nations towards fostering greater understanding and co-operation in every sphere between
Member States. As a sovereign partner in the Caribbean
Community, this newly independent State, we are sure,
will contribute significantly to the development of the entire region, thereby enhancing the thrust of the region as a
whole in relations at the international level.

53.

The countries of the Commonwealth Caribbean welcorpe Antigua and Barbuda as the one hundred and fiftyseventh Member of the United Nations. We look forward
to the valuable contribution which we are convinced its
delegation will make to our deliberations and pledge ourselves to work together in furthering the goals of the
Organization.
54. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative
of the host country, the United States.
55. Mr. LICHENSTEI~ (United States of America): On
I November 1981, a new Caribbean nation achieved its
independence. The United States, this hemisphere's oldest
democracy, is pleased and proud to welcome Antigua and
Barbuda, the newest, as the one hundred and fifty-seventh
Member of the United Nations. As the host country, as
friends and neighbours, the Government and people of the
United States extend congratulations to the Government
and people of Antigua and Barbuda as they join in the
cause of peace, freedom, justice and respect for human
rights, in this hemisphere and in the world.

printi
histor
Ameri
bount
comm
United
the isl
genera

58.
Antigu
standi
since 1
In that
ing an
tion co
moon
Nation
space

59.

I

curity
tual be
the co
bours.

It
the ran
sphere
of the
Govern
Barbud
freedom
to the
who ha
61.

63.

M

56.

When the Security Council considered the application of Antigua and Barbuda for membership in the
United Nations, the United States' expressed its confidence that this newly independent nation would uphold
the basic principles of the Charter. We feel sure that those
principles will guide Antigua and Barbuda as it assumes
its role in world affairs, both within the Caribbean region
and in the United Nations.

wish firs
ulations
represen
tion can
tion it i
inspirati
beginnin
tended
grown fi
plished
onstrate
mous c
pledge t
you disc
ing this

57. My country enjoys an especially warm relationship
with Antigua and Barbuda-one that dates all the way
back to our own early colonial period, when one ·()f our
greatest statesmen, Benjamin Franklin, made the gift of a

64. I al
the coun
Organiza
warm go

9Z7

printing-press to Antigua. And through the years, that
history of friendship and mutual assistance has grown.
Americans have gone to Antigua to enjoy its beauty, its
bounty, its serene life; they have invested in its trade and
commerce, and in business opportunities there. In -1967i a
.United States Peace Corps contingent was established in
the island and, in May 1980, we opened our consulategeneral.
58. Along with our private and diplomatic presence in
Antigua and Barbuda, we also note with pride a longstanding, mutually beneficial security relationship and,
since 1967, an important partnership in space exploration.
In that year, a United States Air Force space-vehicle tracing and communications station was constructed; that station contributed substantially to the success of the Apollo
moon missions and it continues to provide support for the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration [NASA]
space projects.
59. In all of those ways-the ways of peace and security-our two nations have worked together to our mutual benefit, towards mut~al goals. We look forward to
the continuation of that partnership of friends and neighbours.
60. Antigua and Barbuda will, we are certain, fulfil all
of the duties and obligations of United Nations membership-even as it is dedicated to all of the fundamental
principles of freedom, justice, and self-determination.
Those are the principles it reaffirms today through its
membership in this forum of nations and its adherence to
the Charter.
61. It is always a special pleasure for my country when
the ranks of the democracies increase, in our own hemisphere and around the world. The Government and people
of the United States extend warm congratulations to the
Government and people of an independent Antigua and
Barbuda-and the warm embrace of our fellowship in
freedom. We extend also a warm and personal welcome
to the distinguished representatives of that new nation
who have joined us today in this chamber.
62. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now hear a
statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Antigua and Barbuda, Mr. Lester B. Bird.
63. Mr. BIRD (Antigua and Barbuda): Mr. President, I
wish first to extend to you and the people of Iraq congratulations on your election as President of the Assembly. As
representatives of a small third-world country, my delegation cannot but be delighted that as we join the Organization it is you who serve as President. Your career is an
inspiration to my country, for it has proved that a humble
beginning is no impediment to success provided it is attended by hard work and determination. As you have
grown from modest beginnings to become an accomplished diplomat, so too my small country hopes to demonstrate its capacity to cope successfully with the enormous challenges of the international environment. I
pledge to you my delegation's wholehearted support as
you discharge the high responsibilities of your office during this thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly.
64. I also wish to record my country's deep gratitude to
the countries which have sponsored our admission to the
Organization and to those which have expressed such
warm good wishes.

65. I represent a people living in the reality of underdevelopment. I stand before you as a representative of the
wretchedness that is the residue of colonialism, a
wretchedness which includes unemployment ~d underemployment, inadequate housing and insufficient medical
facilities.
.
66. And yet, despite our condition, my people are part
of mankind's universal relationship; by our verY<f~i~tellce
we are intertwined in the destiny of all humanity. In that
sense, regardless of the wealth of some men,· mankind
will never be rich while we remain disinherited, dislocated and disenchanted.
67. My country, Antigua and Barbuda, is a small State.
We have no military muscle and would want none; we
have no quarrels with neighbours or nations further afield
and we would wish to keep it so. Our most earnest desire
is a world secure in peace and stability; a world where
man fulfils his obligation to the survival of his fellow
man above the narrow concerns of ideology, above racial
prejudicr; and above religious bigotry.
68. I am pleased that although our desire may appear to
be idealistic, although it may sound lofty and ethereal, we
are not alone in that desire. The Charter of the United
Nations itself affirms the faith of all our peoples in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the
human person, in the equal rights of men and women and
of nations large and small. In that Charter the peoples of
the world have a sacred bond. We place the greatest value
and highest importance on that bond, tor had we not, we
would have chosen to remain outside of this body.
69. It is regrettable that the bond is jeopardized by lack
of commitment to the spirit of the Charter by some States
which behave as if the rule of law in international affairs
is prescribed only for those too naive to recognize the
realities of power. Large groups of people the world over
are becoming cynical about much of the work of the Assembly. The rhetoric is in danger of becoming hollow and
the pledges empty, for the measure of commitment to a
world where economic and social justice prevails is no
longer the statements of statesmen but the actions of their
Governments.
70. .Yet, for small nations such as my own the Qrganization represents mankind's single most import.ant ;foo,{!'D
for dialogue and discussion. Indeed, if theteweierjo
United Nations, there would be no place in which ,the
concerns of small nations could be expressed to large and
powerful countries. There would be no dialogue, but dictation; no discussion, but direction; no negotiation, but
instruction. Such a situation -would bring the worlc,l to
grave conflict. For if rationality is saCrificed for autocracy, reason wil! be replaced by resistance. Two worl4s
would then exist, one with the resources to sustain fua)1kind's livelihood and another with the resources to destrOy
mankind in pursuit of those resourCes. No n~tion, lain
sure, would wish to see the world thus divided. No Oovernment would wish to face the disastrous consequen~~s
of such action. As you, Mr. President, observed upOn
your election at this thirty-sixth session,
"The General Assembly is not in need of new resolutions but rather a commitment to the resolutions it has
already adopted and to the implementatio~ .~(fI1Q$~ ~~­
olutions by translating them into c6ncre'te aqiuality,
thereby contributing to the principles and purposei of
the United Nations." list meeting.par4. 60.]
_.

General Asserobly-Thirty-sixth. Session;,' J>!elisry Meetings

71. I shQqld be remiss if on the first occasion that rpy
country had the honour to address the Assembly I did not
nation to upholding and advancing the principledge
p1e~9f th~ ~~!U1~r. ~ should be equally remiss if I did not
on beJ1alLof the' wqrld's' ne~est nation call upon all others, rich and poor, powerful and weak, to recommit themselves to the spirit of the Charter in the name of all mankind.

my.

72. My ,~ountrY d.evot~s great efforts to strengthening
economic integration in the Caribbean. Equally we. place
much emphasis on deepening areas of co-operation with
sister States in the Caribbean Community. In so doing we
are not attempting to create a power bloc against the rest
of the world. Rather, we are building a bridge that will
permit discussion with larger States on a more equitable
footing.
73. As we have embraced our Caribbean neighbours in
the past, we hope to embrace our sisters and brothers in
Latin America in the future. We are of the same region,
though artificial barriers created by history's competing
colonial Powers have hitherto separated us. It is our hope
that through co-operation with our Latin American family
yet another bridge to dialogue with larger States will be
built.
74. Such dialogue is now of critical importance within
the General Assembly itself, for although groups of nations can advance the framework for international discussion, they can neither negotiate nor decide for others. It is
the universal participation in the international decisionmaking process within the United Nations that makes this
body so fundamental to mankind's future.
75. No industrialized country, whether or not it sits as a
permanent member of the Security Council with a right to
veto, can make' fundamental decisions for the rest of the
world. Some of us are developing Stat.~s, but we too are
part of the rich tapestry of human endeavour. We too have
a right to be heard. And in the final analysis we represent
the majority of the world's people, who are the markets
for the. production of the rich. If we cease to be markets,
the rich would cease to be rich. For their economies
would recede so quickly that stability would be rocked
beyond recovery, and the gap that would be created could
not be filled by direct trading among themselves.

76; I am aware that, conversely, it will be argued that
the poor would also suffer. But we should bear in mind
that it is far easier for the man who knows suffering to
endure it than for the man who knows no suffering at all.
In that context, last month's summit meeting in Cancun,
represented ~ beaCon of hope to developing States adrift
in the stormy sea of economic difficulties. It should also
be seen as an opportunity for economic stability by the
industrialized States. It is a matter of renewed hope and
great relief that the summit appears to have cleared the
way for" global negotiations within this body on the
world's economic issues.' At last there appears to be wider
consensus on the need for such negotiations, which were
urged by the non-aligned movement, the Group of 77, the
Brandt Commission and the Commonwealth heads of
Government.
77. My delegation warmly applauds the breakthrough
'Ylt!ch has .Ie~.topre~~tions for a.round ~f global neg<;>~Iatlons, for we are victims of the mternatlonal economic
en"irtnlment, which as it currently exists offers little hope
of the accelerated development we urgently require. .

78. The World Bank's development report for 1981 eloquently describes the condition of countries such as mine.
Witli compelling frankness the report states that developing countries face the 1980s with no sign of change in
either their trade or their aid prospects; that the world will
be divided more sharply between the haves and the havenots; that burdensome interest rates place borrowing beyond the reach of poor States; and that in 18 years' time
the world population, which stood at 4 billion in 1975,
will reach 6 billion.

86.
try. W,
the po
ever;
bate.
which
partici
nity,
Presid
ask w
resolv
tion a
ment
advanc
we are
guide

79. The scenario is disturbing, for it portends an unstable world in which nations may once again be set at each
other's throats in pursuit of national self-interest. As the
World Bank report concludes, this scenario painfully exposes any residual belief that industrialized countries can
somehow immunize themselves from the problems of the
poor.
80. The interdependence between North and South
stares us inescapably in the face. Anyone who now refuses to acknowledge the interdependent nature of the international environment is simply courting a grave disturbance of global peace and security. The economic
condition of the world demands an urgent response, particularly from those with the economic and political
power to effect change.
81. Antigua and Barbuda is but a speck in the ocean, a
dot on the world map. But if the contribution of a smaiI
section of mankind makes any difference to the prospects
for all of mankind, then my country may be counted on
fully to participate in the creation of a world built on social justice and economic co-operation from which all can
benefit.

88. T
legitim
not onl
tary att
nous t
rious i
matters
of all

82.. I am loath to sound a distasteful and discordant note
in the pleasantness and warmth extended to my country
by the Assembly, but the subject to which I now turn,
itself sounds a distasteful and discordant note in the harmony of mankind's search for justice and equality. The
subject is South Africa.

g9. T
in this
sion. 11
nuclear
and a n

83. In discussing the condition of the world, my delegation cannot but express our abhorrence of the system of
apartheid practised in South Africa. For the Government
of that country has challenged the basic precepts on
which the Organization is founded by attempting to make
its vice of racism a virtue. Not content with the oppression of the majority of people within its own borders, the
South African Government has threatened and violated the
territorial integrity of States in southern Africa.

90. A
made a
highest
July, af
bourg, 1
had bee
Four m
part in
adoptio
ord. Su
at the t
IAEA i
explana
was ad

84. The celebration of my country's independence is·
soured by the oppression of the majority of people in that
country, for how can mankind claim to be free when so
many men remain captive? Indeed, all human achievement is cheapened by the conditions which persist in that
country. My delegation condemns the South African regime and pledges to join with all who would seek to dismantle its system of apartheid.
85. As the newest country to achieve independence,
after three centuries of colonialism, my delegation also
shares the hope of the Assembly that Namibia will proceed to self-determination and independence without further delay. We fully endorse Security Council resolution
435 (1978) and would wish to see its implementation
without modification or dilution as early as possible.

91. T
to the
violatio
intemati
strongly

I

L.

92. Fr
claimed
carried
also ma
and los

53rd meeling~1'1 November 1981

86. We are very conscious of the smallness of our country. We are under no illusions that, on our own, we have
the power to affect world trerids and developments. However; we will not sit on the sidelines of international debate. We intend forcefully to stand up for principles in
which we firmly believe. hi being bold enough to dare
participate in the challenges of the international community, we are inspired by the words of the late Americari
President John F. Kennedy, who said, "Some ask why, I
ask why not". We have asked "why not?" and we have
resolved to participate fully in the work of the Organization and, by so doing, to contribute to our own development and to the promotion of the economic and social
advancement of all peoples. That is the resolve to which
we are firmly committed; that is the resolve which will
guide our conduct.

AGENDA ITEM 130
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave con§equences for the
established international §ystem concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons and international
peace and security (continued)
87. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the IQ member States of
the European Community.
88. The subject of this debate is a matter of deep and
legitimate concern to the international community. This is
not only because it involves the consequences of a military attack by one Member State upon another, very serious though these are. But it is also because it has serious implications for international relations in nuclear
matters which affect the development and future security
of all States.
89. The concern of the 10 members of the Community
in this particular incident has been given an extra dimension. Two of our member States were engaged in peaceful
nuclear co-operation with Iraq at the time of the attack
and a national of one of them was killed by the bombing.
90. After the attack, the IO members of the Community
made a joint public declaration of their attitude at the
highest level. The European Council announced on I
July, after the meeting of heads of Government in Luxembourg, their endorsement of resolution 487 (1981), which
had been adopted unanimously by the Security Council.
Four member States of the European Community took
part in the Security Council deba£e which preceded the
adoption of this resolution and placed their views on record. Subsequently, the Community took part in the debate
at the twenty-fifth session of the General Conference of
IAEA in Vienna in September, where it made a common
explanation of vote on resolution GC/(XXV)/RES/38 I that
was adopted there.
9 I. The attitude of the IQ members of the Community
to the attack is plain. They believe that it was a clear
violation of the principles of the Charter and the rules of
international law. They have therefore condemned it
strongly and do so again today.
92. From the beginning, Israel has accepted, indeed
claimed, responsibility for the attack which its aircraft
carried out on Iraq's nuclear installations on 7 June. It has
also made no attempt to deny the very serious damage
and loss of life which resulted from the attack. It has

929

sought instead to justify its action as one of sel~-defence.
It has based this justification on its interpretation of Article 5 I of the Charter, which it' asserts must now, in an
age of nuclear weapons, be interpret~d far more .",ic:le~y· to
allow a pre-emptive strike by one State against what· it
alleges to be the nuclear-weapon development programme
of another, potentially hostile, State. The Community
does not accept this interpretation. Indeed, the dangers of
doing so must, on reflection, be obvious to all pf usincluding, we would have thought, Israel; whose future
security is also at stake.
.
93. By attacking the nuclear facility as it dicJ ~srael has
added a new and dangerous dimension to tb~ cycle of
violence and reprisals, endangering efforts to achieve a
just and comprehensive solution to the Middle East conflict. The i 0 members of the Community are convinced
that the resort to force in the Middle East is self-defeating
because it postpones the day of peace. This applies as
much to Israel's security as to that of the other States and
peoples of the region. The to members have always affirmed, and we reaffirm today, our attachment to Israel's
right to live in peace and security. But this will only be
secured, for this and future generations, by a just and
negotiated settlement of the Middle East conflict. Violence must be halted. With this in mind, the Community
solemnly appeals to Israel to respect its obligations under
the Charter and refrain in the future from any further acts
of this kind and from the threat of such acts. The Community also considers that Iraq is entitled to appropriate
redress for the destruction and loss of life, responsibility
for which has been acknowledged by Israel.
Ms. Gonthier (SevchellesJ, Vice-President, took the
Chair.
.
94. I turn now to the implications of the Israeli attacJe
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and for the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons.
95. In the view of the Community, co-operation in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be carried ou~
within the framework of the internat; onal non-proliferation
regime. The IQ members support and uphold the principles of this regime, in which the safeguards system of
IAEA has a central role.
96. The Community recognizes the right of all States to
establish nuclear programmes aimed at developing their
economies and their industry for peaceful purposes', in accordance with the present and future needs of States and
consistent with the internationally accepted objective. of
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons..Individual members of the Community have given practical
expression to this view through ,their peaceful nuclear co~
operation with other States, including especially a number
of developing countries.
, .'
97. The Director General of IAEA' concluded in 'his
statement of 19 June 1981 at the 2288th meeting of the
Security Council that the Israeli atlack on the Iraqi nuclear installations amounted to an attack on the Agt;:ncy's
safeguards system itself. The Community notes that. Iraq
has been a party to the Treaty on the Non-ProJiferation of
Nuclear Weapons [resolution 2373 (XXI/) annex) since it
came into force in 1970, and that it has accepted Agency
safeguards on all its nuclear activities. The Director Get:teral of IAEA has stated that all the fa:cilities and fuel af
T~muz were covered by Agericy s'afeguardsiria2co(4~~~~1
with the safeguards agreement between Iraq' and the
Agency; that those safeguards had been satisfactorily ap-

I:

i'
L.

930

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth. Session":"Plenary Meetings

plied to aate; and th~t, during the last safeguards inspection in January of this year. all nuclear material was satis.factorily accounted for. In these circllmstances. the
Community felt bound to share Mr. Eklund's concern at
this attack on the IAEA safeguards regime. At the same
time. they reiterate their sl,Ipport for the Agency's safeguards system and their confidence in its. efficacy as a
reliable means of verifying the peaceful use of a nuclear
facility.
98. It has been widely noted that, while Iraq adheres to
the Non-Proliferation Treaty and accepts the application of
IAEA safeguards to all its nuclear activities, Israel does
neither. The members of the Community are concerned at
the awesome threat which the development of nuclear
weapons by the countries of the Middle East could pose
to peace in the region and elsewhere, particularly at a
time when no comprehensive and lasting peace settlement
has been achieved. They earnestly entreat all the countries
of the region. including Israel, to refrain from any action
which might serve to increase this danger. They express
the hope that those countries in the region that have not
already done so will accede to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and submit all their nuclear facilities to IAEA safeguards. as the best way of encouraging the development
of mutual trust anc confidence.

99.

Many of these matters have already been discussed
at the General Conference of IAEA in Vienna in September. The Community felt bound for reasons which it explained at the time to abstain on the resolution which was
adopted at that Conference. They had wished instead to
see a solemn warning to Israel that any repetition of similar action on its part would have serious consequences for
its position in the Agency, coupled with a call to Israel to
refrain from any further action inconsistent with the objectives of the Agency. They also agreed that the Board of
Governors of IAEA should be requested not to consider
the provision of any further technical assistance to Israel
for the time being, and at the same time should be requested to examine urgently ways of increasing the provision of technical assistance to Iraq.

100. . I trust that what I have said has made clear the
deep concern and careful deliberation with which the
Community has approached the issue of the Israeli attack.
I have also made clear the very serious consequences
which the Community believes to have resulted from a
premeditated use of force of this kind. We believe that it
is of vital importance that there should be no repetition of
such action by Israel or any other country,
101. The international community must show in its
statements and in its votes that it strongly condemns such
action. It should do so by endorsing in full the views and
recommendations contained in Security Council resolution
487 (1981). Indeed. the Community believes that this resolution, which was unanimously adopted by the Council,
provides the principles for any General Assembly resolution on this item. The General Assembly should take this
opportunity to restate the vital importance for all countries of refraining from any act of violence which might '
escalate tensions in the region. Let us also redouble our
efforts to promote the cause of moderation and to work
towards the just and comprehensive peace settlement
which is' so urgently required in the Middle East.
102. Mr, NUSEIBEH (Jordan): The question we are discussing today is so momentous in its ramifications, so
fraught .with incalculable consequences, ·sobrazen an aggression, not only against Iraq but against the very foun-

dations of the United Nations, that no language or formulation can adequately portray its implications for the
future peace and security of the world.

tho
the
nen

are
103. The Israeli sneak attack of 7 June 1981 against the
Osh ak nuclear research site in Baghdad has shocked the
entire world and a sense of outrage and apprehension has
reverberated in every corner of the globe. The Security
Council, fully conscious of its profound impact upon the
ability to survive an international order governed by international law, solemn conventions and the Charter of the
United Nations, condemned that mendacious and unprecedented Israeli aggression and warned against its repetition.
104. In retrospect, in my humble opinion the Security
Council was duty-bound under the Charter to respond
more forcefully to that warlike act by imposing the sanctions provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter. That
it failed to do so, under the compulsion of a veto by one
or more of the great Powers, has profoundly undermined
the sense of security not only in the Middle East but in
the ~orld at large. It has set a dangerous precedent which
will not be lost on all nations throughout the world.

105. Aggressive and expansionist Israel, whose concept
of self-defence is predicated on the wilful destruction of
peoples and countries regardless of distances and boundaries and without even a semblance of a concrete and tangible pretext, lost no time in responding to Security
Council resolution 487 (1981) with a blatant and undisguised challenge. Not only did it declare its self-annointed right to have destroyed, on 7 June 1981, the Osirak nuclear research cenlre in Baghdad, devoted solely to
peaceful purposes and under the continuous supervision
and inspection of IAEA, but it added a new dimension to
its policy of aggrandizement and hegemony by publicly
arrogating unto itself the right to destroy any rebuilt
peaceful nuclear research facilities. not only in Iraq but
throughout the region and beyond.
106 Unlike Iraq. which has signed dnd ratified the
Non-Proliferation Treaty in good ·faith and has subjected
its facilities to close international inspection and scrutiny,
Israel, which has adamantly and persistently refused to
adhere to the Treaty, has dealt it a fatal blow, the extent of
which only time will reveal.
107. It has placed the bulk of humanity in a totally unacceptable, untenable and unparalleled predicament and
danger. What the Israeli doctrine is-a doctrine no doubt
shared in theory and in practice by racist South Africawe hear loud and clear: the message to their potential
victims is, ··Stop your progress in the sciences, in the
humanities. even in economic development. chemistry. biology and all other fields of knowledge-or else". And
what is that Israeli "or else",? Those hate-mongers and
emotionally infantile Israeli aggressors will have no compunction whatsoever about annihilating other peoples.
using their atomic arsenals. which are sustained and augmented substantially, technologically, financially and in
materiel. by sectors in the United States working clandestinely on behalf of interests at variance with the official policy and the national interests of the country to
which they belong. The visits of the formidable scientists
of that great Power have over the past decades become so
routine in their itineraries that in most instances they have
hardly qualified as news tit to print.
108. Hardly ever has the question been asked, at .what
price? Permissiveness and favouritism are a prerogative of

can,
Afri
their
hum
othe
to
whe
pedo
num
whel
.!:'~g~

tbe

Y~t t

the
math
whic
great
and
optio
politi
nuele
he di
ing
lands.
wisd
tingui
Dean
cause
"The
ficulti
contin
have t
throu
aid to
to sta
which
assess
dange
scious
ergy
means
enrich
which
of the
Pershi
policy

Ill.
madne
shado
to its
legitim
mankin
small
menaci

S3rd meeling -ll November 1981

those who practise them-a fter all, beauty is in the eye of
the behold er-exce pt when they pose a present anc! imminent danger to whole nations, which is what the case we
are discussing today is all about.
109. The principal casualty of Israel's act of' aggression
against Osirak is the sanctity of the Non-Proliferation
Treaty itself. The Treaty specifically recognizes the incontrovertible and undisputed right of every State to pursue and develop its programmes in the application of r.uclear energy for peaceful purposes, as a concomitant of
its agreement to forgo the option of converting its capabilities into lethal weaponry.
110. The questions which the General Assembly should
address and resolve are the following. First, should, or
can, obsessed and lawless countries like Israel and South
AfrIca hold the great bulk of humanity hostage and link
their deranged concept of security with the cessation of
humankind's inexorable progress in the sciences and in
other fields of knowledge? Secondly, what should be done
to restore the credibility <;>f the Non-Proliferation Treaty
when its very foundations have been weakened and torpedoed at the whim of a recalcitrant Israel? Thirdly, the
numerous non-atomic States- and, indeed, the overwhelming majority of mankin d-have made incessant
.!:'~gentJ~~f~r 'pr~ctical and. effective guar~I!tees from
the major Powers against nuclear threats and blackmail.
Yoet the vast majority of Member States that have signed
the Non-Proliferation Treaty find themselves, in the aftermath of Israel's aggression, threatened and blackmailed,
which places their progress and even their survival in the
greatest jeopardy. Can any nation tolerate such imminent
and present danger without resorting to some other
option or options? The late General Dayan told a closed
political forum last summer that Israel might consider the
nuclear option. Why? Because of the ~,ms race. Indeed,
he did consider it in the 1973 war when Israel was suffering military reverses on the battlefields in occupied Arab
lands. Fourthly, the General Assembly might, in its
wisdom, give serious consideration to what a distinguished former United States Secretary of State, Mr.
Dean Rusk, declared in 1968. I quote what he said because of its relevance and its considerable importance:
"The spread of nuclear weapons would aggravate our difficulties in m",intaining friendly relations with parties to a
continuing dispute. If one party 'went nuclear' we might
have to decide whether to help the other party, directly or
through security assurances, whether to sever economic
aid to the country acquiring atomic weapons, or whether
to stand aside, even though the result might be a war
which would be hard to contain." That is a very wise
assessment by a statesman who recognized the inherent
dangers of nuclear adventurism by a State which has consciously, since the 1950s, when it formed its Atomic Energy Commission, worked assiduously to acquire, by fair
means or foul, including theft, substantial quantities of
enriched nuclear ingredients, technological know-how
which is presumed to be highly classified, and also some
of the most advanced systems of delivery, such as the
Pershing missile launchers, for use as an instrument of a
policy of expansion anJ aggression.
11 I. We are all agreed that nuclear weaponry is suicidal
madness, and yet we in our region have been living in the
shadow of this awesome insanity without any deterrence
to its unfolding. Condemnations can hardly assuage the
legitimate apprehensions of the non-atomic majority of
mankind. It is the responsibility of all nations, big and
small alike, to make a reappraisal of the totally new and
menacing situation created by Israel's aggression against

931

Osirak, against' the Non-Proliferation Treaty and, above
all, against world peace, security and orderly progress,
and to come up with appropriate remedies.
112. I might mention in passing that I was very, very
amused, as, I am sure, virtually the representatives of all
Member States were also amused, by the Israeli· Ambassador's statement this morning, in which he alleged that
the Middle East has become a safer place to live in since
the Israeli attack on Baghdad. But, while amused, I present to the Member States his statement :.S further evidence, if any were needed, of Israel's self-centered, egoistic and exclusivist vision of the world. What Israel is
telling all of us is that Israel and Israel alone matters in
this world. It foJlows that it alone should have a monopoly of atomic weapons of destruction and armed deterrence, unlike other universal doctrines of mutual deterrence- or whatever else it may b~ called, such as
"equivalent deterrence" -and, simultaneously, continue
to pursue its reprehensible policies of expansion, aggression and colonization and its adamant refusal to countenance any plan for a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East-a nd, when I say a "just, comprehensive and lasting peal:e "-I mean a meaningful
peace and not the peace of the grave; one can bury a
country, but that is not peace- which would restore the
usurped inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
1I3. The Israelis openly declare and boast to our suffering population under occupation that, with their acquisition of nuclear power, they can continue to defy and ignore all imperatives of international law, justice and
international resolutions. This is not only stated anC: discussed in institutes for strategic studies; it is the kind of
thing that mayors say to each other and that common people talk about; it is an open secret.
114. I can only describe this deranged perspective as
myopic and dangerous. No power on earth can prediCate
its policies on locking up the God-given minds of humankind and thwarting its progress for any but the briefest
time. The Israelis are evidently and callously playing with
fire, which wiII engulf the region and beyond and, surely
enough, their own people as well. Perhaps they should
pay some heed to this banal and trifling fact.
lIS. The Israeli Ambassador's claim that Israel has always supported non-proliferation is not only a blatant distortion -and I have been attending meetings of the First
Committee for years- but, equally importantly, a contradiction in terms. How can a country which has embraced
the doctrine of the nuclear option consciously and openly
allow itself to talk about non-proliferation, unless it
means by that, as it does, a monopoly of this worldthreatening weapon of destruction, without any deterrence
and to the exclusion of other nations? The Israeli representative's sham talk about a nuclear-free zone is equally
contradictory and deceptive. How can any region have or
claim to have a nuclear-weapon-free zone when one country in its midst is already nuclear and has continually refuseci and continues to refuse to adhere to the only multInational Treaty in existence to prevent proliferation,
namely, the Non-Proliferation Treaty?
116. Mr. EL-FATTAL (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): The delegation of the Syrip,;n Arab
Republic is taking part in the debate on this important
item of the agenda in order to reaffirm that Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear reacto r-a' reactor' which
was devoted exclusively to peaceful purposes and recognized as such by IAEA and all States, except Israel and

lilrr··

I£C:.".
..

932

_II:iill_Ii

..

....__.

..I IlI lI

117. The United States is implementing that plan as an
attempt to realize what it terms "strategic compatibility",
on the one hand, 'and its strategic alliance with Israel, on
the other. That attempt has been condemned by the peoples of our region as well as by non-aligned peoples and
all countries which, on the basis of their historical experience, are aware of the dimensions of that conspiracy
being waged against our peoples, their natural resources
and their strategic positions and of what that conspiracy
represents as a threat to international peace and security.
118. Suffice it to recall here the various 'lcts of aggression committed by Israel against Lebanon and Palestinian
refugee camps and the various threats against the Syrian
Arab Republic, all of which are accomplished and executed within the framework of the dark designs to which
I have referred.
119. Furthermore, military aggression agains~ the Iraqi
reactor is part of the American-Israeli unbridled efforts
aimed at preventing the Arab peoples from exercising
their natural and positive rights to achieve economic and
social progress OT. the basis of their human, material and
cultural resources which enable them to emerge from the
ullderdevelopment imposed upon them by classical colonialism and American imperialism and to follow the path
of progress so that their countries may strengthen their
national independence through their economic, technical
and cultural potential.
120. This item appears on the agenda })e('ause of the
Security Council's failure to condemn Israeli aggression
under Cha.,ter VII of the Charter. That failure was the
result of pressure by the United States, which enabled Israel to escape even a modicum of sanctions, which would
ha~c had to be imposed on the Zionist entity to deter it
from repeating such acts of aggression against peaceful
Arab nuclear enterprises. In furtherance of its dreams of
colonialism, Israel will continue to act against the potential of our peoples.

:

Jt,

.,

~

-

...__-.__

_-1III

• •!lllIl!lIIII!. .

t<!lii\l~

Genend Assembly-Thlrty-slxtb sesslon'-P1e!lary Meetings

the United States-is quite obviously part of the global
plan of aggression, the details and practical application of
wHich have become well known ever since it occurred
earlier this year. That plan, which is aimed at achieving
.he dark designs of American imperi~ . 'm and those of
zionism in the Arab region, calls for ute direct domination of Arab countries.

<.~

....__

i21. Israel justifies sllr.h an act of aggression on the
basis of an argument that is logically, politically and
legally false-that of self-defence under Article 51 of
the Charter. We deplore the fact that the United States
recognized that aggressive theory by Israel, which found
expression in the pre-emptive blows, or the pre-emptive
"self-defence", when the United States lifted the ban on
the shipment of military aircraft to Israel only a few days
after the Security Council had acted to condemn the Israeli action-but not the aggression, as it had been requested to do. The United States of America bears full
responsibility for all the acts of terrorism and'tggress;.!n
by Israel, including this attack on the reactor, because of
the alliance of the United States with the Zionist entity
and because of the identity b2tween American interests
and the expansionist interests of the Zionist entity, which
occupies Palestine and other Arab territories and exercises
a settler colonialism that is no less aggressive so far as
the rights of the indigenous inhabitants are concerned lhan
is the settler colonialism exercised in South Africa and
Namibia.
.

122. The delivery to Israel of sophisticated weapotls,
the limitless flow of funds and technology into Israel, the
fact that the United States at the same time strengthens
Israel's policy of aggression against Arab countries-all
this is proof that Washington has decided to be Tel Aviv's
partner against our Arab nation. That development imposes on the American people the fact of their being the
enemy of the Arab people. It seems to us that the United
States Administration has forgotten the lessons learned by
the American people after the aggression against Viet
Nam, because now that Administration is doing everything possible to lead its people into a new Viet Nam.
123. The General Assembly is called upon to fill the
gap in Security Council resolution 487 (1981) about Israeli military acts which led to the destruction of the reactor. We request the General Assembly to adopt a resolution condemning Israeli aggression and repeated acts
against the peoples of the region, and placing the attack
ou the reactor within the framework of official acts of
terrorism committed by Israel against Arab peoples. The
attack on the reactor is nothing more than an exacerbation
of Israeli terrorism. We also ask the General Assembly to
condemn the United States, which, despite all the dangerous developments, continues to provide the Zionist entity with instruments of destruction as part of its strategic
alliance. This threatens international peace and security.
We also call upon Member States to sever all relations
with !srael as a means of halting Israeli aggression, which
continues against our region and our peoples. The General Assembly should ask the Security Council to impose
mandatory sanctions on Israel under Chapter VII of the
Charter.
124. The resolution which will emerge from the Assembly should call upon Israel to place all its nuclear installations and laboratories under international control and
~upervision. Israel should immediately adhere to the NonProliferation Treaty, without reservations and unconditionally, and all Member States should refrain from
providing Israel with technology and fuel until it adheres
to the Treaty. In that context. the resolution should openly
condemn nuclear co-operation between South Africa and
Israel.
125. In conclusion, we should like to warn the United
States about its continuing to be the ally of our enemy,
Israel. We think that the Arab peoples cannot recognize
that Washington has legitimate interests. so long as the
United States has noi: recognized our national rights and,
first and forer..Dst, the need for a complete and uncond i
tional Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories, the return of the Palestinian people to their home,
from which they well~ expelled by force and terrorism in
1948, and the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State without foreign interference, under the leadership of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLOI.
126. The implementation of the General Assembly resolution, in addition to the implementation of all other relev?-.· resolutions, whether adopted by the United Nations
or ay specialized agencies, will be proof of the political
will of States 10 deter Israel from committing similar acts
against any other country, bearing in mind that it has declared officially, and with arrogance, its determination to
destroy any establishment which may constitute a danger
to its colonial and expansionist interests,
127. My country's delegation does not believe that any
responsible State-I emphasize "responsible"-could remain sHem in the face of this flagrant act of aggression.

That is
curity
halt su
to cata
128.
nese):

on Ira
gressio
which
Nation.
aggrav
ernmen
crimina
129.
eral ot
tion an
also pu
tions b
firm su

130. I
no way
the 30launche
Arab c
placing
heavy I
support
authorif
people'
of aggr
cupies t
armed i
tack on
recent a
opportu
tion in
13L I
resorted
Iraq wa
stallatio
weapons
thus inte
defence.
for year
threat"
emptive
their sec
the Cha
rael's ac
other th
curity in
132. In
curity C
condemn
tionalla
had don
respoilde
more un
to imple
sovereign
right and
for justic
to force
and sane
tional su
the reque

_______________

53rd .nee~irjl;

. _ - ' - ' - _ - - C . ~

That is why we expect the General Assembly al:~ the {'
curity Council to act at the same time to deter Israel, ,0
halt such acts, so that that c(.untry may not lead the world
to catastrophe.
128. Mr. LIANG Yufan (China) (trans/ation from Chinese): Last June the Israeli authorities launched an air raid
on Iraqi nuclear installations. Israel's blatant armed aggression against a sovereign country constitutes an act
which seriously violates the Charter of the United
Nations, tramples on the norms of international law and
aggravates tension in the Middle East. The Chinese Government and people oppose and strongly condemn this
criminal act of aggression by Israel.
129. At this meeting the representatives of Iraq and several other countries made eloquent statements in accusation and condemnation of Israel's act of aggression. They
also put forward the reasonable demand that necessary actions be taken against the aggressor. This demand has our
firm support.
130. Israel's attack on Iraq's nuclear installations is in
no way an isolated event. It is a well-known fact that in
the 30-odd years since the Second World War Israel has
launched four successive wars of aggression against the
Arab countries, seriously threatening their security, displacing the Arab and Palestinian people and causing
heavy loss to them in human life and property. With the
support and encouragement of a super-Power, the Israeli
authorities have obstinately held the Arab and Palestinian
people in hostility, going farther and farther on the road
of aggression and expansion. To this day Israel still occupies the Palestinians' homeland and continuously wages
armed invasions against neighbouring countries. The attack on the Iraqi nuclear installations was one of its most
recent aggressive moves. Such a move also provided the
opportunity and created the condition for further intervention in this region by the super-Powers.
131. In order to cover up its crime of aggression, Israel
resorted to fabricating various pretexts. Israel alleged that
Iraq was hostile to it, insisting that the Iraqi nuclear installations served the purpose of manufacturing nuclear
weapons which "threatened" the "security" of Israel,
thus interpreting its own aggressive acts as legitimate selfdefence. This is nothing but the aggressor's logic which
for years has dictated Israel's conduct. With "outside
threat" as an excuse, Israel has wilfully launched preemptive attacks on neighbouring countries, undermining
their security and peace in the Middle East and violating
rhe Charter and the norms of international relations. Israel's act has once again demonstrated that it was none
other than Israel itself which undermined peace and security in the Middle East.
132. In reaction to this grave incident in June, the Security Council acopted resolution 487 (1981), strongly
condemning Israel's violation of the Cha: . - and international law and calling upon Israel to redres~ (he damage it
had done to the victim of its aggression, Iraq. 'But Israel
respollded to world public opinion with defiance and
more unwarranted pretexts arbitrarily to justify its refusal
to implement the Security Council resolution. Iraq, as a
sovereign State and the victim of aggression, has every
right and reason to appeal to the international community
for justice and for opposition to such aggression in order
to force the aggressor to submit to international rulings
and sanctions. This is an appeal that deserves international support. The Chinese delegation firmly supports
the request made by Iraq and other States to consider the

n~'

..:.:'--'---'-'1lh,,~r
1981

----.:=_==.
933

,Ho01 "Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installation and its grave consequences for the established
international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security" at this session of the
General Assembly.

133. The Chinese Government and people resolutely oppose the criminal act of aggression perpetrated by Israeli
expansionists. We firmly support the just struggle of Iraq
and other Arab States in defence of their national rights.
We firmly support the struggle of the Palestinian people
to restore their national rights, including the right to establish their own State. We have consistently held that it
is the inalienable right of all countries and people to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. This naturally applies to the Iraqi Government and people.
134. We are, however, firmly against the clandestine development of nuclear weapons by Israel, which is a constant menace to neighbouring States and a serious threat
to peace and security in the Middle East and the world.
The Chinese delegation lends firm support to the relevant
draft resolution submitted by Iraq and other States [A/36/
L.14], and we hope to see it adopted by the General Assembly.
135. Mr. GOLOB (Yugoslavia): Instead of engaging together in a quest for peace and co-operation, we in the
General Assembly have recently been forced to consider
the ever more frequent use of force, aggression, interference, intervention in the internal affairs of other States
and various other forms of illegal behaviour. Regrettably,
this is the characteristic of the present situation, and the
policy and conduct of Israel lend a specific dimension to
this state of affairs.
136. This time, we are considering an act of aggression
by Israel and its grave consequences for the established
international system concerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
international peace and security. There can be no justification whatsoever for the raid on the Iraqi nuclear facilities. It caused losses of human life and great material destruction. That attack is a flagrant manifestation of the use
of military power and force.
137 ... Iraq-and any other country---has a sovereign
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. That
right is an inalienable one, and this ought to be confirmed
at the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of
International Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear
Energy, to be held in 1983 and for which preparations are
under way.
138. The nuclear installations in Baghdad were constructed to serve the development and prosperity of Iraq
and its people and did not pose a threat to anyone's security. They were the result of the endeavours of the people of Iraq to move forward faster along the road of development and to break the bonds of economic and
technological colonialism.
139. Iraq has ratified the Non-Proliferation Treaty and
has consistently adhered to its provisions. This has been
clearly and unambiguously confirmed by IAEA. The construction of the nuclear facilities was carried out in full
accordance with the international system of nuclear safeguards. Iraq has met all the reql1irements of this system.

.:. .934:.. :. .

G::.·c:.:n.:.:c.:.;ra:.:l. Asscmbly-Thirty-sixth Scssilln':""Plcnar) MeclinRs

140. Israel, on the other hand, has not signed the NonProliferation Treaty and does not adhere to the international nuclear safeguards system. Its nuclear installations
are built outside any international control and there remains no doubt that it is capable of producing nuclear
weapons. In a report submitted under item 56 the Group
of Experts to Prepare a Study on Israeli Nuclear Armament stated that Israel has enough material and know-how
to produce. if it has not already done so. nuclear weapons
in a very short period of time Is('(' A/36/43/. para. 821.
14 I. Israel takes it upon itself to be the paramount
judge and enforcer of how and to what limits a neighbouring or some other State should peacefully develop. Such
behaviour by any member of the international community
should be condemned and checked. otherwise mankind
may soon find itself on the threshold of its own destruction.
142. Israel has attempted to justify its onslaught on Iraq
by the right to self-defence under the provisions of the
Charter. This is unacceptable and dangerous logic. It is
dangerous for all countries including Israel itself. The international community cannot accept such logic, since if
it did so it would become the accomplice of aggression
and would legalize lawlessness and anarchy. The Charter
is precise and clear: the right to self-defence can be exercised only "if an armed attack occurs against a Member
of the United Nations". The interpretation of the Charter
cannot depend on momentary needs and interests. Article
51 of the Charter does not leave room for arbitrary interpretations that would justify the use of force and m~e
"might makes right" the supreme law.
143. It is evident that Israel was not attacked, nor was it
threatened by the Iraqi nuclear installations. The attack on
Iraq was part and parcel of its policy of fait accompli.
occupation' and domination of its Arab neighbours.

144. Proceeding from the principles' and policy of nonalignment, Yugoslavia has never and will never accept or
approve of aggression, intervention, interference or any
other form of use of force in international relations, for
any reason or under any pretext whatsoever. Once again,
we cannot but express our concern over and condemnation
of the Israeli attack on Iraq. Immediately after the attack
on the Iraqi nuclear facilities the Government of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia issued a statement
in which, inter alia. it stressed that this was an "act of
State terrorism and most flagrant violation of the principle
of sovereignty in international relations" . Further, it
pointed out that "Israel again resorted to brutal use of
force with a view to spreading the flames of war in the
Middle East and exacerbating the crisis in that region.
With its latest armed aggression it has extended the area
of its intervention and onslaught on the freedom of the
peoples and countries in that region".
145. The Security Council and the international community condemned the attack and, as on other occasions,
Israel was called upon to respect international law and to
refrain from acts of aggression. The aggressive behaviour
of Israel cannot be condoned by anyone any longer. The
danger of such behaviour is becoming evident even to its
friends. However, it continues to turn a deaf ear to all
decisions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. The General Assembly. as well as the Security Council, should consider comprehensively the crisis in the
Middle East and recommend measures leading to its just
and lasting solution. This means the solution of the Palestinian problem through the exercise by the Palestinian

people of its inalienable right to sell~Jelel1nination. including the right to its own State. the withdrawal of Israel
from the territories occupied in the war of 1967. and the
provision of guarantees of equal security for all countries
and peoples in the region. Only on the basis 'of such a
solution can peace in the Middle East be achieved.
146. It is necessary to adopt measures with a view to
providing compensation for the damage caused by the attack on the Iraqi nuclear installations. Also. it is high
time. in our opinion. to put an end to the supply of arms
to Israel, which is enabling it permanently to jeopardize
the sovereignty. territorial integrity. independence and
freedom of countries in he Middle East.
147. No State can secure its own safety without r.:specting the safety of others. in the first place that of its neighbours. Security cannot for ever be founded on power and
might. Any policy of re 1i1nce on force and aggression is
short-sighted. Although it may provide temporary benefits
it always turns against its proponents in the end. History
clearly shows that nothing of lasting value can be. or was
ever. achieved by force.
148. The Arab States. and the PLO have given. and arc
giving. examples of a constructive approach to the solution of the Middle East crisis. The time has come for
Israel ro respond to these approaches. to accept reality
and to search, together with the neighbouring countries
and the PLO. for solutions which will create the foundations for stability. security and peace in the Middle East.
149. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey): Turkey has already. on different occasions. expressed its position and views on the
question of Israel's military attack last June on the Iraqi
nuclear installations. We have asked to speak once again
because we believe that the issue is of vital importance,
not only in terms of its impact and consequences for
peace and stability in the region. but also in terms of its
implications for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by
sovereign States.

150. During the consideration of that question in the Security Council, the Turkish delegation 2 made clear our
unconditional disapproval of Israel's premeditated and unjustified aggression against the Iraqi nuclear centre. At
that time we also delineated the reasons behind our condemnation of Israel. We- felt that the action of Israel constituted a serious violation of international law and graveiy endangered peace in the turbulent and fragile region.
We indicated that the self-justification proposed by Israel.
namely, that Israel acted in self-defence under the terms
of Article 51 of the Charter, was unacceptable. We emphasized that no nation, including Israel, had the right to
interfere with the right of other States to engage, under
appropriate international safeguards and in conformity
with the principles of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, in activities for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. We called
on Israel to make prompt and adequate reparation. especially to Iraq. And we concluded our observations in
the Security Council by expressing the hope that the
Council would adopt a resolution commensura~e with the
gravity of the situation.
IS!. The resolution which the Security Council did finally adopt on 19 June 1981 was significant in several
ways. The support it received from members of the Council was unanimous. Moreover, it was Ira.q, the very victim
of the aggression, that was primarily instrumental in the
evolution of the consensus that was eventually fon:ralized
by the Council. All that made resolution 487 (1981) a

product
nity, pu
volved .
tions. I
appropr
key. In
Treaty. (
of Iraq
the pea
and that
be, wit
safegua
should'
guards.
well of
dangers
the caus
to the

152. S
the Mid
ments.
than eve
from all
and whe
temptati
any cas
transforn
l:aining h
deem it
utter dis
resort to
clear ins
to the
and wh
Agency'
titled to
into the
cepts ar
tions and
down in
ties.

153. Isr
(1981). B
the Midd
nian que
basis, th
States in
depth on
later und
say now t
and until
with its
on the n
154. M
tion from
sembly i
importan
indeed it
denials 0
ifies a m
inject int
tional con
firmly.
155. Isr
search ce
tional sys
feeble co

S3rd meeting-i1 November 1981

product of the shared concern of the international community, putting in proper perspective the various issues involved in Israel's military attack on Iraqi nuclear installations. Hence, Security Council resolution 487 (1981)
appropriately embodies some of the main concerns of Turkey. In particular, Turkey, a party to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty, adheres at the same time to the view that the right
of Iraq and all other States to engage in efforts aimed at
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is a sovereign right
and that the only acceptable limitati0n of that right would
be, with respect to its exercise, a limitation in the form of
safeguards as provided by IAEA. We believe that Israel
should also place its nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards. Israel's adamant refusal to do so does not speak
well of its intentions. We are deeply concerned about the
dangers of nuclear proliferation. We are of the view that
the cause of peace would be helped if all nations adhered
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
152. Since the Israeli attack on the Iraqi nuclear centre,
the Middle East has witnessed other dramatic developments. The situation now is more critical and sensitive
than ever, requiring the utmost patience and perseverence
from all parties. In that region, which is highly volatile
and where the road to peace is difficult and arduous, the
temptation to resort to the threat or use of force must in
any case be resisted. Israel appears, however, to have
transformed the temptation to use force into a self-sustaining habit whereby the leaders of Israel, whenever they
deem it necessary in the name of "self-defence" and in
utter disregard of the rights of its neighbours, feel free to
resort to force. If Israel feels justified to destroy the nuclear installations of a country like Iraq, which is a party
to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and a member of IAEA
and whose nuclear programme has been subject to the
Agency's safeguards, what next? Not even Israel is entitled to introduce such a unique concept of self-defence
into the arena of international relations; such novel concepts are totally inconsistent and incompatible with notions and principles relating to legitimate self-defence laid
down in the Charter and established in international treaties.
153. Israel has failed to comply with resolution 487
(1981). But. as Turkey has always unequivocally stated, if
the Middle East problem, the core of which is the Palestinian question, is to be resolved on a just and lasting
basis, the solution must provide for the security of all
States in the region. We shall explain our position in
depth on the question of Palestine and the Middle East
later under the appropriate agenda items. But suffice it to
say now that a lasting solution will not be achieved unless
and until Israel demonstrates its commitment to peace
with its actions and refrains from attacks, among others,
on the nuclear installations of other States in the region.
154. Mr. NGUYEN THUONG (Viet Nam) (interpretation from French): The item now before the General Assembly is, in the eyes of my delegation, one of major
importance, not only because it deals with aggressionindeed it could not be described otherwise, despite the
denials of its perpetrators-but also because that act typifies a mentality and morality which some are trying to
inject into relations between States and which our international community is in duty bound to oppose strongly and
firmly.
155. Israel's act, directed against a peaceful nuclear research centre, is a challenge to the established international system on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The
feeble contentions of the Tel Aviv authorities are a further

-9

935

p
e
tl
p

insult to IAEA-a challenge and an insult which in themselves would deserve to be dealt with severely. However,
something which is even more serious is that this act of
gratuitous aggression is a flagrant violation of the sacred
principles of respect for the independence and sovereignty
of States, and is even more reprehensible since that aggression was coldly calculated and ruthlessly carried out,
and cynically justified with total disregard for the possible
reaction of the international community, thus demonstrating an intolerable arrogance of power and political adventurism devoid of any sense of responsibility for peace and
security in the region and in the rest of the world. Still
worse, the world has been outraged to hear the perpetrators justify the act on the basis of the concept of so-called
prevention and by slanderously accusing the Republic of
Iraq of intending their destruction, thus attempting to revive medieval and colonialist theories that have been rejected once and for all by the international community of
our time.

~

p
c
la
il
si
th
I
0

ill
at
al
ell
in

ell

156. It was therefore with good reason that in its resolution 487 (1981), adopted unanimously on 19 June 1981,
the Security Council strongly condemned "the military
attack by Israel in clear violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international conduct".
It is generally held that this armed aggression by Israel
calls not only for severe condemnation but also for sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. If the Security
Council proved unable to adopt a resolution along those
lines, it was because of the United States threat of the
veto, which once again ensured Israel's impunity and prevented the Council from adopting a resolution that could
and indeed should have been considerably better.

~

St

It
re
is

m
vi
cu
M
di
rei
m
an
the
en
gi(

157. The military, economic and political support of the
United States has encouraged Israel to step up with increased ruthlessness its hostile activities against its Arab
neighbours. Far from acknowledging any responsibility
for his criminal act, the Prime Minister of Israel went as
far as openly to threaten Iraq by claiming that he had the
right to repeat the act of armed aggression against nuclear
installations in that country when and if Israei saw fit.
Thus, in defiance of the Security Council resolution to
which I have referred, the Israeli authorities persist in
their false allegations and their arrogant claims, as shown
by the statement of the Israeli representative this morning.

16
Of(

tra
ag
res
Go
an

of
ex
inc
Ar
gio

158. The Zionists would never have dared thus to escalate their aggressive acts against the Arab countries and
adopt this intolerable attitude towards the international
community if they had not been certain of the unconditional and unfailing support of the new American Administration for their attempt~ at destabilization, intervention
and aggression in that part of the world.

16<
for
thi
fec
cur
reg
dar
rae

159. The Israeli air force's premeditated bombing of the
nuclear site in Iraq is not an isolated incident; it is, indeed. one of a series of acts of flagrant aggression by
Israel against Arab States, in particular the repeated attacks against Lebanon, which constitute .in fact an undeclared war against a sovereign Arab country and Palestinian resistance.
160. The deliberate and gratuitous attack against the
peaceful nuclear installation in Iraq, the killing of scientists working for Iraq and the indiscriminate and unprovoked bombing of the Lebanese civilian population
and Palestine refugee camps are all part of a systematic
attempt to spread and perpetuate physical and moral terror
among millions of innocent women. children and old people in order to practice disgraceful blackmail against the

I

16'
the
bly
win

166
:

hie)

,

its
bor

936

-

-

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session-Plenary Meetings

proud and dauntless people of Palestine and against the
entire Arab nation in the insane and vain hope of bringing
them to their knees. These practices, which have been
promoted to a State policy that can only be described as a
policy of terrorism, are absolutely inadmissible. There
may be attempts to justify such practices by calling them
preventive or punitive-both equally anachronistic concepts-but they are entirely contrary to the ethics and the
law of our time. The world public must indeed be vigilant, because these practices and policies are not directed
simply against Iraq, Lebanon or Palestine, nor are they
the monopoly of Zionists.
161. These Israeli practices and policies are possible
only because of the strategic alliance between zionism and
imperialism, Israel's reliance upon the United States in its
attempts to realize its expansionist dream and the imperialists' use of zionism as a local policeman in order to
entrench and maintain their policy of hegemony and domination in the Near and Middle East and throughout the
entire region, in defiance not only of the right of the Arab
people of Palestine to self-determination but also the sovereignty and the immense natural wealth of the Arab
States of the region.
162. Indeed it is no accident that in parallel with this
recrudescence of Israeli aggressiveness the United States
is increasing its military presence and intensifying its warlike activities in that part of the world, which is of such
vital strategic importance for international peace and security. The activities of the United States marines in the
Mediterranean, the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean, the presence of rapid deployment forces, the
reinstatement of former military bases and the establishment of new ones by the United States-all this creates
an atmosphere of great tension, adding to the pressure and
the threats levelled against the independence and sovereignty of Arab States and peace and stability in the region.
163. The people and Government of Viet Nam vigorously condemn the acts of criminal aggression perpetrated by Israel, aided and abetted by the United States,
against Iraq and the other Arab countries and Palestinian
resistance. We rel1ffirm the solidarity of the people and
Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam with
and their firm support for the just cause of the Republic
of Iraq and the struggle of the Arab people against the
expansionist ambitions of Israel in order to safeguard the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Arab States and to ensure peace and security in that region.
164. In particular we should like to reaffirm our support
for the entirely justified claims of the Iraqi delegation at
this session-inter alia, the request for forthright and effective action by the Security Cou; ~il to prevent any recurrence of Israel's threats to peace and security in the
region and for just and adequate compensation for all the
damage and loss of human life that has resulted from Israeli aggression.
165. Finally, we give our full and unreserved support to
the draft resolution that is now before the General Assembly on this agenda item. It is our sincere hope that it will
win the full approval of the General Assembly.
Mr. AL-DOSERI (Qatar) (interpre/ation from Arabic): In its statements and its acts Israel does not conceal
its intention to dominate in the Middle East. It wishes its
borders to contain the entire region. Israel has recently
166.

'.

'"

pose tl
which
this se

been guaranteeing that domination through its technology
and military superiority and its aggressive policy, which
knows no law, no rules. However, Arab technological potential has increased, and the Arabs have decided to confront Zionist domination. Israel has seen that its expansionist and aggressive policy. will be countered by Arab
potential, and that is why Israel decided to commit this
criminai act against Arab technological progress and attacked Iraqi nuclear installations, which are, moreover,
under international control. IAEA had already confirmed
more than once-most recently on 12 June and just before the Israeli attack-that those installations were used
exclusively for peaceful purposes.

173.
tee on
pects 0
have ar
munity.
safegua
Second
peacefu
conven
similar
attack
tion in

167. The Zionist aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations constituted a serious threat to the Middle East.
Its consequences will be evil not only for the Middle East
but for the world as a whole, because that act of aggression was a challenge to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and
to the system of international safeguards. it was a threat
to all peace-loving countries which use nuclear energy for
peaceful and scientific purposes. Many of those countries
realize. this truth-in particular, Japan, whose representative stressed the great concern felt by Japan regarding the
danger of military aggression against nuclear installations
which serve peaceful purposes, especially since Japan has
13 atomic reactors.

174.
ment to
Assem~
Agency
Israeli
gime,
Septem
took a
suspens
rights 0
eomplia
lution 4
bers to
and tee
Equally
its emif
guards

168. In the resolution it adopted on 26 September IAEA
also expressed its apprehension and concern with regard
to Israeli aggression. It requested Israel to place its nuclear installations under IAEA control and called on all
countries to refrain from providing nuclear material to Israel.

175. '1
regards
presents
oped a
by the
documel
prevent
energy
that eve
Treaty"
making
ing an

169. The Israeli Zionist entity refuses to adhere to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty and to place its nuclear installations 'under international safeguards. It also refuses to
abide by the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. It threatens any country installing a nuclear reactor because of its desire to monopolize all nuclear activity in the region and to. acquire nuclear weapons so as to pose a threat to the cQuntries of the Middle
East and perhaps to countries all over the w0rld.
170. Resolutions which condemn and denounce are not
enough. Such resolutions can have no results, for Israel
believes that it is all-powet'ful since it has the support of
other Powers which share its racist and aggressive policy.
The international community must adopt whatever measures are necessary to punish, to impose sanctions, to deter Israel and its allies from repeating such acts. The international community will not remain idle in the face of
such aggression.

176. S
oped eo
non-prol
ing then
and urgi
sueh an
ening th
safeguar
some in
to hold

171. Mr. NAIK (Pakistan): The Israeli air attack against
the nuclear reactor near Baghdad on 7 June this year is
yet another flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and has added a grave new dimension to the Middle East conflict. Furthermore, it has serious and farreaching implications for international security, disarma'ment, the nuclear non-proliferation regime and international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
172. In its resolution 487 (1981) the Security Coun.:il
condemned this Israeli act of aggression in strong terms
but, regrettably, it failed to tak~ any punitive measures
against the aggressor, nor did it demand redress for the
damage suffered by Iraq. In view of the ,gravity of the
matter it is appropriate that the General Assembly sho.uld
examine the question thoroughly, and it was for this pur-

,

,I:
,

:

53rd meeting-ll November 1981

pose that Pakistan was one of the many Member States
which asked for the inclusion of the item in the agenda of
this session.
173. The General Conference of IAEA and the Committee on Disarmament have deliberated on the various aspects of the Israeli attack on Osirak. Two of these aspects
have aroused particular concern in the international community. First, the attack undermines the international
safeguards system for peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
Secondly, it has given rise to a new danger of attacks on
peaceful nuclear facilities which, though carried out by
conventional arms, have a qualitatively different effect,
similar to that of the use of nuclear weapons. Such an
attack could result in widespread radioactive contamination in the victim State and its vicinity.
174. The Director General of IAEA, both in his statement to the Security Council last June and in the General
Assembly debate yesterday, expressed the concern of the
Agency in unequivocal terms. He rightly described the
Israeli attack as a blow to the Agency's safeguards regime, which must be protected. In its resolution of 26
September the General Conference of the Agency also
took a firm view of the'developn.ent and recommended
suspension of Israel from the exercise of privileges and
rights of membership of the Agellcy in the event of noncompliance with the provisions er, Security Council resolution 487 (1981). The Agency also called upon its members to ban the transfer to Israel of fissionable material
and technology which could be used for nuclear arms.
Equally important was the reaffirmation by the Council of
its confidence in the effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system.
175. The Israeli attack has important repercussions as
regards the goal of nuclear non-proliferation. The attack
presents the spectacle of a country which, having developed a nuclear-weapon capability itself, as fully revealed
by the findings in the report of the Group of Experts in
document A/36/431 , is arrogating to itself the right to
prevent another State from developing a peaceful nuclear
energy programme. The Israeli action also rlemonstrated
that even adherence by a State to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty was not sufficient to prevent the aggressor from
making a .subjective and unilateral judgement and launching an attack on the Iraqi nuclear facility.
176. Since the attack the reaction of some of the developed countries which are vociferous advocates of nuclear
non-proliferation has been intriguing. Instead of addressing themselves to the central issue of the attack on Osirak
and urging measures for the prevention of the repetition of
such an occurrence, they are merely advocating strengthening the already adequate and internationally recognized
safeguards system. A more ominous trend is reflected in
some irresponsible reporting of the event, which appears
to hold it up for emulation.

937

177. The Committee on Disarmament discussed intensively another important aspect of the questions raised by
the Israeli attack on Osirak. The report of the Committee
states:
"There was unanimous recognition of the necessity
to ensure against the repetition of such an attack on
nuclear facilities by Israel or any other State. The call
for the prohibition of attacks against nuclear facilities
was widely supported." [See A/36/27, para. 137.]
There was a widespread sentiment in the Committee on
Disarmament that the question of further strengthening the
existing international provisions regarding protection of
civilian nuclear facilities against military attacks should·
be solved thr0ugh the adoption of appropriate international instruments. For this purpose the Swedish proposal
made in the context of the draft convention on radiological weapons is most pertinent.
178. We have also noted with interest the suggestion
made by the Director General of IAEA for the strengthening of the existing international law prohibiting attacks
against nuclear power plants by enlarging the scope of the
Additional Protocol of 1977 to the Geneva Convention of
1949.
179. In considering the Israeli attack et,. Osirak the General Assembly must strongly condemn Israel for its premeditated and unprecedented act of aggression, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
of international conduct, which constitutes a new and
dangerous eSCalation and a threat to international peace
and security.
180. It must also issue a solemn warning to Israel to
cease its threats and the commission of such armed attacks against nuclear facilities. The General Assembly
should also request the Security Council to enforce effective measures so as to prevent Israel from further endangering international peace and security through its
continued aggression and policies of expansion, occupation and annexation in the Middle East. Finally, the Assembly also has a responsibility to demand redress for the
material damage and loss of life suffered by Iraq on account of Israel's act of aggression. In adopting such a decision the General Assembly would indeed be reflecting
the overwhelming sentiment of the international community:

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

NarES
See Official Records of the Se~urity Council. Thirty-sitth Year.
2309th meeting.
'lbid.. 2286th meeting.
I

-.
