United Nations

S/PV.5846

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5846th meeting
Tuesday, 26 February 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Arias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Panama)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Li Kexin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-25201 (E)

*0825201*

S/PV.5846

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Robert H. Serry,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serry to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Holmes to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Robert H. Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. I now give
the floor to Mr. Serry.
Mr. Serry: It is an honour to brief the Security
Council for the first time. I look forward to doing so
regularly in the course of my tenure as Special
Coordinator, in the service of the Secretary-General
and the United Nations.
After two months in Jerusalem, I am deeply
conscious of what is at stake today in the Middle East
peace process. I am also impressed by the calibre and

2

scale of the work of the United Nations on the ground
in difficult, and even dangerous, circumstances. I am
convinced of the importance of the United Nations
playing its full political, development, humanitarian
and human rights role.
I wish to thank President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert and their Governments, as well as the
Governments of Egypt and Jordan and the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, for the warm
welcome they have given me. I look forward to paying
further introductory visits in the region. I also wish to
express my appreciation to my Quartet partners and
Quartet Representative Tony Blair for the support and
cooperation they have extended to me.
Today, I will brief the Council on developments
since the last report, on 30 January (see S/PV.5827),
and offer an initial assessment of the situation. I turn
first to the bilateral negotiations.
Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and
Palestinian lead negotiator Ahmad Qurei are meeting
on a continuous basis. President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert continue their fortnightly meetings.
We welcome the determination of the parties to
continue those negotiations despite challenges on the
ground, and in an atmosphere of confidentiality. The
talks need to make tangible progress on all core issues
without exception.
I was also pleased to meet United States
Lieutenant General William Fraser when he visited the
region for the first time to lead United States efforts to
monitor the implementation of phase I Road Map
commitments, as agreed at Annapolis. I have offered
full United Nations support to the United States-led
monitoring process and look forward to regular Quartet
consultation on it.
Palestinian Authority Prime Minister Fayyad and
his Government continue to promote good governance
and revive the economy. Steps this month included
addressing electricity subsidies, the finalization of
measures to ensure financial transparency and efforts
to ensure that Palestinian Authority ministries and
agencies develop coordinated and standardized project
proposals. We remind donors of the urgency of their
quickly disbursing the generous pledges made last
December in Paris. Quartet Representative Tony Blair
continues his work on economic development projects
and other confidence-building measures.

08-25201

S/PV.5846

Efforts to improve the security performance of
the Palestinian Authority continue. Palestinian security
forces carried out operations against militants in
several West Bank cities. A Palestinian military court
sentenced two individuals to 15 years in prison for
killing two Israelis near Hebron in December. Israel
stopped pursuing 32 Fatah militants after they
surrendered to Palestinian Authority security forces
and successfully completed a three-month trial period.
The death of a Hamas detainee from what an official
autopsy found was a heart attack has led to allegations
of mistreatment of detainees by Palestinian Authority
security forces. President Abbas has called for an
investigation. Approximately
1,000
Palestinian
Authority security officers are being trained in Jordan,
with support from the United States security
coordinator, with a view to their redeployment in April
and May. The European Union Police Mission for the
Palestinian Territories (EUPOL COPPS) continues to
support the Palestinian civilian police and criminal
justice system in the West Bank.
However, the security situation for both Israelis
and Palestinians remains a matter of deep concern. One
Israeli has been killed and 27 injured by Palestinian
militants. Forty-five Palestinians have been killed and
139 injured during Israeli incursions into Gaza and the
West Bank. I am particularly alarmed at the number of
incidents on both sides where children are being killed
or injured.
On 4 February, a suicide attack in Dimona by two
bombers from Hebron, for which Hamas claimed
responsibility, killed one Israeli and injured six others.
Over 320 rockets and mortars have been fired from
Gaza, with the town of Sderot again coming under
particular
attack.
We
unreservedly
condemn
indiscriminate rocket and mortar firing towards civilian
population centres and crossing points, and suicide
attacks against civilians, and call for their immediate
cessation. Israeli interlocutors regard the continuation
of such attacks as the biggest obstacle to progress in
the peace process.
Corporal Gilad Shalit of the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) is in his twentieth month of captivity in
Gaza, and Hamas continues to deny the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) access to him. We
call for access to be provided and for his release.
Over 10,000 Palestinian prisoners remain in
Israeli prisons. President Abbas has appealed for

08-25201

further Palestinian prisoner releases, building on the
steps already taken in that regard.
Israeli military operations into Gaza and the West
Bank have continued throughout the reporting period.
There have been several instances in which civilians
have been killed or injured — including last Saturday,
when three civilians were killed by a ground-to-ground
missile fired into Beit Hanoun. Even if not intended,
such casualties are deplorable and should be the
subject of transparent investigation and accountability
measures. While we are cognizant of Israel’s security
concerns, Israel is obliged not to take disproportionate
measures or to endanger civilians. The United Nations
principled opposition to extrajudicial killings is
compounded by the frequency with which such
operations are carried out in densely populated civilian
areas.
Citing security concerns, the IDF is also
continuing operations in the West Bank. Those actions
undermine the Palestinian Authority’s own security
efforts. Improved IDF cooperation with the Palestinian
Authority security forces in the West Bank is crucial.
In that context, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has reported that there
are 580 obstacles to Palestinian movement in the West
Bank, a level that has stayed steady for many months,
and has even increased, despite Palestinian Authority
security efforts and Israeli pledges to remove obstacles.
Closure levels must be reduced significantly if the
Palestinian economy is to revive and if donor
assistance is to produce long-term results.
Phase I of the Road Map, to which the parties
recommitted at Annapolis, requires the Government of
Israel to freeze all settlement activity, including
“natural growth”, and to remove all outposts erected
since March 2001. However, construction continues in
settlements throughout the West Bank, including in
East Jerusalem. Tenders for new housing continue to be
issued by the Israeli Government, and no outposts have
been removed. Continued settlement activity is illegal
anywhere in the occupied Palestinian territory and is an
obstacle to peace. I should also inform the Council that
settlement expansion was cited by several Palestinian
and Arab interlocutors as among the biggest factors
undermining confidence in the Annapolis process and
prospects for a viable Palestinian State.
In the same vein, and despite the Road Map
obligation to re-open Palestinian institutions in East

3

S/PV.5846

Jerusalem, an order was recently issued by the Israeli
Government continuing their closure for a further six
months. Israel should demonstrate with concrete and
urgent steps its commitment to phase I of the Road
Map, as called for by Quartet principals when they last
met in Paris.
Construction work on the barrier continues within
occupied Palestinian territory, in deviation from the
Green Line and contrary to the International Court of
Justice advisory opinion.
I now turn to the situation in Gaza, which is
unacceptable and also unsustainable in humanitarian,
human rights, security and political terms. The UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs will brief
the Council on the severe humanitarian situation in
more detail. Several factors have created a dangerous
cocktail for Israel, Egypt and the Palestinians, causing
deep suffering and damaging prospects for a two-State
solution.
The Hamas takeover last June violently removed
the Palestinian Authority from Gaza, including from
the crossings. A degree of order has been established,
but the rule of law is absent. Major changes are taking
place outside a legal framework. Many independent
institutions have been closed, or replaced and restaffed
so that they are controlled by Hamas but disconnected
from their headquarters in Ramallah. The civilian
justice system has ceased to function, as have
important instruments of good governance and social
regulation in Gaza. Allegations of human rights abuses
in Gaza continue to be made by various Palestinian and
international non-governmental organizations operating
in the Strip.
Despite statements of intent, Hamas has not acted
with sufficient determination to bring about an end to
rocket attacks by militant groups. Hamas itself also
carries out periodic rocket firing and regular mortar
fire, to say nothing of the recent suicide bombing.
Reports of smuggling continue to be of concern, as are
reports of outside militant groups now gaining a
foothold in Gaza. We continue to call on Hamas to live
up to the responsibilities it has taken on itself and to
choose the olive branch over the gun.
However, Israeli measures amounting to
collective punishment are also not acceptable. We call
on Israel to meet its obligations towards the civilian
population of Gaza under international law.

4

The breach at Rafah at the end of January caused
understandable relief in Gaza, as civilians sought basic
commodities and a respite from the pressure cooker
conditions under which they are forced to live. Egypt
moved to re-establish order along the border earlier
this month. But the situation remains extremely fragile.
Unless addressed, it will remain a danger to the safety,
security and well-being of the Palestinian population,
to the security of Egypt and of Israel, and to the
sustainability of the political process itself. Only
yesterday, several thousand people protested against
the conditions they face, and the Israel Defense Forces
increased its military presence in areas surrounding the
Strip.
In the light of these developments, the United
Nations has actively made the case with all parties and
our Quartet partners that a different and more positive
strategy for Gaza is required.
To this end, Quartet envoys are agreed that we
should now work towards resumption of normal
economic life for the people of Gaza, pursue
arrangements that ensure the security of Israel, Egypt
and the Palestinians, and support the legitimate
Palestinian Authority. Rocket fire and suicide attacks
should cease, as should all acts of violence, so that an
atmosphere of calm is created. The humanitarian needs
of the civilian population must be met, including the
uninterrupted provision of essential goods and services,
including fuel and power supplies. Stalled United
Nations and other projects in Gaza should resume, and
the movement of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel needs to be facilitated. Conditions need to be
established to allow the reopening of crossings, as
envisaged in the Agreement on Movement and Access.
It is therefore of crucial importance now that
Israel, Egypt and the Palestinian Authority develop a
positive strategy for Gaza designed to achieve those
goals. Quartet members, individually and collectively,
are ready to provide support for such efforts, including
the European Union Border Assistance Mission at
Rafah, as appropriate. Egypt’s efforts along the border
and diplomatically to find durable solutions to this
crisis are to be commended. The Quartet has also stated
publicly its strong support for the proposal of the
Palestinian Authority to resume operations at the
crossings.
Turning to the regional aspect, the Governments
of Egypt and Jordan and the Secretary-General of the

08-25201

S/PV.5846

League of Arab States have underlined the importance
of the continued commitment of Arab countries to the
Arab Peace Initiative. However, they have stressed
their growing concern regarding the direction of the
peace process, as well as developments in Gaza, and
regarding the implications for the region should the
peace process not succeed.
During the reporting period, the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan has remained largely quiet,
other than an incident on 11 February in which two
Syrian youths, residents in the Golan, were shot by an
Israeli soldier and subsequently treated in hospital.
I should add that I am not briefing on Lebanon
this month in view of the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006).
Allow me to conclude with some brief personal
impressions. From what I have seen in several field
visits, including to the West Bank, Gaza and southern
Israel, ordinary people, understandably, have little
confidence that the political process is delivering.
In the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the
imposing presence of the barrier, the expanding
settlements, the unremoved outposts, the system of
closures and constant military incursions have grave
implications for the human rights, economic life and
social fabric of the entire population. In Gaza, the
deprivations of basic human dignity are even more
acute, and the sense of abandonment and frustration is
palpable.
In southern Israel, communities that believed
Israel’s disengagement from Gaza would bring security
face daily rocket attacks, while Israelis generally
continue to believe that they must primarily rely on
Israeli security measures for their safety. In the region,
there is a growing sense of disquiet about the state of
the political process.
I applaud the sense of responsibility and indeed
political courage that Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas have shown in re-embarking on the
political process despite public scepticism and many
anxieties. The Annapolis process needs to proceed, and
it needs support. The international community should
do everything it can to ensure that the parties move
ahead in the bilateral negotiations towards an
agreement on all core issues without exception.

08-25201

But the Annapolis process can be sustained only
by real changes on the ground. First, a major
intensification of efforts in the West Bank is required,
including more substantial and urgent Israeli actions
and continued and intensified efforts by the Palestinian
Authority, in accordance with phase I of the Road Map.
Secondly, we believe a different and more positive
strategy for Gaza is a humanitarian, security and
strategic imperative, for Israel, Egypt and the
Palestinian Authority, and we welcome the united
engagement of the Quartet on this issue.
We will continue to remind all parties of the
framework of international law and to work closely
with Quartet partners, countries of the region and the
Council towards implementation of the Road Map. The
goal must be an end to the occupation that began in
1967, the coexistence in peace and security of the State
of Israel and the State of Palestine and a
comprehensive regional peace, in fulfilment of
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and
1515 (2003), and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Serry for that important information. We wish him
every success in his new functions. I now give the floor
to Mr. John Holmes.
Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on my visit to the
occupied Palestinian territory and Israel from 14 to
18 February. I spent a day in Gaza, a day in the West
Bank and a morning in Sderot in southern Israel. I also
called on Israeli Government officials, the Prime
Minister of the Palestinian Authority and others and
held intensive discussions with the United Nations and
other humanitarian agencies and non-governmental
organizations working in both the West Bank and Gaza
and with representatives of civil society.
I found conditions for the people of Gaza grim
and miserable, and far from normal. Eight months of
severe restrictions on the movement of goods and
people entering and leaving the territory, following the
Hamas takeover in June 2007, have taken a heavy
economic and social toll, coming on top of years of
difficulty and economic decline. Whilst the most basic
humanitarian goods, particularly food aid, have mostly
continued to struggle through, other imports have been
progressively closed off, including critical spare parts
and raw materials such as cement. Only about 10 per
cent of what went into Gaza in January 2007 was
allowed to enter in January 2008. In addition, in

5

S/PV.5846

October, Israel started to reduce the flow of industrial
diesel used to operate the single power station in Gaza.
In February, the amount of electricity supplied to Gaza
from Israel was also reduced. Since June 2007, the
movement of Palestinians in and out of Gaza has been
virtually impossible, apart from the short period when
the Rafah wall was down, and with limited exceptions
made for urgent medical cases, pilgrims, those with
student and work visas and foreign residence
documentation.
The consequences are increasingly severe and
visible. Almost 80 per cent of the population are now
receiving food aid; most industry and agriculture has
collapsed, raising unemployment and poverty to new
heights; frequent and lengthy power cuts severely
impair the functioning of essential services and
infrastructure; water quality is declining rapidly, where
water is available at all; the inadequacies of the sewage
system are increasingly exposed, with a real risk of a
sewage lagoon at Beit Lahiya collapsing; the medical
and education systems are teetering on the edge of
failure, as lack of equipment, spare parts and qualified
staff, and psychological strains, undermine their
functioning.
Vulnerability of the weakest to disease is rising,
notably among children, who make up more than half
of the population of Gaza. For instance, in October
2007 the number of children under the age of 3
diagnosed with diarrhoea increased by 20 per cent
compared to the previous year, and anaemia among
children is up by 40 per cent. This bleak situation is
further compounded by bureaucratic difficulties
between the Palestinian Authority and those
administering health care, for example, in Gaza.
The Israeli Government has said that, while there
are security concerns about the crossing points
themselves, which have been fired on and through
which attempts have been made to smuggle arms and
potential bombers, the main motivation for the
restrictions is the continuing firing of Qassam rockets
from Gaza. My visit to Sderot, which has been the
target of more than 4,300 rockets since 2004, brought
out the physical and psychological damage to the
population there from this constant barrage. These
crude rockets are aimed at hurting civilians and clearly
constitute terrorism. Their continued firing is
completely unacceptable and must be halted
unconditionally. Hamas, which claims to govern the
Gaza Strip, must accept its full share of responsibility
for the suffering in Gaza. Above all, it must act to stop
these rockets immediately.

6

However, I also made clear publicly and privately
my view that, whatever the provocation and illegality
of the rockets, the effective Israeli isolation of Gaza is
not justified, given Israel’s continuing obligations to
the people of Gaza. It amounts to collective
punishment and is contrary to international
humanitarian law. Moreover, it does not appear to be
having the desired effect, either in halting the rockets
or in weakening Hamas’s position among the people of
Gaza, or more widely. Only those who want to see
further radicalization can be happy with the present
situation.
Meanwhile, the consequences for civilians on
both sides are dramatic, not only through the imposed
restrictions and the continuous firing of rockets, but
also through the resulting repeated incursions into and
military clashes inside Gaza, which cause many
civilian casualties, however unintended they might be.
The fundamental principles of distinction between
combatants and non-combatants and of proportionality
in attacks during the conduct of hostilities must be
respected by all sides.
The current situation in Gaza is not sustainable
and is extremely damaging to the prospects for the
current peace process. Only political efforts can change
this dynamic. Meanwhile, from a humanitarian point of
view, while a return to the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access is what is really needed, I
pressed the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
Authority at least to ensure that more humanitarian and
other goods are allowed in, on a more predictable and
systematic basis. I made the same message clear to
Hamas in what I said publicly.
This means reopening the crossings and
establishing better mechanisms for identifying and
addressing the fundamental needs of the population. In
particular, I asked that the materials necessary for the
restart of $213 million worth of frozen humanitarian
United Nations projects, in areas such as sanitation,
housing, education and health, be allowed in by Israel
and that spares and equipment for medical and
sanitation services be given priority. There were some
indications that the Israeli authorities are willing to
respond positively to these requests.
I would add that the proposals of the Palestinian
Prime Minister, Salam Fayyad, for the reopening of the
key Karni crossing — the only one with adequate
infrastructure to process large quantities of goods
appropriately and effectively — deserve all our
support. A properly negotiated role is also necessary

08-25201

S/PV.5846

for the Rafah crossing, a role which does not give
credence to the idea that Israel can hand over its
responsibilities and obligations for Gaza to Egypt or
any other State or authority. Arrangements which
ensure proper screening for goods passing in both
directions through the crossings, to meet Israel’s
security concerns, should be possible, if necessary with
appropriate international support.
The conditions of life I saw in the West Bank
were obviously better than those in Gaza, but the
situation there is of no less fundamental humanitarian
concern. I had read about the barrier, the settlements,
the permit regime and the access closures, but that had
not prepared me for the visible and tangible reality on
the ground.
The combination of the construction of the
barrier, the steady expansion of the settlements, all still
illegal, and the now 580 separate checkpoints and
blockages within the West Bank is fragmenting
communities. It seriously impairs the access of tens of
thousands of people to their lands and to essential
services, not least medical services. Severe restrictions
on the movement of goods and people are affecting
economic growth, as well as increasing poverty and
food insecurity and reducing health standards. They
further threaten the viability of a future Palestinian
State.
In my meetings with Palestinians in the West
Bank, I felt that the despair and sense of humiliation
and injustice were no less than in Gaza. This was
particularly evident from my visit to Hebron, where the
presence of a relatively small group of 600 settlers and
the considerable security arrangements put in place to
ensure their protection have divided the city and
severely affect the economy and the lives of its
citizens. Representatives of Palestinian civil society
throughout the West Bank appealed passionately to the
United Nations, through me, to do something about
their plight and their lack of a viable future, as they
saw it.
Israel has legitimate security concerns and a right
and duty to defend its citizens. But even in such
circumstances, security cannot override all other
concerns or justify so much damage to ordinary
people’s livelihoods and infringements of their human
dignity and human rights. Israel has obligations
towards the Palestinian population under occupation. I
therefore pressed the Israeli authorities to begin
implementing their commitments to ease at least some
of the restrictions.

08-25201

Looking at these deteriorating realities on the
ground in Gaza and the West Bank, as well as in
Sderot, the disconnect between these realities and the
hopes and aims of the continuing peace talks seemed
almost total and, indeed, risks making a mockery of the
readiness of the international community to invest
$7.7 billion in the economic development of the
occupied Palestinian territory. As the Special
Coordinator has stressed, unless this chasm is bridged
quickly and the humanitarian indicators begin to rise
and create some sense of hope for the future, the
chances of success in the peace talks may be fatally
undermined, no matter how great the sincerity and
ingenuity of all concerned. And we desperately need
those talks to succeed this year. The alternative
comforts only the extremists.
Notwithstanding all the difficulties, the
humanitarian community will continue to do all it can
to respond to the moral imperative of saving and
improving lives and preserving human dignity. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the other agencies and
NGOs working in Gaza, in particular, are doing a
heroic job under circumstances that are difficult and
dangerous, not least due to the imposed restrictions on
the movement and access of United Nations staff,
which are too often not consistent with the immunities
and privileges to which they are entitled.
Meanwhile, I also appeal to the donor community
to continue to respond generously to what has now
become the third largest annual consolidated appeal for
humanitarian funds, after Darfur and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Finally, I appeal to the Security Council to
continue to speak up about the consequences for
civilians, in both the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel, of what is happening and about the overriding
duty on all sides to comply with international
humanitarian law and the resolutions of this Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Holmes for his important briefing and the critical
information he provided on the situation in Gaza.
In accordance with understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

7
