S/2015/503

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Central
African Republic, Ethiopia and Burundi, including the
African Union
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 5 March 2015 (S/2015/162), the President of the Security
Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had decided to send a
mission to the Central African Republic, Ethiopia (African Union) and Burundi
from 9 to 13 March 2015. The mission was co-led led by the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations, Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins, and
the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations, François Delattre.
They were joined by the Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations, Samantha Power, in leading the Burundi segment of the visit.
The composition of the mission and its terms of reference are set out in annexes I
and II to the present report.

II. Central African Republic
A.

Background
2.
The Security Council mission was the first Council visit to the Central African
Republic. Its primary purpose was to assess the situation on the ground just under a
year after the adoption of resolution 2149 (2014) of 10 April 2014, in which the
Council established the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). The mission was aimed at
assessing progress in key areas of resolution 2149 (2014), notably the political
process, the security situation, the restoration of State authority, the protection of
civilians, the humanitarian and human rights situations, the threat posed by armed
groups and their disarmament, and security sector reform, as well as the deployment
of MINUSCA and progress on the implementation of its mandated tasks. The visit
provided an opportunity for the Council to reiterate to Central African interlocutors
its call for the protection of civilians and the implementation of the Brazzaville
Agreement, in particular the holding of the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation and the elections in an inclusive and transparent manner.

15-11165 (E)

310715

*1511165*

S/2015/503

B.

Meetings in Bangui
3.
Upon arrival in Bangui, on 12 March, the members of the Council received
detailed briefings from the MINUSCA leadership on the implementation of
resolution 2149 (2014), as well as a briefing by the acting Humanitarian
Coordinator on the dire humanitarian situation across the country. The serious
threats to civilians and the continuing occupation of large areas in the east by armed
groups were also highlighted. The Council was briefed by MINUSCA on the
improved security situation in Bangui and efforts to enhance s ecurity across the
country, including operations to expel armed groups occupying major towns and the
redeployment of local government authorities and gendarmerie to those areas. The
Council was also briefed on the Mission’s efforts to protect civilians and
communities at risk, with a focus on women, children and internally displaced
persons. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Central Africa and
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, Abdoulaye Bathily,
briefed the Council on the internal and regional dynamics surrounding the political
process and highlighted critical challenges such as the establishment of a
representative republican army, the urgent need to move forward on economic
recovery and the importance of addressing marginalization to ensure long-term
stability. The members of the Council also had the opportunity to meet and discuss
various issues with the United Nations country team and the diplomatic corps in
Bangui.
4.
On 13 March, the members of the Security Council met with the Head of State
of the Transition, Catherine Samba-Panza, and key transitional Government
ministers, including the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Reconciliation, Finance,
Social Affairs, Justice, and the Prosecutor General. The President of the National
Electoral Authority, Dieudonné Kombo Yaya, participated in the meeting with the
Head of State of the Transition. The mission also met with the President of the
National Transitional Council, Alexandre-Ferdinand Nguendet, and members of the
Transitional Parliament. The Council members visited the Benzi -vi camp in Bangui
and spoke to internally displaced persons at the site. They also met with members of
civil society in the capital, including the religious platform that includes the Imam
of Bangui, Oumar Kobine Layama, and the Pastor, Girekoyamet Cibangou. They
also paid visits to the European Union military operation in the Central African
Republic (EUFOR-RCA) and Operation Sangaris headquarters and received
briefings by their respective commanders.

C.

Key issues raised during the meetings with the Head of State of the
Transition, the Prime Minister, cabinet ministers, the National
Transitional Council and civil society

1.

Political process
5.
In their meeting with the Head of State of the Transition, the members of the
Security Council reiterated their strong support for the political process in the
Central African Republic and called for the implementation of the Brazzaville
process, notably the holding of the Bangui Forum and the legislative and
presidential elections. The Council called upon the Head of State of the Transition
to ensure that the political process was conducted in an inclusive and transparent

2/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

manner and included the participation of women, internally displaced persons and
refugees. The Council commended MINUSCA for its efforts in supporting the
transition and informed the Head of State of the Transition that the Council was
currently considering increasing the Mission’s resources so that it could further
support the Central African authorities. Council members also commended the
international forces (MINUSCA, Operation Sangaris and EUFOR -RCA) and the
African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic, MIS CA,
for having prevented a genocide in the Central African Republic.
6.
The Head of State of the Transition assured the members of the Security
Council that the political process would continue to be conducted in a fully
inclusive manner. She noted progress in a number of areas in the past year,
including the security situation in Bangui, the redeployment of government
representatives to some of the regions, the return of some internally displaced
persons and refugees, and the fight against impunity. She also noted that many
challenges remained to be addressed, highlighting the financial challenges facing
the transitional authority in successfully concluding the transition.
7.
Highlighting her commitment to an inclusive political process, the Head of
State of the Transition informed the Security Council that local consultations had
been concluded in all 16 prefectures and emphasized the importance of that
achievement, given that the process had allowed the voices of Central Africans
across the country, including internally displaced persons and refugees in
neighbouring countries, to be heard. The Head of State of the Transition informed
the members of the Council that according to the preliminary outcome of the
consultations, Central Africans had expressed concerns mainly with respect to
security, disarmament, peace, justice and economic development. Those grievances,
she assured, would be considered by the four thematic working groups established
to prepare the Bangui Forum, expected to take place at the end of April. She also
expressed concern about the lack of resources and called upon the international
community to assist in funding the outcomes of the Bangui Forum.
8.
Civil society groups welcomed the local consultations and the upcoming
Bangui Forum, emphasizing their appreciation for the international community’s
support in ensuring that the political process moves forward in an inclusive manner.
On the next steps, representatives of women’s groups urged the further inclusion of
women in the political and reconciliation processes, in accordance with resolution
1325 (2000), including in the ongoing preparations for the Bangui Forum.
Representatives of civil society also expressed criticism regarding any parallel
processes that could undermine and derail the political process in the country and
urged the Security Council to ensure that the transition continued to move forward
in a transparent manner.
2.

Elections
9.
Concerning the planned referendum on the Constitution and presidential and
legislative elections, the Head of State of the Transition informed the Security
Council that while the transitional authorities were doing their utmost to prevent an
extension of the transition, the current electoral timetable was facing delays owing
to the decision to hold the local consultations as well as operational and financial
challenges, including the lack of funding for voter registration. The President of the
National Election Authority and the President of the National Transitional Council

15-11165

3/26

S/2015/503

echoed that statement, while reassuring the Security Council that their efforts were
currently fully focused on the electoral process. In terms of the timeline, the
President of the National Transitional Council informed the members of the Security
Council that according to his assessment, elections could realistically take place in
early 2016. The Head of State of the Transition emphasized that it would be
important to conduct the elections properly in order to avoid contestation and
possible further violence.
10. Representatives of civil society groups in Bangui pointed to the importance of
extending State authority throughout the country before conducting the elections, in
order to ensure free and fair elections in a secure environment for the population. In
that regard, civil society groups commended MINUSCA for its efforts and support
to the transitional authorities to restore the presence of the State in and outside
Bangui and called for further operations similar to those conducted in February in
Bria, particularly in advance of the elections.
11. Security Council members commended the Central African authorities for their
commitment to holding elections in a timely manner, stressing the importance of
ensuring that the process remained inclusive. They also stressed the importance, for
the transitional authorities, of focusing on the redeployment and extension of State
authority throughout the country, with the support of MINUSCA.
3.

Disarmament and security
12. In meetings with all interlocutors, the members of the Security Council firmly
called upon all armed groups to lay down their weapons without delay and
participate in the ongoing political process. Armed groups were encourag ed to voice
their concerns through the Bangui Forum and to participate in a disarmament
process. The members of the Council commended MINUSCA and the international
forces for the improved security situation in Bangui, encouraging further efforts to
ensure that security was also enhanced in the regions, including in the east of the
country.
13. The Head of State of the Transition highlighted the commitment of her
Government in addressing the issue of disarmament and pointed out that a
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process would be one of the key
issues discussed at the Bangui Forum. She explained that a general agreement on
the format and approach of a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
would need to be achieved, in order for the transitional authorities to move forward
on that issue. Meanwhile, while acknowledging the importance of ethnically
balanced and professional security forces, the Head of State of the Transition
emphasized the need for the Central African armed forces to be rehabilitated and
rearmed, in order to provide security for the Central African people.
14. This message was echoed by nearly all Central African interlocutors, including
civil society groups and internally displaced persons. While appreciation wa s widely
expressed regarding the positive impact of the deployment of MINUSCA and the
international forces on the security situation, Central African interlocutors reiterated
that a functioning national army was urgently needed to support and ensure the
restoration of security, safety and the protection of civilians. Women ’s groups in
Bangui added that women, along with children, still found themselves in a
vulnerable position and requested further protection, which could be provided by
the Central African armed forces along with MINUSCA. The President of the

4/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

National Transitional Council assured the Security Council members that once
re-established, the Central African armed forces would be ethnically and regionally
balanced and would be subject to democratic oversight mechanisms. The members
of the Council suggested that, in view of the arms embargo, the Head of State of the
Transition bring requests for the provision of equipment to national security forces
to the attention of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic.
15. The Head of State of the Transition also made an appeal for the resumption of
the Kimberly Process Certification Scheme in the Central African Republic in order
to enhance the income and self-sustainment of the transitional authorities and future
elected government. Civil society groups, however, voiced hesitation about the
timing, stressing the need to extend State authority and establish security
beforehand in those areas in order to prevent armed groups from further benefiting
from the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
4.

Urgent temporary measures and fighting impunity
16. The fight against impunity was highlighted by the members of the Security
Council as one of the most important challenges for securing peace and stability in
the Central African Republic. In that regard, Council members commended the
Head of State of the Transition for her leadership on justice issues and for the
transitional authorities’ cooperation with the International Criminal Court, in
particular with regard to the transfer of the commander of the Lord ’s Resistance
Army, Dominic Ongwen, to The Hague. The Council emphasized the critical need to
fight impunity and called upon the National Transitional Council to pass the law on
the Special Criminal Court without delay. Civil society groups, and in particular
representatives of women’s groups and religious leaders, echoed that view, pointing
out that the establishment of the Special Criminal Court and the start of its work
would send a strong message on accountability to perpetrators of human rights
violations.
17. The Head of State of the Transition assured the members of the Security
Council that since the signing of the memorandum of intent on the urgent temporary
measures, efforts were under way to establish the Special Criminal Court. The
President of the National Transitional Council informed the Security Council that
the draft law would be adopted during the ordinary session o f the National
Transitional Council in March. In addition, the Head of State of the Transition asked
for further support by the international community in building the capacity of the
penal chain and thanked the United Nations for its support in arresting and holding
perpetrators of serious crimes accountable. She also made an appeal to the members
of the Security Council to add further names to the sanctions list established and
maintained by the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutio n
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic and to ensure that those under
United Nations targeted sanctions did not move around freely in violation of the
sanctions regime.

5.

European Union military operation in the Central African Republic and
Operation Sangaris
18. The members of the Security Council visited EUFOR -RCA and Operation
Sangaris at their headquarters in Bangui and received briefings from their respective

15-11165

5/26

S/2015/503

commanders. Council members commended the international forces for their critical
role in enhancing security and protecting civilians and for playing a crucial role in
bridging the gap ahead of the deployment of MINUSCA. Recognizing the additional
tasks and challenges for MINUSCA with the departure of EUFOR -RCA and the
drawdown of Operation Sangaris, the Council called upon MINUSCA and the
international forces to ensure a smooth transition and handover, with a particular
focus on ensuring continued protection to communities at risk. Council members
also welcomed the decision of the European Union to establish a one -year military
advisory mission in the Central African Republic to support the security sector
reform of the Central African armed forces and underlined the importance of close
coordination in that regard between the European Union Military Advisory Mission
in the Central African Republic and MINUSCA.
6.

Humanitarian situation
19. The members of the Security Council reiterated their deep concern about the
dire humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic with all interlocutors.
They expressed hope that the nearly 440,000 internally displaced persons and more
than 425,000 refugees in neighbouring countries could soon return, adding that it
would be important to address that issue at the Bangui Forum. In their meeting with
the Head of State of the Transition, the members of the Council expressed concern
about the living conditions of over 36,000 people, mostly Muslims, confined to
seven enclaves across the country. The situation of the nearly 500 internally
displaced Fulanis in Yaloké was raised with the Head of State of the Transition, with
an appeal to ensure that families and individuals could exercise their right of
freedom of movement, in accordance with human rights law and international
humanitarian law.
20. The Head of State of the Transition, ministers and representatives of the
National Transitional Council all expressed serious concern about the grave
humanitarian situation in the country and requested further assistance from the
international community. The Head of State of the Transition highlighted that one of
the main challenges for the transitional authority was the lack of funds and
resources to address poverty and social challenges, which were at the root of the
conflict. She highlighted that when thousands of young people were out of work,
they were easily manipulated into joining armed groups and resorted to banditry and
violence. On Yaloké, the Head of State of the Transition stated that she was not in
favour of relocation and preferred focusing on improving living conditions; efforts
in that regard were under way, with the assistance of humanitarian groups. Civil
society groups highlighted that while non-governmental organizations had done a
praiseworthy job in addressing the humanitarian situation and assisting the most
vulnerable, civilians were still in need of further support from the international
community and the transitional authorities.
21. Security Council members also visited the Benzi-vi site in Bangui, where over
300 internally displaced persons had sought refuge from the violence in December
2013 and had remained owing to the continued insecurity. Many people told the
Council members that they lived close by but could not return because of the high
level of insecurity. Others added that their homes had been destroyed, urging that
the United Nations provide assistance to rehabilitate their homes in order to
facilitate their return. Council members assured peopl e at the Benzi-vi site that the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees was very high on the Council ’s

6/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

agenda. They also noted that the Council would continue to support and urge the
transitional authorities, humanitarian groups and MINUSCA to assist displaced
civilians, to ensure that they could return home as quickly and safely as possible.
7.

Meetings in Bria
22. On 12 March, the members of the Security Council visited Bria in Haute -Kotto
préfecture and met with administration officials, including the mayor, préfet and
sous-préfet, as well as members of civil society. The meeting was held at Bria city
hall, which had recently been liberated from occupation by ex-Séléka elements. The
meeting provided an opportunity for the Council members t o hear from the local
administration, women’s groups, youth representatives, members of the ex-Séléka
and others about the impact of the conflict and the improvement of the situation
following the deployment of MINUSCA. The members of the Council were brie fed
in detail on the Mission’s efforts to restore State authority in Bria, including
assisting the return of local government personnel and gendarmerie. They also
visited a labour-intensive construction project in Bria, which had been designed by
MINUSCA in support of article 4 of the Brazzaville Agreement to occupy and
generate work for young people at risk, women and former combatants. Council
members also visited the camp of the Cambodian unit of MINUSCA and received
briefings by the Force Commander on the Mission’s effort to conduct more flexible
and proactive patrols. They also heard the Head of the Bria MINUSCA Office’s
political assessment on the situation in the préfecture and ongoing efforts to protect
civilians. Representatives of international non-governmental organizations in Bria,
who also attended the meeting, urged the Council to maintain security and
protection of civilians as key priorities for MINUSCA.
23. The mayor noted that despite the recent expulsion of ex-Séléka elements from
government buildings, the security situation remained fragile. Representatives from
the Comité des Sages added that while the centre was now safer, the outskirts were
still not fully safe for the population. Representatives from women’s groups echoed
that view. The mayor expressed concern about the continued violence against
civilians by armed groups and stressed the need to systematically disarm such
groups. He highlighted the importance of education for young people and of
assistance in restoring the local authorities, for long-term stability. All
representatives of civil society, including women and young people, were in
agreement with the mayor on that point, emphasizing the need to create work for
young people as critical to avoiding a return to arms and banditry. Representatives
of women’s groups also insisted on the importance of launching reconciliation
processes and the need to end impunity and to extend State authority. The
Sensitization Committee briefed on the successful and ongoing religious
reconciliation efforts in Bria, bringing together Muslims and Christians in mosques
and churches. While the members of the ex-Séléka assured the Council that they
recognized the central government and were engaged politically to make progress
on peace, they were now expecting the transitional authorities to take the next step
by reaching out and ensuring a conducive environment for dialogue and
reconciliation.
24. The members of the Security Council thanked the local administration an d
civil society for their frank exchanges and assured them that their messages had
been heard. The Council expressed full support to the Central Africans in the key
challenges facing the country, including security, State authority, education and

15-11165

7/26

S/2015/503

economic recovery, and commended the ongoing reconciliation efforts undertaken
in Bria by the Sensitization Committee. The members of the Council commended
MINUSCA for its efforts to restore security and State authority in Bria. They also
expressed deep appreciation to the non-governmental organizations for their
important work.

III. Ethiopia (African Union)
25. On 12 March, members of the Security Council visited Addis Ababa for their
annual consultations with the Peace and Security Council of the African Uni on. The
consultations were co-chaired by France, as President of the Security Council, and
Namibia, as Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union for the
month of March. Libya, a member of the Peace and Security Council, did not attend
the meeting. Despite a long agenda and multiple speakers per item, which did not
leave time for interactive debate, the tone was largely positive. Following the
session, members of both Councils went on to an informal dinner hosted by the
Governments of France and Namibia at the residence of the Namibian Ambassador.
26. During the opening session, Namibia, as Chair of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, welcomed the opportunity for frank exchange, noting
that 2015 marked an important year for many reasons, including the post-2015
development agenda and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). Namibia suggested that the two Councils re view
their past joint communiqués to take stock of the progress made in the partnership
and consider new innovations, including through videoconferences between the
respective Chair/President each month, communication on agendas and joint visits.
France stated that the Security Council recognized the “value added” of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, given its proximity and relationship to
countries in conflict. France stressed that the partnership was becoming more
effective daily, adding that the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union, Haile Menkerios, was an illustration of
coordination across prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
27. The Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, Smail
Chergui, commended the developing relationship between the two Councils and
recommended that they hold a dedicated seminar on strengthening the partnership
on the margins of the next consultations, stressing the need to focus on conflict
prevention in particular. He thanked the United Nations for its ro le in the fight
against Ebola. Turning to the agenda, he noted that terrorist groups such as Boko
Haram must be fought with “all our might” and called for immediate and
sustainable support from the international community, including the Security
Council, to the countries of the region. On South Sudan, he stated that the African
Union intended to scale up its support and operationalize the ad hoc committee of
Heads of State in the coming days. The remarks by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to the African Union focused on the same two agenda items and
the partnership between the African Union and the United Nations.
28. On the situation in the Great Lakes Region, the United Republic of Tanzania,
on behalf of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, stated that the
United Nations and the African Union were working together, noting the joint
membership in the Regional Oversight Mechanism for the Peace, Security and

8/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
and the joint participation in the first meeting of the guarantors for the Framework.
It underlined the importance of eliminating negative forces operating in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda, following its failure to respect the 2 January 2015 deadline to
voluntarily disarm. The United Republic of Tanzania further stressed the need for
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to urgently settle their differences and undertake joint milit ary operations
against the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, a view echoed by
Angola, France, and New Zealand on behalf of the Security Council. It welcomed
the idea of the organization of the Great Lakes Private Sector Investment
Conference and called upon the World Bank to disburse the sum of $1 billion
previously announced as its support to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. The United Republic of Tanzania, supported by France, also called for
transparent and credible elections. Angola stressed the need for respect for human
rights and accountability for violators, as well as the speedy implementation of the
Nairobi Declarations of the Kampala Dialogue, particularly with regard to former
combatants of the 23 March Movement. France and New Zealand informed that the
Security Council was scheduled to renew the mandate of MONUSCO at the end of
the month and expressed the wish to see a greater role for the Mission in human
rights, democracy, protection of civilians and efforts to address the root causes of
conflict. New Zealand suggested that the Council consider oversight mechanisms in
the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate and stressed its responsibi lity to take the
views of troop-contributing countries into account. The situation in Burund i was not
directly taken up in the context of this agenda item.
29. With respect to the Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea, on behalf of
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, commended the efforts of
MINUSCA, EUFOR-RCA and Operation Sangaris in creating the necessary
conditions for a progressive transition, expressed full support to MINUSCA and
warned potential spoilers, particularly ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka elements, against
disturbing the transition process. It urged the authorities of the Central African
Republic to ensure that elections were held by 15 August 2015 and encouraged the
international community to mobilize resources for the country, expressing support
for the coordinating role of the International Contact Group on th e Central African
Republic. France, Chad and Nigeria, on behalf of the Security Council, commended
the contributions of MISCA, MINUSCA, EUFOR-RCA and Operation Sangaris and
stressed the need for MINUSCA to attain full capability, especially with the
drawdown of EUFOR-RCA and possibly of Operation Sangaris. France said that the
Council was considering an enhanced troop presence for MINUSCA; Chad and
Nigeria underlined the need for MINUSCA to have the necessary strength to
provide security. France welcomed efforts to fight impunity, recalling the decision
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to open an inquiry and the
Mission’s temporary measures mandate, while Nigeria called upon the African
Union and the United Nations to work together with the International Commission
of Inquiry. France also underlined the need to finance the transition process
(elections, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security sector reform)
and reform State structures, while Chad stressed the importance of setting up a
national republican army and Nigeria called for lifting the arms embargo on the
supply of weapons to the legitimate armed forces. All speakers emphasized the

15-11165

9/26

S/2015/503

importance of coordination among the United Nations, the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the international community.
30. On Boko Haram, Niger, on behalf of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, welcomed recent statements by both Councils and informed that on
3 March 2015, the Peace and Security Council had endorsed the concept of
operations of the Multinational Joint Task Force and authorized the deployment of
10,000 military and other personnel. Noting that some areas had already been
recovered as a result of the efforts by members of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, Niger urged the Security Council to rapidly adopt a resolution under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations for the deployment of the
Multinational Joint Task Force and a funding arrangement. It underlined the need
for a holistic approach that would include socioeconomic development and
employment in the affected areas as well as respect for human rights. Chad stressed
that the eradication of Boko Haram was a global responsibility and informed that it
would present a draft resolution to the Security Council with support from Angola
and Nigeria. Nigeria related its actions in the fight against Boko Haram, which
included military, socioeconomic and human rights -related policies. It expressed
appreciation for the support received from various partners in that regard. Jordan
stressed the need for regional and interregional cooperation in the fight against
terrorism and for financial and logistical support to the Multinational Joint Task
Force.
31. On Mali and the Sahel region, speakers welcomed progress made in the
inter-Malian peace talks, especially the initialling of a draft peace agreement on
peace and reconciliation by the Government of Mali, a member of the coalition of
armed groups “Plateforme” and the international mediation team. Algeria, speaking
on behalf of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, and Chad, on
behalf of the Security Council, deplored the fact that the Coordination of the
coalition of armed groups had yet to initial the draft agreement; Spain suggested
that the group would soon do so and expressed hope that a final peace agreement
would be signed on 26 March, Martyrs’ Day in Mali. Chad called for the two
Councils to insist that the remaining armed groups sign the peace agreement, while
Nigeria cautioned against rushing the parties to an agreement prematurely. On
MINUSMA, Algeria recommended that the Security Council strengthen the
Mission, including through an intervention force modelled on MONUSCO. Spain
and Chad pointed to the future role of MINUSMA in supporting a peace agreement
including the implementation of a ceasefire.
32. On the situation in the Sahel region, speakers called for a holistic and
coordinated approach to the challenges in the region. Algeria, on behalf of the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, and Chad, on behalf of the Security
Council, called for the international community to support the Nouakchott process
aimed at enhancing security in the region. Spain emphasized the need to coordinate
efforts within the framework of the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel
and underlined that fighting terrorism in the Sahel was a priority. Spain and Chad
also underscored the connection between the situation in the Sahel region and
Libya. Nigeria noted that the region had been overlooked and was far behind with
respect to infrastructure development, industrialization and basic food security.
33. On Libya, there was a broad call for all parties to engage in negotiations, and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union expressed support for the

10/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

mediation efforts under the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya, Bernardino Leon. Mozambique, on behalf of the Peace and Security Council,
said that it was essential for the two Councils to work with countries of the region,
especially Algeria and Egypt. Malaysia highlighted the responsibility of both
Councils to curb the illicit trafficking of arms, which had fuelled conflict in the
region, and to support the Government to counter the terror ist threat. Jordan added
that negotiations were under way within the Security Council on rearming the army.
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland said that external actors
could not pick sides at the current point and stressed that the S ecurity Council
debates on the arms embargo were very serious. Chad said that the two Councils
must send the same message, namely, that all must come to the negotiating table,
with a view to forming a transitional government of national unity. The Bolivari an
Republic of Venezuela called for donors to fulfil their commitments to the country.
34. On Somalia, speakers recognized the role of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) in degrading Al-Shabaab and noted that Somalia was a good
example of partnership between the African Union and the United Nations. They
commended the progress made towards “Vision 2016”, including the adoption of
legislation relating to the national electoral commission. Uganda, on behalf of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, called for sustained international
support to consolidate gains made, emphasizing the need to provide equipment to
the army and to stabilize recovered areas. It noted that the joint African Union United Nations benchmarking exercise in April 2015 would elaborate a new
strategic concept of operations and stressed the need to review the configuration of
the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(UNSOA) to ensure the more effective delivery of logistical support for AMISOM.
The United Kingdom welcomed the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Somalia (UNSOM) in supporting the Somali-led process, notwithstanding the
political difficulties of the past 12 months, and underlined the need to prioritize the
Constitution, prepare the ground for elections in 2016 and empower Somalis
through political reform and security sector reform. It looked to the joint assessment
as an opportunity to secure supply routes to liberated towns, strengthen stabilization
and tackle asymmetric threats. The United Kingdom also pointed to the European
Union engagement on the issue of troops’ stipends as an example of the
multifaceted partnership among the African Union, the United Nations and the
European Union. New Zealand cautioned against the possible resurgence of clan
violence in the absence of Al-Shabaab and said that the African Union and the
United Nations must work together to ensure that the civilian components of the
Mission focused on stabilization, including outside Mogadishu. It also welcomed
the commitment by the African Union to tackle sexual exploitation and abuse. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela called for global financial support for Somalia.
35. On South Sudan, Ethiopia, on behalf of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, stressed its disappointment in the parties, commended the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), as well as efforts to unify the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Arusha, and underscored
the need to hold those blocking peace accountable. It noted the recent decision by
the African Union Summit of Heads of State and Government to consider the report
of the Commission of Inquiry in due course and emphasized the Peace and Security
Council’s commitment to ensuring that issues relating to impunity were effectively
addressed. The United States of America underscored the importance of the

15-11165

11/26

S/2015/503

relationship between the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and stated that spoilers and capability gaps were the two biggest
problems of the two Councils. In that context, it stressed that the Security Council
had created the sanctions regime, hoping that it would not be needed, but spoilers
“must know there will be consequences”. The United States noted that for sanctions
to work, however, the buy-in of African countries would be needed both po litically
and technically. It also called for the release of the Commission of Inquiry report so
that the long process of addressing accountability could begin. The Russian
Federation said that it was naive to think that targeted sanctions would drasticall y
change behaviours and reiterated that it had supported resolution 2206 (2015) in the
spirit of Security Council unity, but did not consider sanctions an effective tool.
China called for ongoing support to IGAD and African solutions to African
problems, noting its opening of a Permanent Mission of China to the African Union
to advance its partnership. Nigeria said that the proliferation of other processes
outside of the IGAD umbrella was undermining pressure on parties and stressed that
the Peace and Security Council and the Security Council should meet to determine
the next course of action if the peace process continued to fail.
36. On Darfur, South Africa commended the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) for the creation of s afe havens and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, but noted the decline of the security situation
and lack of political progress. It called for the two Councils to work together to
harmonize positions in the context of the Government’s demands for an exit and the
upcoming report of the joint working group on an exit strategy. The Russian
Federation said that sanctions should be considered against rebels who showed no
signs of interest in negotiation. The United Kingdom said that the strategic review
offered an opportunity to refocus the mission on its primary task of protection of
civilians and that the exit strategy must be based on conditions, including the
Government’s willingness and capability to protect civilians. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela welcomed President Bashir ’s call for national dialogue but
stated that it must be inclusive and asked for the views of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union on how to make progress with respect to the Doha and
Mbeki processes.
37. On the review of United Nations peacekeeping operations, Burundi, speaking
on behalf of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, referred to the
changing security environment and increasing attacks against peacekeepers and
humanitarian workers. Burundi, supported by Namibia, reiterated that the Peace and
Security Council recognized the primacy of the Security Council and acts on behalf
of the international community, underscoring the need to resolve the question of
sustainable financing. It noted that the African Union was preparing a common
African position to be submitted to the panel. France looked forward to the review
as an opportunity to increase the efficiency of peace operations, which would
require the adjustment of mandates based on needs, more flexible tools and the
sharing of resources between missions. France also noted that cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union was a key aspect of the panel ’s work.
38. On the enhancement of cooperation between the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union and the Security Council in preventing conflicts and crises,
Gambia, speaking on behalf of the Peace and Security Council, commended the
African Union’s Continental Early Warning System, the Panel of the Wise and the
ongoing development of a structural prevention framework, as well as its

12/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

comprehensive normative instruments. It called for Security Council support for the
preventive efforts of the African Union, regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, as well as the elaboration of mitigating strategies and
common messages. Further, it stressed the need to strengthen linkages, including
through joint horizon-scanning, biannual meetings on conflict prevention, the
synchronization of calendars and joint missions. Gamb ia, Nigeria and Namibia
supported Commissioner Chergui’s idea of a seminar to take stock of the
partnership. Namibia supported the idea of joint missions, noting the recent joint
visit of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the European
Union Political and Security Committee to Mali as a model, and suggested
videoconferences between respective Chairs and Presidents and communication on
agendas. It stressed the need for the two Councils to take stock of the previous nine
consultative meetings. Nigeria called for the Security Council to support the full
implementation of the African Peace and Security Architecture and called for a
deeper partnership on conflict prevention and counter -terrorism, also recommending
joint discussions on thematic issues. Chile echoed the need to strengthen the conflict
prevention partnership in a key election year.
39. New Zealand stated that the relationship between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union remained too ad hoc and called for
much stronger engagement, particularly on conflict prevention, including through
regular and substantive dialogue between the Councils throughout the year, better
sequencing of decision-making between the two bodies, invitations to Chairs and
Presidents to meet the opposite Council and the invitation of selected Security
Council members to some Peace and Security Council sessions. New Zealand
undertook to engage with the Chair of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union (South Africa) during its Security Council presidency in July 2015. New
Zealand also stressed that the Security Council should be willing to respond quickly
to requests from the African Union and that an innovative solution to the financing
question could not be put aside. The intervention by New Zealand was the last and
contributed to a positive ending to the meeting.
40. The meeting was followed by a press briefing co-chaired by the Ambassadors
of France and Angola for the Security Council, the Ambassador of Namib ia for the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security for the African Union Commission. The Ambassador of France
provided a general summary of the consultation and the panel fielded questions
from the media.

IV. Burundi
41. In a letter dated 5 March 2015, the President of the Security Council informed
the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had decided to send a
mission to Burundi on 13 March 2015. France, Angola and the United States co -led
the mission.
42. The Security Council visited Burundi on 13 March 2015. The visit coincided
with preparations for the elections in Burundi, with the Security Council -mandated
United Nations Electoral Observer Mission in Burundi (MENUB) having been in
the country only a little over two months. Its primary purpose, in line with the
agreed terms of reference, was to take note of the significant progress made by

15-11165

13/26

S/2015/503

Burundi since the adoption of the Arusha Agreement in 2000, notably in the
restoration of security and stability in the country, and to welcome Burundi’s
contribution to and active participation in United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping operations, especially in Somalia and the Central African Republic. It
aimed to stress the crucial need for a free, transparent, credible, inclusive and
peaceful electoral process in 2015 and encourage the Government of Burundi and
the Independent National Electoral Commission, as well as all stakeholders in the
electoral process, including the opposition, to continue to implement the code of
conduct for political parties and political actors and the road map towards the
elections and to make further efforts to ensure a space for all political parties and to
improve dialogue among all political actors, with a view to ensuring a conducive,
free and open environment for the run-up to the 2015 elections. It also aimed to
stress that the Security Council pays sustained attention to the electoral process in
Burundi; to recall the mandate of MENUB to follow and report on the electoral
process before, during and after the elections, in accordance with resolution 2137
(2014); and to call upon the Government of Burundi, the Independent National
Electoral Commission and all relevant electoral stakeholders to ensure close
cooperation with MENUB in that regard. Other aims included assessing the efforts
made by the Government of Burundi to improve the human rights situation in the
country; calling for further efforts to address concerns about restrictions on freedom
of expression and opinion, peaceful assembly and association, continued threats
against journalists and representatives of civil society, including those who work on
human rights, and reports of intimidation, harassment, political violence, arbitrary
arrest and detention; expressing concern about the insufficient progress on the fight
against impunity; calling for the Government of Burundi to deploy greater efforts to
ensure that all human rights violations and abuses are seriously investigated and that
perpetrators are held accountable; stressing the utmost importance of fighting
against poverty; and reiterating its call on the United Nations country team and its
component United Nations agencies to scale up their activities.
43. The delegation held meetings with MENUB, the United Nations c ountry team
and its Resident Coordinator, the Minister of Interior, the Minister of External
Relations and International Cooperation, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the Independent National Human Rights Commission, political parties
and young people affiliated with political parties, civil society and faith-based
organizations and media representatives. The delegation was also received by
President Pierre Nkurunziza.

A.

Key issues

1.

Elections and political developments
44. The Special Envoy and Head of MENUB, Cassam Uteem, briefed on the
progress made in preparation for the elections and efforts to facilitate political
dialogue. The Special Envoy emphasized that the 2015 elections were decisive and
would contribute to enhancing democracy and consolidating peace and national
reconciliation. However, the elections were also difficult because of the absence of
a real political space and political dialogue, which could exacerbate political
tensions and return Burundi to the dark hours of its past. He stressed that successful
elections would open up new prospects in Burundi and allow Burundians and the
elected leaders to tackle the real challenges of the country, namely, health, education

14/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

and employment. Contested elections could pave the way to instability and to a
crisis between the governors and the population, with severe consequences for the
Great Lakes region.
45. The Special Envoy informed that since 1 January 2015, MENUB
representatives had been encouraging the Government and the Independent National
Electoral Commission to take steps to improve relations with the political parties
involved in the electoral process. Also, to respond to some criticisms, the
Commission had agreed to correct some deficiencies. For their part, stakeholders
remained fully involved in the process. The Special Envoy informed that, supported
by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Commission ’s data
processing centre had completed the voter register operations. The provisional
electoral lists would be posted in the coming days in the various provinces and
MENUB observers were trained and ready to observe that process.
46. The United Nations Resident Coordinator, Zacarias Agostinho, underlined that
peace consolidation remained an ongoing priority as the precondition for
development. In that context, the upcoming general elections would be a critical
milestone either by reinforcing the progress made or by triggering a relapse into
conflict in the absence of preventive measures and contingency planning. The
Peacebuilding Fund had played an important role in supporting peace consolidation
in the past and present and would continue to do so in the future. Given that peace
consolidation was a long-term process, the Fund had approved a third peace priority
plan.
47. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Laurent Kavakure, said that there was no
doubt that the elections in Burundi would be democratic and transparent. He
reiterated that the existing legal mechanisms (the Constitutional Court) would
resolve issues, including on the third mandate for President Nkurunziza, and that the
Government of Burundi was a guarantor of the Constitution and the Arusha
Agreement. While there were differing interpretations of the Constitution, he
pointed out that only the Constitutional Court — not political parties, churches or
civil society organizations — could interpret the Constitution. He added that while
there were tensions, the main problem facing the elections was financial support.
The elections were taking a toll on the budget. He asked for additional funding and
financial resources and expressed the hope that the Security Council would send a
message that would lead to more financing for the electoral process. He referred
tithe calm and peaceful elections in 2005 and 2010 and expressed the belief that the
elections in 2015 would be the same.
48. The Minister of Interior, Edouard Nduwimana, thanked the United Nations for
accepting the Government’s request for an observer mission, adding that the
Ministry had been working closely with MENUB. As with other countries,
pre-election periods were characterized by increased tensions. In 2013, the
Government had organized a workshop and established an electoral road map that
served as a guide. He recalled that a code of conduct had also been signed. All of
those steps were helping to calm tensions and to create an environment conducive to
elections. He further recalled the recent signing of a charter on non -violence,
another tool that the Government was using to ensure inclusion. The Minister noted
that political parties in Burundi suffered from low capacity. He recalled that in
2005, only 12 parties had participated in the elections. In 2010, while there were
41 parties accredited, only 24 had participated in the elections. There were many

15-11165

15/26

S/2015/503

political parties, but only three had the capacity to attract support from the entire
country. He highlighted the inclusiveness of participation in the country, mentioning
that women had the right to hold decision-making posts and that all ethnicities could
as well. The Government had noticed that Burundian political parties were
beginning to coalesce and form coalitions and welcomed that development. He
recalled that the Government had adopted a new law on public gatherings and that
90 per cent of civil society organizations liked the law, given that the process had
involved all stakeholders. The National Assembly had also discussed the media law.
The Minister believed that the Government should be congratulated for having such
a large number of radio stations and that civil society in Burundi had evolved just as
the political parties had evolved. The Minister closed by reaffirming the
Government’s commitment to the Arusha Agreement, as it had enabled Burundi to
make progress and set up strong institutions. Burundi wanted strong institutions, not
necessarily strong individuals. He reiterated that the people of Burundi could rest
assured that the elections would be held under excellent conditions, as in 2005 and
2010.
49. The President of the Independent National Electoral Commission recalled that
the five commissioners were first appointed by political parties and then by
presidential decree. The National Assembly was involved in that process, as well as
the Senate. He briefed on the Commission’s current activities, saying that they had
gathered data on voters and were compiling the provisional voters list. They had
finished computerizing the collection of data and would soon be sending out the
voters list. He recalled the plans to reopen the vo ter registration process, for those
who had not been able to register in November and December 2014. He highlighted
that the Commission had been a permanent body since 2009 and that the electoral
process would include national and international observers.
50. He recalled that he had been President of the Independent National Electoral
Commission for the elections in 2010 and reaffirmed the Commission ’s commitment
to a fair and open electoral process. Regarding the eligibility of the President to run
for a third term, that could be addressed only by the Constitutional Court. He
recalled that leading an electoral commission in Africa was a permanent ongoing
challenge. The Commission’s engagement with the diplomatic community and
political parties had been helpful and they had received advice from all actors.
51. During the meeting with leaders of major political parties, which leaders of
youth leagues affiliated with political parties had also attended, opposition parties,
including Sahwanya-Front pour la démocratie au Burundi (Sahwanya-FRODEBU),
FRODEBU-Nyakuri, Forces nationales de libération (FNL) and Union for Peace and
Development, as well as Agathon Rwasa and Charles Nditije, underscored the lack
of political space, the restrictions on freedom of expressio n and assembly and the
arming of youth groups (Imbonerakure) that threatened the peace, security and
stability of the country in the lead-up to the elections. They specifically warned of
the possibility of Imbonerakure youth manning polls around the country as a means
of intimidating voters. Opposition parties also reported not being able to hold press
conferences and being restricted from moving around the country. On the other
hand, they criticized the lack of independence of the Independent National Elec toral
Commission, which they believed was biased in favour of the ruling party, and the
lack of transparency in the way the Commission handled the voter registration
process. The opposition parties highlighted the risk for violence in the country
should President Nkurunziza run for a third term and all of them called upon the

16/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

Security Council to exert all its might to dissuade President Nkurunziza from
running for a third term, stressing the risks that it entailed for the stability of the
country.
52. The Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie -Forces pour la défense
de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD) commended the work of the Independent National
Electoral Commission while recognizing that there had been problems at the
beginning of the voter registration process. They also criticized the opposition as
weak and willing to bypass the electoral process to get into power. They argued
against allegations that the CNDD-FDD youth wing (Imbonerakure) was preventing
the activities of political parties. With regard to the third term, the President of
CNDD-FDD stressed that some political parties and civil society organizations were
using the issue as a pretext to incite young people to protest. The Coalition for
Peace in Africa, a coalition of nine political parties close to the CNDD-FDD-led
Government, recognized that thanks to the Arusha Agreement, the country had
achieved progress but that since 2005, the country had been guided by the
Constitution, which had been voted by the population, not just a group of a few
political movements. As for the third term, representatives of the Coalition indicated
that any problem with the interpretation of the Constitution would be dealt with by
the Constitutional Court.
53. Civil society organizations and the media also had the opportunity to express
their views to the Council members. The majority addressed the divisions and
tensions relating to a possible third term for President Nkurunziza, believing that it
was a violation of the Arusha Agreement and of the Constituti on and was likely to
lead to violence. They specifically asked the Security Council to advise President
Nkurunziza to renounce the possibility of a third mandate because such a decision
would lead to violence. They called upon the Council to do everything in its power
to preserve peace and stability in Burundi. The representative of Ligue ITEKA
further informed that any attempt by President Nkurunziza to run for a third term
would cause chaos in the country. The civil society organizations were also
concerned about general insecurity before and during the elections. Civil society
activists also called for the release of political prisoners who had been arrested, so
that they could participate in the upcoming elections. The representative of
Association pour la protection des droits humains et des personnes détenues
expressed concern about divisions within the security forces. Another concern
among the majority of the civil society organizations and the media was the
restricted political space, with media representatives recalling personal accounts of
restrictions of their rights as journalists.
54. Pro-Government civil society organizations, Observatoire national des
élections et des organisations pour le progrès and Ligue Izere Ntiwihebure were also
present at the meeting. Observatoire national des élections et des organisations pour
le progrès condemned some members of the Security Council for constantly
criticizing the Government but never the opposition’s behaviour. It also criticized
donors for not providing financial support to pro-Government civil society
organizations. The representative of Ligue Izere Ntiwihebure further advised against
being pessimistic about the electoral atmosphere. The civil society organizations
underlined that women were the ones in the front line and therefore urged respect
for the laws and sought guarantees of peace and peaceful and transparent elections.

15-11165

17/26

S/2015/503

55. During his meeting with the members of the delegation, President Pierre
Nkurunziza thanked the Security Council for the balanced statement adopted on
18 February on Burundi and for the continuous engagement in the country. He
asserted that Burundi enjoyed peace and aspired to development. He proudly
stressed that Burundi was now exporting peace to other countries such as So malia
and the Central African Republic through the presence of its peacekeepers.
56. With regard to elections, President Nkurunziza observed that that was a
normal process and that the Government was in a continuous dialogue with civil
society organizations and political parties to improve the political environment. In
that regard, he mentioned that various texts had been adopted and several actions
had been taken, notably in connection with freedom of expression. He also noted
progress in the preparation of the elections, underlining that the population had
registered and that there was dialogue at every step of the process to correct
irregularities and make further progress. He informed members of the Security
Council that the Independent National Electoral Commission was about to post the
provisional lists of voters and that the operation would give the population an
opportunity to challenge the lists prior to the partial reopening of the voter
registration process.
57. President Nkurunziza also reiterated that the 2015 elections would take place
in a peaceful environment and would be organized in the best conditions possible,
insisting that the Government had asked the region and the international community
to deploy observers. He further commended the Minister of Interior for his
supervision of the work of political parties and civil society organizations and said
that he was pleased with the MENUB presence and its support in the signing of the
Charter on Non-Violence. The President also told the Security Council delegation
that goodwill was not enough to organize elections: one also had to have resources
and, in that regard, the United Nations must help Burundi to mobilize the required
resources. He further called for political support, underlining that all concerned
parties had to lend their support to the process, including governme nt, political
parties and civil society organizations.
58. The President stressed that Burundi was a democratic country and that for the
first time ever, elected institutions had been able to complete their mandates without
being brutally disrupted. He considered that the country was in an electoral phase
and that everyone was trying to position himself, which was normal. He added that
it was also normal for people to have their own interpretation of the Constitution,
but what was more important was that people respect the Constitution. The debate
about the third term was a sign that there was democracy in Burundi. In the same
vein, President Nkurunziza stressed that the Constitution found its source in the
Arusha Agreement and in the comprehensive ceasefire agreement. As a matter of
fact, he said, the competent institution would decide, not the people on the streets,
stressing that the referee in that matter was the Constitutional Court. He also stated
that everyone had the right to be elected and that preventing anyone from being
elected would create a bad precedent. He further said that calling people to the
streets to demonstrate would be irresponsible.
2.

Security
59. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Interior highlighted that
the army and police in Burundi were guaranteeing security. They stated that the

18/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

Government was doing everything so that the situation improved in the pre -election
period. The Minister of Interior emphasized that the country had a comprehensive
national security programme. Security measures were being implemented
throughout the country and at all levels of government. He reiterated that security
would be guaranteed throughout the elections.
60. Major opposition parties and civil society groups decried the rising insecurity
in the country, which made it difficult for them to carry out their outreach. They
specifically pointed out that the arming of CNDD-FDD youth (Imbonerakure)
threatened the peace, security and stability of the country in the lead -up to the
elections.
61. Assessing the political and security environment during the 2015 elections,
President Nkurunziza indicated that his message to the Government, political parties
and civil society organizations was that Burundians should understand that peace
and security were the responsibility of all.
3.

Development
62. The United Nations Resident Coordinator and other members of the United
Nations country team briefed the Security Council on their various mandates
relating to development. The Minister for Foreign Affairs highlighted the strategic
framework for eradicating poverty and asked for the country team to be
strengthened in order to launch more projects more quickly. He recalled the Security
Council presidential statement of 18 February (S/PRST/2015/6) and the call for
development assistance. He appealed to the various partners to respect their
commitments. The Resident Coordinator recalled the need for de velopment
assistance and asked that the United Nations strengthen the country team and its
programmes. That call was echoed by the President.

4.

Human rights
63. The representative of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) in Burundi, Patrice Vahard, informed the Security Council
of the Office’s mandate in Burundi as it related to the protection of human rights in
the country. He informed that the High Commissioner was planning a visit in April,
which showed the priority accorded to the situation in Burundi.
64. Members of the Security Council also held discussions with the Independent
National Human Rights Commission represented by the Deputy President, Sonia
Ndikumasabo. Ms. Ndikumasabo informed the Council that the fight against
impunity was a major challenge for the Commission, owing to the lack of
independence of the justice system. She added that Burundians had very little
confidence in the justice system. The Deputy President emphasized that the
Commission had very good relations with magistrates; however, they were reluctant
to apply the law in “delicate” cases and awaited instruction from above, implying
the executive. The Commission had held workshops for the magistrates in an effort
to build their capacity. She informed Council members that the Commission had
very limited means to fulfil its mandate. While the Commission was represented in
all provinces of the country, the workforce was very weak and experts had no means
of transportation to investigate reports and cases. When asked specifically about her
views on the independence of the Constitutional Court, the Deputy President gave
the example of the Court turning down the Government ’s draft law on media, which

15-11165

19/26

S/2015/503

was indeed inconsistent with the Constitution. Some had interpreted that as a sign of
the independence of the Court vis-à-vis the Government. However, the Deputy
President also expressed doubts concerning the independence of the Court, sta ting
that some observers also believed the Court might have turned down the draft media
law to appear independent ahead of deciding in favour of the ruling party on the
third term decision.
65. Civil society and political parties also raised concerns about the violation of
human rights, especially those relating to the freedom to assemble. Democracy
could not exist without certain freedoms, including freedom of association and
opinion, freedom of expression and freedom of the press. The Minister of Interio r
defended the Government’s record on the protection of human rights, especially on
the freedom of the press. He suggested that the Government should be congratulated
for having a large number of radio stations and that civil society in Burundi had
evolved just as the country’s political parties had evolved.

B.

Observations
66. Members of the Security Council commended Burundi for the hard -won peace
that it had forged over the past decade, its stellar contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping in the Central African Republic and Somalia and its progress in
economic development. While members of the Government expressed their
commitment to holding free, credible, inclusive and peaceful elections, most
members of the political opposition and civil society reported that the pre-election
environment was not inclusive or peaceful. Several reiterated their fear that an
announcement by President Nkurunziza of his intention to run for a third term
would lead to violence and called upon the Council to advise President Nkurunziza
on that point. Members of the Council urged Government officials to ensure a free
and inclusive environment before, during and after the elections and urged that the
President balance the need to maintain the peace established through the Arusha
Agreement in his decision on elections.

20/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

Annex I
Composition of the Security Council mission to the Central
African Republic, Ethiopia and Burundi, including the
African Union
Composition
Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins (Angola), co -head of mission
Ambassador Mahamat Zene Cherif (Chad)
Ambassador Carlos Olguín Cigarroa (Chile)
Counsellor Zhao Yong (China)
Ambassador François Delattre (France), co-head of mission
Ambassador Dina Kawar (Jordan)
Ms. Siti Hajjar Adnin (Malaysia)
Ambassador Jim McLay (New Zealand)
Ambassador Usman Sarki (Nigeria)
Mr. Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Juan Manuel González de Linares Palou (Spain)
Ambassador Peter Wilson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America), third co -head of
mission to Burundi
Minister Counsellor Zael Alexis Fernández Rivera (Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of))

15-11165

21/26

S/2015/503

Annex II
Terms of reference
Central African Republic
1.
To recall that the Central African Republic authorities bear the primary
responsibility to protect all populations within their territory from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and to emphasize that any
sustainable solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic should be owned
by that country.
2.
To commend the African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic, Operation Sangaris and the European Union military operation in
the Central African Republic for the work done in laying the foundation for
increased security ahead of and in support of the deployment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Cent ral African Republic
(MINUSCA).
3.
To express grave concern that armed groups continue to destabilize the Central
African Republic and pose a permanent threat to the peace, security and stability of
the country, and to further express concern at the recent increase in kidnappings and
attacks against humanitarian workers in the Central African Republic, which
impedes humanitarian access to vulnerable populations.
4.
To reiterate the appeal to all parties and stakeholders, particularly the leaders
of the ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka groups, as well as all other armed groups, to
immediately cease all forms of violence, including sexual violence, to permanently
lay down their arms, to release all children from their ranks, and to embark upon the
path of dialogue as the only viable means towards achieving lasting reconciliation
and peace.
5.
To remind all parties of their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law to ensure the immediate, full, safe and unhindered civilian -led
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the principle of safe, dignified and
sustainable return of internally displaced persons and refugees.
6.
To commend efforts by the transitional authorities to gather views of local
citizens in advance of the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation by dispatching
Government ministers and officials throughout the Central African Republic and to
welcome the holding of the Bangui Forum as an important milestone for a
comprehensive political dialogue and reconciliation process at the loc al and national
levels.
7.
To reiterate the call upon the transitional authorities to accelerate the transition
process and to take concrete action, with the full, effective and equal participation
of women, for the holding of free, fair, transparent and inclusive presidential and
legislative elections that allow for the full, effective and equal participation of
internally displaced persons and Central African Republic refugees, no later than
August 2015; the fight against impunity, including for crimes o f sexual and genderbased violence; the formulation and implementation of a disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy; and the rebuilding of
effective State institutions, including through security sector reform.

22/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

8.
To reinforce the need for an inclusive and effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, as well as repatriation and resettlement, in
the case of foreign fighters, including women and children formerly associated with
armed forces and groups, while respecting the need to fight impunity.
9.
To stress the important role of the internal security forces (police and
gendarmerie) in the restoration of security in the Central African Republic and
encourage the Central African Republic authorities to initiate the reform process of
the Central African Republic armed forces, to include appropriate vetting
procedures in order to put in place a professional, representative and balanced army,
including through the adoption of measures to absorb elements of the ar med groups
meeting rigorous selection criteria, building the capacity of the security forces to
address sexual and gender-based violence and retraining part of the Central African
Republic armed forces.
10. To welcome in this regard the decision of the European Union to establish a
one-year military advice mission based in Bangui (European Union Military
Advisory Mission in the Central African Republic), as requested by the transitional
authorities of the Central African Republic, in order to contribute to providing them
with expert advice on reforming the Central African Republic armed forces and to
underline the importance of a clear distribution of tasks and close coordination
between the international forces or missions in the Central African Republic a nd the
lead role of MINUSCA in this regard.
11. To assess the deployment of the military, police and civilian components of
MINUSCA; the initial work of the Mission in implementing its mandate; the
establishment of the Bangui task force; and the reconfiguration of the Mission
following the violent incidents in Bangui in October.
12. To urge MINUSCA to accelerate the deployments of its civilian, police and
military capabilities, including gender advisers and women protection advisers, in
the Central African Republic in order to reach its full operational capacity as soon
as possible and enable the Mission to effectively discharge its mandate over the
entire national territory.
13. To assess the security situation and the ability of MINUSCA to intensify the
implementation of its mandate, in particular to protect civilians under threat of
physical violence; prevent and report on all forms of violence, including sexual based violence; support the implementation of the transition process, in particular
the reconciliation and electoral processes, with the full and effective participation of
women; facilitate the civilian-led delivery of humanitarian assistance; support the
promotion and protection of human rights; support national and international justice
and the rule of law and support the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation and security sector reform processes, in accordance with the priority
tasks set out in paragraph 30 of Security Council resolution 2149 (2014).
14. To assess the plight of vulnerable populations in the Central African Republic,
including those located in enclaves in Bangui and around the country.
15. To urge the former troop- and police-contributing countries of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African Republic that have been
rehatted to MINUSCA to expedite the procurement and deployment of remaining
additional contingent-owned equipment.

15-11165

23/26

S/2015/503

16. To call upon all international partners of the Central African Republic to
provide urgent financial contributions to support national dialogue and
reconciliation, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform processes and the restoration of the judicial and penal chains in order to fight
against impunity.
17. To further call upon all international partners to provide support to the
electoral process as a matter of urgency, particularly through financing the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) multi-donor basket fund for elections.
18. To express grave concern at the threat to peace and security in the Central
African Republic arising from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and
misuse of small arms and light weapons, and the use of such weapons against
civilians affected by armed conflict, and to recall in this regard the important
contribution that the Council-mandated arms embargo can make to countering the
illicit transfer of arms and related materiel in the Central African Republic and its
region and to supporting post-conflict peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector reform.
19. To stress the urgent and imperative need to end impunity in the Central
African Republic and to bring to justice perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and of abuses or violations of human rights, including sexual
violence, underlining in this regard the need to bolster national accountability
mechanisms and to implement without delay the Memorandum of Understanding on
Urgent Temporary Measures of 7 August 2014, which describes, in particular, the
establishment of a national special penal court in charge of investigating and
prosecuting the serious crimes committed in the Central African Republic.
20. To welcome the ongoing cooperation of the transitional authorities of t he
Central African Republic with the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
who opened an investigation on 24 September 2014, following the request of the
national authorities, into alleged crimes committed since 2012.
21. To exchange views with members of civil society, including local women and
women’s organizations in the field, in accordance with paragraph 6 of Security
Council resolution 2122 (2013).
22. To express concern that illicit trade, exploitation and smuggling of natural
resources, including gold, diamonds and wildlife poaching and trafficking, continue
to threaten the peace and stability of the Central African Republic.
23. To note the critical importance of effective implementation of the sanctions
regime, including the key role that neighbouring States and regional and subregional
organizations can play in this regard and encourage efforts to further enhance
cooperation.
24. To call upon the transitional authorities to continue their efforts to restore
sound and transparent public financial management, in line with the
recommendations of the recent International Monetary Fund mission in Bangui
(November 2014), in particular to mobilize domestic resources, particularly customs
revenues, in full respect of financial best practice, in order to meet the expenses
related to the functioning of the State; implement early recovery plans; and
revitalize the economy.

24/26

15-11165

S/2015/503

25. To express its appreciation for the international mediation led by President
Denis Sassou N’Guesso of the Republic of Congo and comprising Soumeylou
Boubeye Maiga, on behalf of the African Union, and Abdoulaye Bathily, on behalf
of the United Nations, as well as the Secretary-General of the Economic Community
of Central African States as rapporteur, in view of the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation and the upcoming legislative and presidential elections, and the
constructive engagement of the region in this regard.
African Union
26. To strengthen partnership and enhance cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations through an exchange of views on issues of interest to both
the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2033 (2012).
27. To exchange views and explore ways of reinforcing and supporting the African
Union conflict prevention tools.
28. To exchange views on situations of interest to both the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, on the basis of
an agenda to be agreed by both Councils.
Burundi
29. To take note of the significant progress made by Burundi since the adoption of
the Arusha Agreement in 2000, notably in the restoration of security and stability in
the country, and to welcome Burundi’s contribution to and active participation in
United Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations, especially in Somalia
and the Central African Republic.
30. To stress the crucial need for a free, transparent, credible, inclusive and
peaceful electoral process in 2015, with the effective participation of women as
observers, voters, candidates and mediators, in order to ensure that the significant
progress achieved is not reversed.
31. To encourage the Government of Burundi and the Independent National
Electoral Commission as well as all stakeholders in the electoral process, including
the opposition, to continue to implement the code of conduct for political parties
and political actors and the road map towards the elections and to make further
efforts to ensure a space for all political parties and to improve dialogue between all
political actors, with a view to ensuring a conducive, free and open environment for
the run-up to the 2015 elections.
32. To stress that it is critical that the Independent National Electoral C ommission
continue to take effective measures to strengthen the public ’s confidence in the
electoral process, and also to encourage the opposition to play its part and remain
engaged throughout the electoral process and to use peaceful and democratic means
to address any electoral dispute.
33. To recall that the Security Council pays sustained attention to the electoral
process in Burundi and to recall the mandate of the United Nations Electoral
Mission in Burundi (MENUB) to follow and report on the elector al process before,
during and after the elections, in accordance with resolution 2137 (2014), and to call
upon the Government of Burundi, the Independent National Electoral Commission

15-11165

25/26

S/2015/503

and all relevant electoral stakeholders to ensure close cooperation with MENUB in
this regard.
34. To assess the efforts made by the Government of Burundi to improve the
human rights situation in the country and to call for further efforts to address
concerns about restrictions on freedom of expression and opinion, peaceful
assembly and association, continued threats against journalists and representatives
of civil society, including those who work on human rights, and reports of
intimidation, harassment, political violence, arbitrary arrest and detention.
35. To express concern about the insufficient progress on the fight against
impunity and call for the Government of Burundi to deploy greater efforts to ensure
that all human rights violations and abuses are seriously investigated and that
perpetrators are held accountable.
36. To stress the utmost importance of fighting against poverty and to emphasize
the need for the United Nations system and the international community to maintain
their support for peace consolidation and long-term development in Burundi, calls
upon the Government of Burundi and international and regional partners to fully
implement the mutual commitments made in the joint communiqué of the round table meeting held in Bujumbura in December 2014, welcoming the continued
engagement of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
37. To reiterate its call on the United Nations country team and its component
United Nations agencies to scale up their activities and to emphasize the need to
address the implications of the departure of the United Natio ns Office in Burundi as
identified in the Joint Transition Plan, in particular in the areas of political dialogue,
high-level facilitation and advocacy, and human rights; to ensure that women, peace
and security functions and overall efforts towards inclus ion are properly embedded
and resourced within the United Nations country team and are part of the political
dialogue with the Government and MENUB.

26/26

15-11165
