11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/4 4 that, in accordance with paragraph 27 of resolution A above, he had appointed the following
members of the United Nations Council for Namibia: ANGOLA,
BELGIUM, BULGARIA, CYPRUS, UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON

and VENEZUELA.
As a result, the Council is composed of the following Member States: ALGERIA, ANGOLA, AUSTRALIA, BANGLADESH, BELGIUM, BOTSWANA, BULGARIA, BURUNDI, CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, CYPRUS, EGYPT, FINLAND, GUYANA, HAITI, INDIA, INDONESIA, LIBERIA, MEXICO, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, POLAND, ROMANIA,
SENEGAL, TURKEY, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON, VENEZUELA, YUGOSLAVIA

and ZAMBIA.

33/183.

Policies of apartheid of the Government
of South Africa46
A

UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa,46 to which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa,
Reaffirming that humanitarian assistance to those
persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia
is appropriate and essential,
Grave/y concerned over the continued and increased
repression against all opponents of apartheid and racial
discrimination in South Africa, Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia,
Recognizing the need for increased contributions to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned, in arder to enable them to provide legal assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and
discriminatory legislation, as well as assistance to
their families and to refugees from South Africa,
1. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund
for South Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian assistance;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments,
organizations and individuals that have contributed to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged
in rendering humanitarian assistance to the victims
of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Again appeals for generous contributions to
the Trust Fund and to the voluntary agencies concerned.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

B
INTERNATIONAL MOBILIZATION AGAINST apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its numerous resolutions on the policies
of apartheid of the Government of South Africa and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
44 A/33/560 and
45 See also sect.

33/446.
4 6 A/33/313.

Add.l.
I, foot-note 5, and sect. X.B.3, decision

27

Recalling, in particular, its resolution 3411 C (XXX)
of 28 November 1975 proclaiming that the United
Nations and the international community have a special responsibility towards the oppressed people of
South Africa and their liberation movements,
Further recalling its resolution 32/105 B of 14 December 1977 proclaiming the year beginning on
21 March 1978 International Anti-Apartheid Year,
Considering that the United Nations has an important and vital role in the promotion of international
action for the elimination of apartheid,
Reaffirming its full commitment to the eradication
of apartheid and the elimination of the threat to international peace and security caused by the apartheid
régime,
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against the
conscience and dignity of mankind,
Aware that the righteous struggle of the oppressed
people of South Africa has led to an international
consensus against apartheid and to growing support
for the struggle for freedom and human dignity in
South Africa,
Considering that the observance of the Intemational
Anti-Apartheid Year must lead to acceleration of
concerted intemational action towards the eradication
of apartheid and the liberation of the South African
people,
T aking note of the recommendations of the Special
Committee against Apartheid far an international mobilization against apartheid,47
1. Calls upon ali Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to join in
the intcrnational mobilization against apartheid;
2. Authorizes the Special Committee against Apartheid, with the assistance of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat and in co-operation with the
liberation movements recognized by the Organization
of African Unity, to promote the intemational mobilization against apartheid and to facilitate co-ordination
of action;
3. Appeals to anti-apartheid movements, solidarity
committees, trade unions, churches, youth organizations and all other non-govemmental organizations to
participate in the intemational mobilization against
apartheid by appropriate action.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

e
TRIBUTES TO THE MEMORY OF LEADERS AND OUTSTANDING PERSONALITIES WHO HAVE MADE SIGNIFICANT CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE STRUGGLES OF THE
OPPRESSED PEOPLES

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid,48
Conscious of the great contribution to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations made by the
leaders of the oppressed peoples in their struggles
47 Official Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.1), paras.
235-245.
4 8 fbid., Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.l ).

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

28

against apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism
and for peace and international co-operation,
Considering that those leaders, as well as other outstanding personalities who have made significant contributions to the struggles of the oppressed peoples,
should be duly honoured by the international community and that their contributions should be made
widely known for the education of world public
opinion, especially of youth,
l. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
in consultation with the Special Committee against
Apartheid and all other appropriate bodies, to take
steps to honour the memory of the persons referred
to above and to publicize their lives and contributions;
2. Appeals to Governments and organizations to
co-operate with the United Nations and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the effective implementation of the purposes
of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meetin{?
24 January 1979

D
RELATIONS BETWEEN ISRAEL ANO SoUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its repeated condemnations of the intensification of relations and growing collaboration by Israel
with the racist régime of South Africa in the political,
military, economic and other fields, in particular resolution 32/105 D of 14 December 1977,
Taking note of the special report of the Special
Committee against Apartheid concerning recent developments in relations between Israel and South
Africa, 49
Taking note of the report of the World Conference
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, held at
Geneva from 14 to 25 August 1978,5º
Grave/y concerned by the persistence of Israel in
escalating its collaboration and strengthening its relations with the racist régime of South Africa in defiance
of the resolutions of the General Assembly and of
world public opinion,
Reaffirming that collaboration by Israel has constituted an encouragement to the apartheid régime in
South Africa to persist in its criminal policy of apartheid and is a hostile act against the oppressed people
of South Africa and the entire African continent,
1. Again strongly condemns lsrael's continuing and
increasing collaboration with the racist régime of
South Africa;
2. Demands that Israel desist from and termínate
all forms of collaboration with South Africa and abide
scrupulously by the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council;
3. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to keep the matter under constant review and
49 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 22A (A/33/22/ Add.l and 2),
document A/33/22/ Add.2.
50 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.XIV.2.

report to the General Assembly and the Security Council as appropriate.
93rd plenary meetin!?
24 January 1979

E
ÜIL EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/105 G of 14 December
1977,
Having considered the special report of the Special
Committee against Apartheid on oil sanctions against
South Africa, :. 1
Taking note of resolution CM/Res. 634 (XXXI)
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity at its thirty-first ordinary session,
held at Khartoum from 7 to 18 July 1978," 2
Reiterating the importance, among measures for
the eradication of apartheid, of an embargo on the
supply of petrolcum and petroleum products to South
Africa and on investments in the petroleum industry
in South Africa,
I. Commends all Governments which have imposed an oíl embargo against South Africa;
2. Requests the Security Council to consider urgently a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Requests all States to enact legislation to prohibit:
(a) The sale or supply of petroleum and petroleum
products to any person or body in South Africa, or
to any other person or body for the purpose of eventual
supply to South Africa;
( b) Any activities by their nationals or in their
territories which promote or are calculated to promote
the sale or supply of petroleum or petroleum products
to South Africa;
(e) The shipment in vessels or aircraft of their
registration, or under charter to their nationals, of
any petroleum or petroleum products to South Africa;
(d) The supply of any services, including inter
alia technical advice, spare parts and capital, to the
oil companies in South Africa;
(e) The provision of facilities in their ports or
airports to vessels or aircraft carrying petroleum or
petroleum products to South Africa;
(f) Any investments in, or provision of technical
or other assistance to, the petroleum industry in South
Africa;
4. Encourages trade unions, churches, anti-apartheid movements and other organizations to intensify
their campaigns for an effective oil embargo against
South Africa;
5. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid:
(a)
To publicize all information concerning the
supply of oil and oil products to South Africa and
51 O/jicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22A (A/33/22/ Add.1 and 2), document A/33/22/ Add.1.
52 See A/33/235 and Corr.l, annex I.

11.

Reaolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the collaboration in this respect by Govemments and
transnational corporations with the racist régime of
South Africa;
( b) To take all appropriate steps, in co-operation
with the Organization of African Unity, to enhance and
intensify world-wide support for an effective oil embargo against South Africa;
(e) To take all other appropriate steps to promote
the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests all Governments and organizations to
co-operate with the Special Committee in the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

F
POLITICAL PRISONERS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its past resolutions concerning political
prisoners in South Africa,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 53
Noting with grave concern the continued and escalating repression in South Africa, including indiscriminate killings of peaceful demonstrators, arbitrary
detentions, torture and killing of detainees, and the
institution of numerous trials under arbitrary laws providing for death sentences,
Recognizing the great contribution of the opponents
of apartheid in South Africa to the purposes of the
United Nations,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 417
( 1977) of 31 October 1977,
l. Demands that the racist régime of South Africa
end violence and repression against the black people
and other opponents of apartheid, release all persons
imprisoned or restricted under arbitrary laws for their
opposition to apartheid and abrogate the bans on organizations and news media opposed to apartheid;
2. Expresses its solidarity with the national liberation movement of South Africa and all those struggling
for the elimination of apartheid and racial discrimination;
3. Warns the racist régime of South Africa of the
grave consequences of the execution of freedom
fighters;
4. Declares that freedom fighters captured during
the struggle for liberation must be entitled to prisonerof-war status in accordance with the relevant Geneva
Conventions;
5. Urges the Secretary-General and Member States
to take appropriate measures to save the lives of
Mr. Solomon Mahlangu and other captured freedom
fighters;
6. Demands that the racist régime of South Africa
termínate the trials of "Bethal 18" and "Soweto 11"
and ali other trials under repressive laws and release
the accused in those trials, as well as witnesses detained
in connexion with those trials;
53 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr. l).

29

7. Requests ali Governments and agencies within
the United Nations system to publicize, as widely as
possible, the lives of political prisoners in South
Africa;
8. Urges ali Governments, judicial associations and
other organizations to contribute generously to legal
assistance to ali those persecuted under repressive
and discriminatory legislation in South Africa;
9. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid to take ali appropriate measures to promote the
world campaign for the release of South African political prisoncrs in co-operation with the Govemments
and organizations concerned.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979
G
NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH SüUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Security Council resolution 418
( 1977) of 4 November 1977, in which the Council decided, inter afia, that all States should refrain from
any co-operation with South Africa in the manufacture
and development of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its resolutions concerning the denuclearization of the continent of Africa,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid,M
Noting with great concern that the racist régime of
South Africa has intensified its nuclear capability,
Considering that the acquisition of nuclear-weapon
capability by the racist régime of South Africa would
constitute a grave threat to intemational peace and
security,
1. Requests the Security Council to consider measures aimed at effectively preventing South Africa from
developing nuclear weapons;
2. Calls upon all States which have not yet done
so, in particular France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, Israel and the United States of America, to cease
forthwith all collaboration with the racist régime of
South Africa in the nuclear field and to take measures
to prevent such collaboration by corporations, institutions and other bodies and individuals within their
jurisdiction;
3. Requests all intemational organizations concerned to take measures to act in accordance with
the purposes of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

H
ECONOMIC COLLABORATION WJTH SüUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/105 G of 14 December
1977,
Reafjirming that any collaboration with the racist
régime of South Africa constitutes a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South Africa and a contemptuous defiance of the United Nations and of the international community,
r,.i !bid.

General Assembly-Thirty-third SeS11i0111

30

Considering that such collaboration strengthens the
racist régime, encourages it to persist in its repressive
and aggressive policies and seriously aggravates the
situation in South Africa, thereby constituting a threat
to international peace and security,
Reiterating its firm conviction that mandatory economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations are essential to facilitate the
speedy eradication of apartheid,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid,55
Concerned that the majar Western and other trading
partners of South Africa continue to collaborate with
the racist régime and that their collaboration constitutes
the main obstacle to the liquidation of the racist régime and the elimination of the inhuman and criminal
system of apartheid,
Recognizing that utmost priority must be accorded
to international action to secure the full implementation
of the resolutions of the United Nations far the cessation of all collaboration with South Africa,
l. Calls upan all Governments concerned:
(a) To sever links with the apartheid régime;
(b) To take measures to prevent transnational
corporations, banks and all other institutions from
collaborating with the apartheid régime;
(e) To take all necessary action to termina te
credits by the International Monetary Fund and other
bodies to South Africa;
(d) To prohibit the sale of krugerrands;
(e) To deny any facilities to airlines or ships
travelling to and from South Africa;
2. Requests the Security Council urgently to consider mandatory economic sanctions against the racist
régime of South Africa and take action, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to bring
about the total cessation of:
(a) Supplies of petroleum, petroleum products or
other strategic materials to South Africa;
(b) Loans to, and investments in, South Africa;
(e) Guarantees or other inducements far investments in South Africa;
(d) Tariff and other preferences far imports from
South Africa;
(e) All trade with South Africa;
3. Encourages anti-apartheid movements, solidarity
committees, trade unions, churches, student groups
and other organizations engaged in campaigns against
collaboration with South Africa;
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid:
(a) To continue to publicize all available information on collaboration by transnational corporations
with the racist régime of South Africa in its pursuit
of apartheid, in arder that appropriate action may be
taken to secure the termination of such collaboration;
( b) To publicize the plundering of the natural
resources of South Africa by the transnational corporations with the collusion of the apartheid régime and
to study measures far the protection of the resources;
Mi Ibid.

(e) To take all other appropriate steps to promote
the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

I
DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON apartheid

The General Assembly,
Strongly convinced of the need to intensify greatly
the efforts to mobilize world public opinion far the
eradication of apartheid in South Africa,
Noting the insidious propaganda activities of the
racist régime of South Africa and its supporters, and
the imperative need to counter them effectively,
Recalling its resolution 32/105 H of 14 December
1977,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid," 6
Noting the promotion of the dissemination of infarmation against apartheid, particularly through audiovisual means,
Noting with appreciation that the Secretary-General
has initiated, in co-operation with Member States
whose transmitters can be heard in southern Africa, a
regular programme of radio broadcasts directed at
South Africa,
Expressing its appreciation to all Governments which
have contributed to the Trust Fund far Publicity against
Apartheid,
Recognizing the important contribution of specialized agencies and other institutions within the
United Nations system to the dissemination of infarmation against apartheid,
l. Requests all Governments and organizations to
co-operate with the Special Committee against Apartheid and the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat towards the widest possible dissemination of
infarmation on apartheid;
2. Appeals to all Governments and organizations
to contribute generously to the Trust Fund far Publicity
against Apartheid;
3. Requests the Special Committee and the Centre
against Apartheid to utilize the Trust Fund particularly
far the production of audio-visual material and far
assistance to appropriate organizations with a view to
disseminating infarmation material on apartheid;
4. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States whose broadcasting organizations are co-operating with the Secretary-General in radio broadcasts directed at South Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify and
expand the production of radio programmes for broadcast to southern Africa;
6. Again urges Member States whose radio transmitters can reach South Africa and adjacent territories
to make available transmission facilities far these
broadcasts;
7. Requests the Centre against Apartheid, in cooperation with the Department of Public Infarmation
of the Secretariat:
r.o !bid.

11,

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) To lend all appropriate assistance far these
transmissions, in particular to African radio stations
broadcasting to South Africa;
( b) To expand the production and distribution
of infarmation material in various languages and give
special attention to the production of audio-visual material;
(e) To acquire and distribute a film on international action against apartheid;
(d) To arrange far the production and distribution, in various languages, of selected films on apartheid produced by other organizations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General and Member
States to issue special postage stamps on apartheid;
9. Commends, in particular, the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
Intemational Labour Organisation, the World Health
Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and the United Nations High
Commissioner far Refugees far intensifying their activities far the dissemination of infarmation on apartheid in connexion with the International Anti-Apartheid Year;
10. Requests all United Nations offices and agencies to co-operate with the Centre against Apartheid
far the regional production and distribution of United
Nations material on apartheid.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

J
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF THE SPECIAL CoMMITTEE
AGAINST Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 51
Commending the Special Committee far its activities
in the discharge of its mandate,
Considering the need far continuing and expanding
the activities of the Special Committee in the light
of the recommendations contained in its report,
Reiterating its determination, as expressed in its
resolution 32/105 B of 14 December 1977 proclaiming the year beginning on 21 March 1978 International Anti-Apartheid Year, to take all appropriate
measures to promote the world-wide observance of
the Y ear in full solidarity with the oppressed people
of South Africa and their national liberation movements,
Considering that the increasing importance and urgency of effective international action against apartheid
require intensified and concerted efforts by all Governments and non-governmental organizations,
Noting with appreciation the work of the Centre
against Apartheid of the Secretariat in assisting the
Special Committee in the discharge of its mandate,
l. Approves the recommendations of the Special
Committee against Apartheid in subsections G to I of
section II of its report; 57
2.

Authorizes the Special Committee:

5 7 /bid.

31

(a) To send missions to Member States and to
the headquarters of the specialized agencies and other
intergovernmental organizations, as required, to promote international action against apartheid and the
observance of the Intemational Anti-Apartheid Year;
( b) To intensify co-operation with the movement
of non-aligned countries, the Organization of African
Unity and other appropriate organizations;
(e) To participate in conferences concerned with
action against apartheid;
(d) To invite representatives of the South African
liberation movements recognized by the Organization
of African Unity and those of other organizations
active in opposition to apartheid, as well as experts,
far consultations on various aspects of apartheid and
on international action against apartheid;
(e) To associate representatives of the South African liberation movements recognized by the Organization of African Unity with its missions;
(f) To promote assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their liberation movements;
(g)
To send representatives to attend meetings
of the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development Programme, the Executive Committee of
the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other bodies concerned with
apartheid and assistance to South Africans;
3. Requests the Special Committee, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, to undertake consultations with Member States with a view to making
proposals to the General Assembly at its thirty-faurth
session on the expansion of the Committee's membership in accordance with the principie of equitable
geographical distribution;
4. Authorizes the Special Committee to associate
Member States not members of the Committee with its
activities in promoting intemational action against
apartheid as appropriate;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen
the Centre against Apartheid in the light of the recommendations of the Special Committee;
6. Decides that the post of the head of the Centre
against Apartheid be upgraded to the level of an
Assistant Secretary-General;
7. Decides that the special allocation made from
the budget of the United Nations in paragraph 8 of
General Assembly resolution 32/105 B shall be available for utilization until the end of 1979 far special
projects in observance of the International AntiApartheid Year and for follow-up action;
8. Requests all Governments, specialized agencies
and other institutions within the United Nations system and other organizations to co-operate with the
Secretary-General and the Special Committee in the
implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979

K
AssJSTANCE TO THE OPPRESSED PEOPLE OF SOUTH
AFRICA ANO THEIR NATIONAL LIBERATION MOVEMENT

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/105 J of 14 December
1977,

32

General Assembly-Thirty-third SeS11ion

Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid,58
Recognizing the need for increased international
assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa
in view of the escalating repression against all opponents of apartheid,
Further recognizing the importance of the provision
of all necessary assistance to the national liberation
movement of South Africa in the present crucial stage
of its struggle for the eradication of apartheid and the
establishment of a non-racial society,
Considering the need for greater co-ordination and
consultation among the international agencies concemeq with assistance to the oppressed people of
South Africa and their national liberation movement,
Considering that the international community has a
duty to assist the African States subjected to threats
and acts of aggression because of their support to the
legitimate struggle of the South African people in
accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity,
l. Appeals to all States to provide increased humanitarian and educational assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa, as well as all assistance required by the South African national liberation movement in its legitimate struggle for the exercise of the
right of self-determination by the people of South
Africa as a whole;

2. Appeals to the United Nations Development
Programme and all specialized agencies and other
institutions within the United Nations system to provide increased assistance to the oppressed people of
South Africa and their national liberation movement
and to report annually to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
review annually, in consultation with the Special Committee against Apartheid, the assistance provided by
agencies and institutions within the United Nations
system;
4. Requests all agencies and institutions within the
United Nations system to consult with the Special
Committee on their programmes of assistance so that
there may be maximum co-ordination;
5. Authorizes the Special Committee to take all
appropriate steps to promote greater assistance to the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement and greater co-ordination in programmes of assistance by agencies within the United
Nations system;
6. Appeals to all States to provide the African
States concemed with:
(a) All necessary assistance, at their request, for
the defence of their independence and territorial integrity against acts of aggression and subversion by
the apartheid régime;
( b) Assistance to compensate them for economic
sacrifices resulting from their support to the South
African national liberation movement and the granting
of asylum to South African refugees.

93rd plenary meeting
24 January 1979
r,s Ibid.

L
SJTUATION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 59
Mindful of the special responsibility of the United
Nations and the international community towards the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
Jiberation movement and towards those imprisoned,
restricted or exiled for their struggle against apartheid,
Commending the heroic struggle of the oppressed
people of South Africa for their inalienable rights,
Conscious of the crucial stage of the struggle for
freedom in South Africa and its intemational significance,
Noting that the racist régime of South Africa is stepping up its policy of apartheid, repression, "bantustanization" and aggression, in flagrant defiance of
United Nations resolutions, and is thereby gravely aggravating the threat to international peace and security,
Reafjirming that apartheid constitutes a crime against
humanity,

1. Strongly condemns the illegitimate minority
racist régime of South Africa for its criminal policies
and actions;
2. Again proclaims its full support of the national
liberation movement of South Africa, as the authentic
representative of the South African people, in its just
struggle;
3. Reafjirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the
oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement-by all available and appropriate
means, including armed struggle-for the seizure of
power by the people and for the full exercise of their
political rights, the elimination of the apartheid régime
and the exercise of the right of self-determination by
the people of South Africa as a whole;
4. Declares that the intemational community
should provide all necessary assistance to the national
liberation movement in its legitimate struggle;
5. Rejects any reforms or readjustments of apartheid and reaffirms the commitment of the United Nations to the total eradication of apartheid;
6. Again condemns the establishment of bantustans
and calls upon all Governments to implement fully
the provisions of General Assembly resolution 32/ 105
N of 14 December 1977;
7. Condemns the racist régime of South Africa for
the forcible uprooting of black people from their homes
in pursuit of apartheid;
8. Further declares that any collaboration with
the racist régime and apartheid institutions is a hostile
act against the purposes and principies of the United
Nations;
9. Commends all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations which
have taken action against apartheid and in support of
the South African national liberation movement in
accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations;
59 Ibid., Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.l) and
Supplement No. 22A (A/33/22/Add.l and 2).

11.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

33

M

mercenaries for assistance to the apartheid régime, and
to punish such mercenaries;
3. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid:
(a) To continue its efforts to publicize all developments concerning military and nuclear collaboration
with the racist régime of South Africa;
( b) To lend its full co-operation to the Security
Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) of 9 December 1977 conceming the question
of South Africa;
(e)
To consult with experts, to hold hearings and
to encourage conferences and campaigns in order to
promote a total cessation of military and nuclear
collaboration with the racist régime of South Africa.
93rd plenary meeting
24 Ianuary 1979

MILITARY COLLABORATION WITH SOUTH AFRICA

N

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/105 F of 14 December
1977 as well as Security Council resolution 418 ( 1977)
of 4 November 1977,
Considering that the full implementation of an arms
embargo against South Africa is an essential first step
in international action against apartheid,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 61
Noting with serious regret that sorne Western and
other Governments and transnational corporations continue to co-operate with the South African racist régime in the military field, especially by restrictive interpretations of the arms embargo,
Considering it essential that Security Council resolution 418 (1977) be reinforced and fully implemented,
l. Requests the Security Council to declare that
any military or nuclear collaboration with South Africa
constitutes a threat to intemational peace and security,
and urgently to take mandatory measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to end
all military and nuclear collaboration with the apartheid régime and all supplies of materials or technology
to or from South Africa which may be used for military
purposes or for the development of nuclear-weapon
capability;
2. Further requests the Security Council to take
mandatory measures to ensure that all States:
(a) Revoke all Jicences granted to South Africa
for the manufacture of arms and equipment;
( b) Prohibit corporations within their jurisdiction
from any involvement in the manufacture in South
Africa of arms and related equipment for the use of
the military and police forces, and in the transfer of
technology and capital for that purpose;
(e) Termina te the exchange of military attachés
with the apartheid régime;
( d) Prohibit the supply of aircraft and aircraft
engines, parts and computers to South Africa;
(e) Take effective legislative and other measures
to prevent the recruitment, training and transit of

Apartheid IN SPORTS

10. Invites all States and organizations to take all
appropriate measures to persuade those Govemments,
transnational corporations and other institutions which
continue to collaborate with the racist régime of South
Africa to abide by the resolutions of the United Nations;
11. Appeals to all States which have not yet done
so to accede to the Intemational Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;60
12. Urges Governments and organizations to give
special attention, during the International Year of the
Child, to the plight of children oppressed by the inhuman policy of apartheid.
93rd plenary meeting
24 Ianuary 1979

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/6 F of 9 November
1976 and 32/105 M of 14 December 1977,
Reaffirming the importance of effective measures
for a complete cessation of all sports exchanges with
South Africa,
Recognizing the need for the early completion of an
international convention against apartheid in sports,
Having considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an Intemational Convention
against Apartheid in Sports, 62
I. Requests the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an International Convention against Apartheid
in Sports to continue its work with a view to completing a draft international convention against apartheid
in sports for submission to the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth session;
2. Appeals to ali States, intemational and national
sports bodies and sportsmen to implement strictly the
International Declaration against Apartheid in Sports; 63
3. Authorizes the Ad Hoc Committee to consult
with representatives of the organizations concerned and
experts on apartheid in sports;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
necessary assistance to the Ad Hoc Committee in the
discharge of its task.
93rd plenary meeting
24 Ianuary 1979

o
lNVESTMENTS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/6 K of 9 November 1976
and 32/105 O of 16 December 1977,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee against Apartheid, 64
Convinced that a cessation of new foreign investments in, and financia! loans to, South Africa would
62 !bid., Supplement No. 36 (A/33/36).

60 Resolution 3068
61 Official Records

(XXVIII), annex.
of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.1).

63 Resolution 32/105 M, annex.
64 Ofjicial Records of the General

Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/33/22 and Corr.l ).

General Auembly-Tbirty-third Seuio:n

34

constitute an important step in intemational action for
the elimination of apartheid, as such investments and
loans abet and encourage the apartheid policies of
that country,
Noting, in this context, that a number of transnational corporations, financia! institutions and other interests have continued to make new investments in,
and financia! loans to, South Africa,
W elcoming the decision of those Governments which
have taken measures to achieve the cessation of further
foreign investments in, and financia! loans to, South
Africa from their countries,
Noting with regret that the Security Council has not
taken steps for the cessation of further foreign investments in South Africa, as requested by the General
Assembly in resolution 31/6 K and 32/105 O,
Urges the Security Council to consider the matter at
an early date with a view to taking effective steps to
achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in,
and financia! loans to, South Africa.
93rd plenary meeting
24 J anuary 1979
33/206.

Question of Namibia

The General Assembly,
Grave/y concerned at the critica! situation in Namibia,
Having heard the statements by the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia 65 and the President of the South West Africa People's Organization,66
Bearing in mind its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and reaffirming the inalienable rights of the Namibian
people to self-determination, freedom and independence in a united Namibia,
Recalling its resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967 and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council relating to the question of Namibia,
as well as the advisory opinion of the lnternational
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971,67 which emphasized
both the illegality of South Africa's occupation of
Namibia and the direct responsibility of the United
Nations for the Territory,
Recalling also its resolution S-9 /2 of 3 May 1978
containing the Declaration on Namibia and Programme
of Action in Support of Self-Determination and National Independence for Namibia,
Indignant at South Africa's persistent refusal to
withdraw from Namibia in utter defiance of numerous
resolutions of the United Nations and gravely concerned at South Africa's escalated brutal repression
of the Namibian people as well as the measures it
has taken to destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia,
65 Ibid.,

Thirty-third Session, P/enary Meetings, 97th meeting,
paras. 7-32.
66 Jbid., paras. 50-87.
6 7 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
J.C.!. Reports 1971, p. 16.

Convinced that South Africa is seeking to establish
a puppet régime in Namibia in contravention of resolutions of the United Nations, in particular Security
Council resolutions 385 (1976) of 30 January 1976
and 435 (1978) of 29 September 1978,
Strongly reiterating its support for the national liberation movement of Namibia, the South West Africa
People's Organization, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people in their struggle by
all means, including armed struggle, to achieve selfdetermination, freedom and national independence in
a united Namibia,
l. Declares the urgent need to ensure the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Namibian people
to genuine self-determination and national independence in Namibia, including Walvis Bay, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples as well as all subsequent reso1utions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, including Council resolution 385 ( 1976), relating to Namibia, and supports the legitimacy of their
struggle by ali means at their disposal against the illegal
occupation of their Territory by South Africa;
2. Solemnly reaffirms the direct responsibility of
the United Nations for Namibia, renews its determination to ensure the effective and complete discharge of
this responsibility and, to this end, calls upon all
Member States and bodies and organs of the United
Nations to support fully the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia until independence in the implementation of
its mandate;
3. Determines that South Africa has acted deceitfully through unilateral measures and sinister schemes
within Namibia during the protracted period of talks
for a negotiated settlement in Namibia to the detriment of the Namibian people and their national liberation movement, the South West Africa People's Organization, and in contravention of resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolutions 385 (1976)
of 30 January 1976, 431 (1978) of 27 July 1978,
435 (1978) of 29 September 1978 and 439 (1978)
of 13 November 1978, and relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
4. Strongly condemns the racist régime of South
Africa for its arrogant and defiant actions in imposing
on the Namibian people a so-called interna! settlement
through a fraudulent and illegal "national assembly"
designed to achieve international recognition for its
puppets therein in order to perpetuate South Africa's
illegal occupation and its colonial and racist exploitation of Namibia;
5. Calls upon ali Member States and the international community to refrain from according any recognition to, or co-operating with, the illegal national
assembly or any régime which racist South Africa
may impose upon the Namibian people in disregard
of resolutions of the United Nations;
6. Solemnly reaffirms that a just and durable settlement of the question of Namibia is possible only with
the direct and full participation of the South West
Africa People's Organization, the sole and authentic
representative of the Namibian people, and that the
parties to the conflict in Namibia are, on the one
hand, South Africa, which is illegally occupying the
