S/2004/878

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 November 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 29 October 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Accra III Agreement on Côte d’Ivoire
concluded on 30 July 2004 in Accra, to the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 5 August 2004 (S/PRST/2004/29) and to my letters dated
16 August 2004 (S/2004/667), 3 September 2004 (S/2004/716), 20 September 2004
(S/2004/748) and 6 October 2004 (S/2004/800) concerning the monitoring of the
Agreement.
Please find attached the fifth report of the Tripartite Monitoring Group
established under the Accra III Agreement, covering the period from
1 to 15 October 2004 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter and its annex to the attention
of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-58286 (E) 031104

*0458286*

S/2004/878

Annex
Implementation of the Accra III Agreement
Fifth report of the Monitoring Group
Covering 1 to 15 October 2004

I.

Overview

1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the Accra III Agreement
of 30 July 2004 and covers major developments in the implementation of the
Accra III Agreement since the last report of 30 September 2004.
2.
During the period under review, the Ivorian peace process continued
to face serious difficulties. The general security situation appeared calm in
the South but tense in the North. All over the country, there was a growing
ferment which fed into a prickly and volatile political situation due to the
delay by the National Assembly to meet the deadline of 30 September for
the passage of the relevant texts of legislation and what appeared early as yet
another delay by the protagonists to meet the 15 October deadline for the
start-up of the DDR process. Political debate continues to be marked by
mutual apportioning of blame among political forces, in this case, the FPI
and the Forces Nouvelles.
3.
In the South, as the 15 October deadline approached, the threats of
demonstrations and protests by militant groups heightened the feelings of
anxiety among the population of an imminent confrontation. In the North, a
widespread rumour and belief that the Impartial forces were going to launch
forced disarmament on the Forces Nouvelles fuelled the mood and reactions
of the local population. This led to demonstrations in Bouake, Korhogo,
Seguela, Bouna on 7, 11 and 13 October. The demonstrations in Bouake of
11 October were the most serious as they led to violent attacks against
ONUCI and LICORNE forces.
4.
The meetings of the Quadripartite Committee and the dialogue with
the President of the Republic resulted in some positive developments. The
two military belligerents in their declaration of 11 October sent a positive
and firm signal that the military have decided on the end to the war and were
poised to embark on the DDR process. They left no doubt in their message
inviting the Ivorian political actors to rally in support of their stance and to

2

S/2004/878

follow in the dynamic to advance the peace process. The President’s
Address to the Nation on 12 October 2004 helped to calm tempers among
those of his political sympathisers who were determined to take to the
barricades over the refusal of the Forces Nouvelles to begin the disarmament
process. Consequently, demonstrations planned by the Jeunes Patriotes and
pro-FPI militants have been suspended for the time being. As the 15 October
deadline passed, the feeling of unease persists. No violent reactions have
thus far surfaced. All are looking round, awaiting to see what next move
from which side can jump-start the stalled motor of the DDR process.

II.

Salient developments in the peace process

Consultations on and preparations for DDR
5.
On 4 October 2004, President Gbagbo held a meeting with senior
officials from the Government including the Prime Minister, the Ministers of
Defence and Internal Security, the President of the CNDDR, as well as the
Chiefs of FANCI, the police and the Gendarmerie Nationale, to discuss the
start of the DDR process. The military chiefs of LICORNE and ONUCI
were present but not the Forces Nouvelles.
6.
Given that some of the DDR sites are not ready for the start of the
DDR process, the President offered to pay from public funds for the
accommodation of ex-combatants in various hotels in the DDR locations
throughout the country during the regrouping phase. The plans for starting
the DDR process with a pilot programme in Bouna and Bondoukou in the
eastern zone of the country were also discussed, as were the issues of
identification, security auxiliaries and payments. It was agreed that the
content of this meeting would be relayed to the Forces Nouvelles Secretary
General by the Prime Minister. The President had said that he would like to
meet with all the parties to discuss a realistic plan after the Yamoussoukro
meeting between CNDDR and representatives of the FAFN and FANCI on
DDR preparations. This meeting took place on 6 October 2004 and agreed
on the following: i) the DDR should start effectively on 15 October with the
first phase of the cantonment in the East (Bouna in Forces Nouvelles
controlled zone and Bondoukou in Government-controlled zone), followed
by the West (Man and Seguela in Forces Nouvelles controlled zone, Guiglo
and Daloa in Government-controlled zone) and the Central zone (Bouake in
3

S/2004/878

Forces Nouvelles controlled zone and Yamoussoukro in Governmentcontrolled zone); ii) CNDDR undertook to rehabilitate the cantonment sites
in Bouna and Bondoukou before 15 October 2004; iii) Identification of
ex-combatants would be conducted during cantonment with the technical
assistance of the Office of National Identification and the National Statistical
Commission of Cote d’Ivoire.
7.
The plans for the pilot programme in Bouna and Bondoukou have
been drawn up. Given the relatively small scale of a DDR process in these
locations (there are an estimated 800 combatants in Bouna and 900 in
Bondoukou), preparing the sites and arranging the payments, should be less
difficult than elsewhere. Given that staff has not been recruited for these two
sites, it was agreed that the staff that has already been recruited for the sites
in Bouake and Yamoussoukro would be relocated to the Bouna and
Bondoukou sites. The Impartial forces, including CIVPOL, would assist
with patrolling the sites to ensure their security and ONUCI and LICORNE
forces would also start putting in place measures to secure collected
weapons. CIVPOL is also prepared to conduct its DDR sensitisation
programme in both locations. Besides travelling to villages and towns to
explain to the local populations the work of CIVPOL and ONUCI, the
programme entails assisting CNDDR with reaching out to communities on
DDR issues with the assistance of community leaders.
8.
The President of the CNDDR has indicated that he is pursuing several
sources of funding, including from the national treasury to meet the shortfall
caused by the suspension of World Bank funding. He also indicated that
once the DDR programme was finalized, CNDDR would prepare a chart
displaying the various steps of the process with deadlines for public
dissemination. The French Government has pledged a contribution through
the UNDP of one Million Euros with immediate effect to be used to cover
the following requirements: i) the safety net for 1,100 demobilised
combatants in the entire Eastern region; ii) the repatriation of foreign
combatants; and iii) equipment and staff.
9.
Among the decisions taken at that meeting on 6 October 2004, was a
request by FANCI and FAFN to meet with the Head of State before
15 October to discuss matters relating to the political situation in the country
and to review the DDR preparations. President Gbagbo accepted the

4

S/2004/878

invitation for 11 October in Yamoussoukro. He enlarged the forum of
discussion and extended the invitation to the following: Prime Minister
Seydou Diarra and the members of the Government of National
Reconciliation; two representatives each of the ten Ivorian signatories of the
Accra III Agreement; the President of the CNDDR; the General Coordinator
and the Secretary General of the Comité National de Pilotage du
Redéploiement de l’Administration (CNPRA); the Force Commanders of
ONUCI and LICORNE and the Commissioner of CIVPOL.
10. At the meeting of 11 October 2004, FANCI and FAFN reaffirmed
their strong commitment to their Joint Declaration of 4 July 2003 on the end
of the war and exhorted the political class to follow their example.
Significant among their other concerns were their calls for installing a
climate of confidence to defuse anxieties among the general population over
their personal security and property; the restructuring of the National armed
forces to integrate elements of the armed wing of the Forces Nouvelles; and
measures to address the overall economic decline aggravated by tensions
generated over the 15 October deadline.
11. President Gbagbo addressed the Nation on 12 October 2004, on the
status of the implementation of the Accra III Agreement, particularly in
relation to the impending deadline for the start-up of DDR. He stated that he
intended to submit to the National Assembly for consideration all the
relevant texts of legislation envisaged under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and as agreed under the Accra III Agreement. As regards the
amendment to Article 35, he firmly stated that he would submit that key text
of legislation to the National Assembly once DDR commenced. He made
clear his position on that text which he intended to have put ultimately to a
referendum. He warned against all acts calculated to attack France and the
UN, admonishing that “one does not attack those who have come to help”.
He announced a forum to which all the Ivorian signatories of the Accra III
Agreement had been invited. The meeting would respond to the concerns of
the military protagonists and identify issues conducive to creating a
favourable political environment for the effective start-up of DDR. He
appealed fervently to all the political class to rally around the message of the
military protagonists to end the war and move forward the peace process.

5

S/2004/878

12. The statement by the President of the Republic has been received
differently in various political quarters. The FPI enthusiastically welcomed
the statement as vindicating their position, particularly on Article 35. In their
view, there can be no precondition to disarmament. The National Assembly
would do its duty without the interference of the Executive and Article 35
will be decided in strict conformity with Constitutional procedures. The G7
Marcoussistes, on the other hand, believe that disarmament should
effectively take place along with the political reforms prescribed under the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. The Forces Nouvelles stated that there was no
question of disarmament starting on 15 October without proceeding action
on the adoption of the political reforms envisaged under the LinasMarcoussis and Accra III Agreements. It is in vindication of this position
that the Forces Nouvelles were conspicuously absent from the meetings
called by the President on 11 and 13 October 2004.
13. On 13 October 2004, the French Government through the
Spokesperson of the Foreign Ministry issued an official statement in the
following terms:
“The Ivorian parties pledged at Marcoussis and Accra to see
through the process of reconciliation, which includes the
implementation of legislative and constitutional reforms in
exchange for disarmament. The Marcoussis and Accra
Agreements were endorsed by the Security Council.
We welcome President Gbagbo’s speech on October 12 and in
particular his clear commitment to implement the Marcoussis and
Accra agreements, lead the country to peace and hold elections as
scheduled. We note that he intends all the reforms stipulated in these
agreements to be rapidly implemented.
Important commitments were made yesterday in Yamoussoukro.
We call on all parties to show a sense of responsibility and to
implement these essential commitments to guarantee the return to
peace”.
14. From the international community, the Heads of Mission of the
European Union resident in Abidjan welcomed the address of the President
Gbagbo which they saw as an affirmation of his commitment to implement
6

S/2004/878

fully the provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements.
They expressed satisfaction particularly over the initiative taken by the Head
of State which will lead to an amendment of Article 35 in conformity with
the powers vested in him by the Constitution and pursuant to the
implementation of the provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and
the Work Programme of the Government of National Reconciliation. The
heads of mission of the European Union stated that this initiative is an
important step towards the organisation of credible and transparent elections
as scheduled. In this regard, they affirmed that the progress in the
consultations between FANCI and FAFN are essential to “launch
simultaneous processes both at the political level and at the level of
disarmament” (… pour déclencher un processus simultané tant sur le plan
politique que sur celui du désarmement …).
15. The UN Secretary-General has communicated a statement on the
President’s address and on the Ivorian situation. The statement reads as
follows:
“The Secretary-General notes with concern that key deadlines of the
Accra III Agreement, for the adoption of legislative reforms, the
revision of Article 35 of the Constitution on eligibility to the
Presidency and the commencement of the disarmament process, have
not been met. He has taken note of President Laurent Gbagbo’s
address to the nation on 12 October 2004, and shares his views that
the political crisis should be resolved without further delay. To this
end, the Secretary-General urges the political forces in Côte d’Ivoire
to ensure the full and unconditional implementation of the LinasMarcoussis and Accra III Agreements, including constitutional reform
and disarmament.
The Secretary-General recalls that the Accra III Agreement envisaged
the timely adoption of all legal reforms, including the revision of
Article 35 of the Constitution on eligibility to the Presidency. In this
context, he urges adoption of all legislative reforms without delay,
and also appeals to all armed elements, including militias, to
commence disarmament at the earliest.

7

S/2004/878

The Secretary-General welcomes the President’s condemnation of all
acts of violence against the United Nations Operation in Cote d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) and the French forces, which should be unconditionally
enforced by all authorities concerned.”
16. The meeting convened by the President for 13 October 2004 was
inconclusive. The political forces reserved their position to study matters
further and come up subsequently with comprehensive responses.
Demonstrations over the DDR
17. Against the background of the foregoing consultations, there were the
negative developments generated by various threats and demonstrations in
the North against ONUCI and LICORNE forces. On 7 October 2004,
demonstrations by civil society organisations took place in Bouake,
Korhogo, Seguela and Bouna against the DDR process. On 11 October
2004, in Bouake, demonstrators attempted to burn down one Armoured
Personnel Carrier (APC) belonging to the ONUCI Moroccan battalion
guarding the BCEAO Bank. Warning shots were fired by both ONUCI and
FAFN troops. In another incident, demonstrators attacked the office of the
ONUCI military observer team and burned some windows and doors. They
also had access to one room where they burned furniture and archives
belonging to Cote d’Ivoire Telecom before FAFN intervened to put off the
fire. In yet another incident, demonstrators headed for LICORNE logistic
base and were deterred by tear gas and warning shots. Two LICORNE
soldiers and five demonstrators were injured. Four UN vehicles were
damaged. On 11 October 2004, there were peaceful demonstrations in
Seguela and Vavoua. Some 3,000 persons were involved in the
demonstration at Seguela where a petition was submitted to ONUCI
demanding that there should be a revision of Article 35 before the
commencement of the DDR. On 13 October, there was a peaceful
demonstration in Korhogo. On 15 October, further demonstrations were
planned in Korhogo, Bouake and Seguela. All these demonstrations were
organised as a reaction to a widespread belief and rumour that the Impartial
Forces were going to launch forced disarmament on the Forces Nouvelles.
18. The Secretary-General of the Forces Nouvelles in a protest note to
ONUCI has requested an inquiry into the events which took place in Bouake
8

S/2004/878

on 11 October 2004. ONUCI has responded and intends to institute the
inquiry.
19. In the South, the Jeunes Patriotes and like-minded militant groups had
for sometime launched a campaign threatening violent actions against
ONUCI and LICORNE if they did not ensure the start-up of disarmament. It
is believed that President Gbagbo’s Address to the Nation of 12 October has
gone some way to dissuade these militant elements from carrying out their
designs.
National Assembly proceedings
20. So much of the political controversy during the period under review
has generated from the stalemate in the proceedings of the National
Assembly on the key texts of legislation which are required to be passed.
21. Our last report pointed out that the National assembly of Cote
d’Ivoire could not meet the deadline of 30 September in adopting the
draft texts of legislation envisaged under the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and as agreed under the Accra III Agreement. Only the draft
law on the public funding of political parties and groups and electoral
campaigns was adopted during the extraordinary session.
22. The second regular session of the National Assembly for the year
2004 (6 October to 17 December 2004) will effectively start its
proceedings on 19 October 2004. According to its agenda, the draft
texts of legislation on the Independent Electoral Commission (CEI), and
on the Identification of persons and the Right of residence for
foreigners will be presented by the Minister of Territorial
Administration, Issa Diakite, on 19 and 20 October 2004. The draft text
on the Regime governing the Press, to be presented by the Minister of
Communication, Guillaume Soro, will be under consideration on 20 and
21 October 2004. As he announced in his message to the Nation on
12 October 2004, President Gbagbo intends to submit, to the National
Assembly, the draft text of legislation on the Amendment to Article 35
as soon as disarmament commences.
23. It is, however, not yet known when the draft text of legislation on
the Code of Nationality will be resubmitted by the Minister of Justice
9

S/2004/878

after she withdrew it on 24 August 2004. The draft texts on Illegal
personal enrichment, on the Status of the Opposition, and on the
Regime governing the Radio and Television Media are yet to be
discussed by the Government before submission to the National
Assembly.
Electoral process
24. In spite of the stalemate caused by the lack of progress in the
adoption of the legislative and constitutional reforms, the working
group comprising UN agencies and other development partners
interested in the electoral process has continued to meet to exchange
views on the electoral, identification process and possibilities of
assistance from partners.
25. The working group met the visiting UN electoral assessment mission
to exchange views on the electoral process. This current mission (13-27
October 2004) is a follow up on their previous mission. The purpose of the
mission is to review the technical preparations required for organizing a
referendum and the elections of October 2005, the cost implications and the
nature and scope of assistance required. A meeting between UN, EU, UK
and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF) has been
scheduled for 26 October 2004 after consultations with the Office of the
Prime Minister.
Extension of public services and redeployment of administration
26. Arrangements have proceeded on course to extend public services and
the redeployment of administration in the Forces Nouvelles controlled zones
in the North and West. This assignment is the responsibility of the Comite
National de Pilotage du Redeploiement de l’Administration (CNPRA) under
the general coordination of the Minister for Public Service and Employment.
The Minister for Territorial Administration is equally involved.
27. In the period under review and with the start of the school year 20042005, the Government has undertaken to pay the salaries of teachers to
enable the schools to reopen as well as redeploy administration
progressively in certain areas and regions. The exercise entails first the

10

S/2004/878

identification of teachers, calculating the quantum of salaries to be paid and
the payment of the requisite salaries. So far, 1,200 teachers have been paid
in Bouake and adjoining areas. The exercise, which began on 13 October
due to initial obstruction by elements of Forces Nouvelles, continues until
20 October 2004. In the regions of Bouna, Korhogo, Odienne, Man and
Seguela, the process of identification, which started on 14 October, will
continue through to 19 October. Thereafter, the salaries will be paid. At the
request of the Government, ONUCI forces provide security and safe conduct
to support the implementation of this exercise.

III. Human rights and Humanitarian assistance developments
28. It is expected that the reports on the two Human Rights inquiries on
the events in Korhogo and the events since 19 September 2002 are due to be
released after submission by the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Geneva to the UN Secretary-General.
29. Humanitarian organisations are concerned with the current
security situation in the North, which is impeding their activities and
the return to normalcy. The current situation initially affected the
redeployment of public administration and staff within the health and
education sectors. On 11 October, the exercise planned to distribute
instalment benefits in Bouake to those — primarily teachers and
medical staff — who have returned to their posts in the North, was
obstructed by demonstrations. As reported earlier, the exercise resumed
on 13 October 2004.
30. Another concern, due to the negative perception of UN’s role in
disarmament, is the difficulty of access to the Forces Nouvelles
controlled zones. Because of the current tensions in the North,
humanitarian activities have slowed down and missions have been
restricted to those that are absolutely necessary.

IV. Conclusion
31. Stated baldly, the current deadlock over DDR relates to establishing
that delicate political balance between delivering on disarmament while
guaranteeing the passage of the legislative and constitutional reforms
11

S/2004/878

proposed under the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement and as agreed under the
Accra III Agreement. President Gbagbo has made clear his commitment to
ensure the passage of all the relevant reforms envisaged under the LinasMarcoussis Agreement. Critical in this initiative of the President’s is how he
can steer through the amendment to Article 35 and the October 2005
elections not just anyhow but in consonance with the spirit and
understanding of the Linas-Marcoussis and the Accra III Agreements.
32. The present conjuncture constitutes a critical and defining moment in
giving a jump-start to a positive dynamic in the peace process. As hinted in
the statements of the French Foreign Ministry in Paris and the European
Union Heads of Mission in Abidjan, the passage of the legislative and
constitutional reforms and the implementation of the DDR must be seen as a
“package”. As the statement of UN Secretary-General complements it, that
package should ensure the “full and unconditional implementation of the
provisions of the Linas-Marcoussis and Accra III Agreements, including
constitutional reform and disarmament”.
33. The African Heads of State and the Secretary-General, in further
prodding all Ivorian political actors, should urge them to follow such
principles of action in moving forward the peace process.

12
