S/PV.8290

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8290th meeting

Wednesday, 20 June 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kuzmin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-18910 (E)
*1818910*

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Russian Federation on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council, and to wish you,
Sir, every success in steering the important work of this
organ throughout the month of June.
It has been over 13 years since the Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and directed me to report to it every six
months on actions taken and progress made pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). After 13 years and 27 reports, the
victims of the grave crimes that prompted the Security
Council to refer the situation in Darfur to the ICC have
yet to see those alleged to be most responsible for such
crimes face justice. The question begs asking — how
many more years and how many more reports will be
required for the Council to be galvanized into taking
tangible action? How much longer should victims of
the alleged atrocity crimes in Darfur suffer in silence
or wait to have their torment acknowledged through
concrete results?
The Security Council has an important role to play
in supporting the effective implementation of its own
resolution — resolution 1593 (2005) — which referred
the Darfur situation to the Court. In paragraph 2 of the
resolution, the Council decided that the Government of
the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur
shall cooperate fully with and provide any necessary
assistance to the Court and the Prosecutor. Regrettably,
2/20

20/06/2018

the Government of the Sudan has not only refused
to cooperate with the Court, in clear violation of the
Council’s resolution, but has rather been emboldened
to publicly denounce the Court in this forum. It does so
repeatedly, with facile and baseless allegations aimed
at creating a distraction from the real issues and the
Government’s failure to fulfil its responsibilities and
obligations. It is also regrettable that such intransigence
has been presented in this Chamber, where respectful
discourse is to govern all interventions, focused on
finding real solutions to the serious issues of which this
organ is seized.
The eyes of the world are upon us; the eyes of
victims and victims’ groups in Darfur, some of whom
are present today, are upon us. They are owed at least
this minimum decorum, and they deserve not to not
have their ordeals undermined by rhetoric aimed at
confusing the issues and distracting the Council’s
and the world’s attention from what we are really
concerned with here — the need to ensure that there is
accountability for the serious and destabilizing crimes
under the Rome Statute committed in Darfur through
the Court’s independent judicial process.
Today, I want to use this opportunity to reassure the
victims in Darfur that my Office has neither forgotten
nor abandoned them. Despite the many challenges we
face, my Office continues to do all within its power
and means to ensure that alleged perpetrators against
whom ICC warrants have been issued will face justice
in Court.
The ICC is a permanent judicial institution and it
is here to stay. The evidence collected to date as part
of our Darfur investigations, thanks to the assistance
and commitment of victims and witnesses, and often
at great risk, has persuaded the judges of the Court
to issue warrants of arrest against five suspects. My
Office continues to collect more evidence. Considerable
progress has been made in this regard, thanks to the
cooperation of a number of States and the sacrifices
that many continue to make to help us solidify our cases
towards the aim of being trial-ready. What is required
now is for the Council and the international community
at large to support the apprehension and transfer of
ICC suspects to the Court so that they can answer the
charges against them through a fair, independent and
objective judicial process.
Let me be clear. The effective power to arrest
and surrender ICC suspects in the Darfur situation
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rests solely with States. The Council also plays a vital
role in ensuring that these obligations are honoured.
I once again urge the Council to take concrete action
concerning States referred to it by the Court following
failures by such States to arrest and surrender ICC
suspects in the Darfur situation while such suspects are
on their territory. I am encouraged by the efforts that a
number of members of the Council, including permanent
members, continue to make to break the impasse. These
efforts include proposals for potential responses on the
part of the Council to the referrals it receives and public
calls on States, including the Sudan, to cooperate with
the Court to execute outstanding arrest warrants. This
ongoing support for the work of the Office by individual
members of the Council is greatly valued.
As mentioned, there are today five persons in the
Darfur situation subject to outstanding warrants of
arrest: officials of the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Ahmad Harun and
Mr. Abdel Hussein; militia leader Mr. Ali Kushayb;
and rebel leader Mr. Abdallah Banda. All are presently
at large. These fugitives stand accused of multiple
crimes against humanity and war crimes. These alleged
atrocities include the widespread rape and sexual assault
of women and girls; attacks on civilians and forcible
expulsion from their homes; and detention, torture and
summary executions of men detained by Janjaweed
and the Sudanese army. It is also alleged that in 2007,
personnel of an African Union peacekeeping operation
in Darfur were attacked and murdered at their Haskanita
base by rebel forces under the command of Mr. Banda.
These are all serious crimes of great concern that must
be addressed.
Following the Council’s referral, the Office’s
investigation and application for warrants of arrest and
the Pre-Trial Chambers’ issuance of these warrants,
there are now two main areas of focus in the Darfur
situation: first, the Office’s efforts to advance its
investigations, and secondly, the Court’s collective
efforts to secure the arrest and surrender of the suspects
in the Darfur situation. The support of the Council is
critical to each if we are to move the Darfur situation
forward and achieve justice for the victims.
In relation to the Office’s ongoing investigations,
during the reporting period the efforts of my team
of lawyers, investigators and analysts resulted in
important advancements in the cases against the Darfur
suspects. Additional witnesses have been interviewed
and a significant number of leads developed. However,

S/PV. 8290

despite this progress, additional funding is required
to allow the team to increase the pace and breadth of
its investigations. For this reason, I must respectfully
repeat my request to the Council to facilitate financial
support from the United Nations for the Office’s
investigations in the Darfur situation, as envisaged
under article 115 (b) of the Rome Statute.
My report also makes clear that during the reporting
period, the team’s ongoing investigations benefited from
the cooperation of over 20 States parties. My Office
is immensely grateful for this support. Regrettably,
however, the Sudan and a number of States parties do
not cooperate with my Office in the Darfur situation.
I therefore repeat my request to the Council to take
steps to facilitate dialogue between my Office and the
Government of the Sudan. I also repeat my invitation to
the Government of the Sudan to constructively engage
with my Office, including in particular to discuss future
investigative missions by the Office to Darfur.
My report further provides an overview of the
current ongoing litigation before the Court relating
to States parties that failed to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir while he was on their territory. In
relation to the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of
Chad, Pre-Trial Chamber II has initiated proceedings
pursuant to article 87.7 of the Rome Statute in relation to
the failures of those State parties to arrest and surrender
Mr Al-Bashir during official visits on 14 November
2017 and 1 and 2 December 2017, respectively. Both
Uganda and Chad were previously referred by Pre-Trial
Chambers of the Court to the Council for past failures to
arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir — Uganda in 2016
and Chad in 2011 and 2013. No action in relation to
these or any other referrals by Pre-Trial Chambers to the
Council, has been taken. This situation, I respectfully
submit, is untenable and the Council must increasingly
assume its responsibility to take appropriate action
following a notification by the Court of non-compliant
States. Proceedings are also ongoing regarding Jordan’s
failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir in March
2017.
I must emphasize that the Pre-Trial Chambers of
the Court have developed a body of jurisprudence that
clarifies the obligations of States parties under the Rome
Statute. The Council will recall that Pre-Trial Chamber
II of the Court made a decision in December 2017 to find
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in non-compliance
with its obligation to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
during a visit on 29 March 2017, and to refer the matter

18-189103/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to the Council and the Assembly of States Parties. That
decision again made clear that Mr. Al-Bashir’s official
status did not justify a failure by a State party to
arrest and surrender a suspect subject to an ICC arrest
warrant. Jordan appealed that decision and the Court’s
Appeals Chamber is now seized of the question.
The Appeals Chamber has scheduled a hearing
for 10, 11 and 12 September 2018. In advance of that
hearing, on the basis that the legal issues in the appeal
may have broader implications, the Appeals Chamber
has invited the relevant parties to make submissions
that may assist in its determination of the legal issues
raised in Jordan’s appeal. In response to an invitation by
the Appeals Chamber to States parties and professors
of international law, the United Mexican States and
16 law professors were granted permission to submit
legal observations. The Appeals Chamber also invited
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of American States to submit observations on the legal
issues in the appeal by 16 July.
I am particularly encouraged by the fact that the
African Union recently notified the Appeals Chamber of
its acceptance of the invitation to submit observations.
The participation of the African Union in the process is
very important, not least because, as the African Union
observed in its notification to the Appeals Chamber, 33
of the 55 African Union States members are also parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.
The issue of official immunities in relation to
persons subject to ICC warrants of arrests was discussed
at the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa on 28 and
29 January. I am also aware that various follow-up
initiatives are being considered by the African Union.
In that context, I commend the African Union for
taking the opportunity to constructively engage with
the Appeals Chamber on this important issue.
The Appeals Chamber also invited the Sudan and
Mr. Al-Bashir to file submissions, by 16 July, on the
merits of the legal questions raised in Jordan’s appeal.
It is important for the Appeals Chamber to hear and
consider the views of all interested parties before its
final determination on the issue.
All the relevant stakeholders in the matter have an
opportunity to express their viewpoints to the Appeals
Chamber. I am hopeful that they will each do so,
including the Security Council via the United Nations,
4/20

20/06/2018

and thereby participate in a process that will result in a
final determination of this critical issue.
My Office would be remiss not to recognize and
appreciate the continued progress towards stability in
Darfur. I commend the efforts of all those involved in
the Darfur peace process, led by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel and supported by the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur.
Despite that progress, as my report makes clear,
intermitent violence in Darfur continued during the
reporting period. A number of clashes were reported
between forces of the Government of the Sudan
and various rebel groups in the Jebel Marra area. In
addition, there were reported attacks by Rapid Support
Forces and militiamen during March and April on
villages located in Jebel Marra. The clashes and attacks
reportedly resulted in tens of thousands of additional
internally displaced persons.
My report notes the 1 February report by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), which stated that, according to the
Government of the Sudan, there had been a substantial
decrease in the overall number of internally displaced
persons from Darfur and that hundreds of thousands
were returning to their homes. I note that OCHA
indicated that it is verifying the numbers of returning
internally displaced persons. As stated in my previous
report, the Office echoes the Council’s view expressed
in its resolution 2363 (2017) that any return should
be safe, voluntary and in accordance with applicable
international law.
Sustainable peace and stability can return to Darfur
only once the root causes of conflict are addressed.
That includes ending impunity for alleged crimes under
the Rome Statute in Darfur and ensuring accountability
for the victims of those serious crimes. The collective
efforts aimed at ensuring such accountability, which
I outlined in my report, will go on. My Office will
continue to play its role, together with the other organs
of the Court and the international community at large.
I appeal to the courageous women and men who are
victims of the past and ongoing crimes in Darfur not to
despair but to bear with us and continue to cooperate
with our ongoing investigations.
Today I ask the Council, as the organ that began the
process of accountability for Rome Statute crimes in
Darfur, to more actively play its part in these collective
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

efforts — and in particular to show its support for my
Office’s investigations by facilitating United Nations
funding and taking steps to ensure that my Office
obtains the cooperation it needs, including from the
Sudan.
Finally, I respectfully request the Council to
provide its support to secure the arrest and surrender
of the Darfur suspects. That is a prerequisite for justice
being done for the thousands of victims in the Darfur
situation, and a vital next step in the process that the
Council started with its referral of the Darfur situation
to my Office.
In addition to falling short of adequately responding
to the legitimate calls of victims for justice, the status
quo will not only erode public confidence in the cause
of international criminal justice in Darfur, but also
in the Council itself. We must work together more
effectively, within our respective mandates, to ensure
full implementation of, and compliance with, resolution
1593 (2005). More than a decade since the Council
adopted that resolution, it is past time that we did just
that. We must act collectively and with resolve. My
Office remains firm in its commitment and as a ready
partner in that joint obligation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-seventh report on
the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), and for her briefing today. I would also like
to commend her and her staff for their hard work and
dedication in the investigations.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
important role to play in global efforts to end impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The United Kingdom fully supports its efforts to hold
perpetrators to account and to achieve justice for
victims. We understand how difficult the investigations
have proven to be for the Prosecutor and her team and
how disheartening that can be, but we encourage them
to maintain their current level of commitment, as the
victims and the witnesses deserve nothing less.
While the United Kingdom welcomes the decrease
in armed conflict between Government forces and the
armed opposition, we are concerned by the ongoing

S/PV. 8290

clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid faction and Government forces in the Jebel
Marra region. Reports of villages being burned, aerial
bombardmens and civilian casualties and displacements
are particularly troubling. It is unacceptable that the
Government of the Sudan has prevented the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and humanitarian actors from accessing
areas of recent conflict. We call on the Government of
the Sudan to provide unfettered access immediately.
As the security situation shows signs of
improvement in some parts of Darfur, small numbers
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) are beginning to
return to their areas of origin. However, many of those
returns are short-lived and precarious due to localized
insecurity, the occupation of lands by militias and the
absence of basic services. We note that the Prosecutor’s
Office is highly concerned for the fate of some of
those IDPs. We are also concerned that the situation is
particularly perilous for female IDPs, given the ongoing
prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence.
The Government of the Sudan, with the support of
UNAMID and international donors, must focus its
efforts on creating the conditions necessary for the safe
and voluntary return of all IDPs in accordance with
applicable international law, as required by resolution
2363 (2017).
The continued lack of progress in the peace
process is a cause for significant frustration. We urge
all parties to engage meaningfully and to focus their
efforts on implementing the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel road map. Linked to that, the
Government must ensure the protection of fundamental
human rights, including the freedom of expression
and the freedom of association, in order to create
an environment conducive to political dialogue and
democratic reform.
In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
committed to supporting the Office of the Prosecutor
in its efforts to investigate the situation in Darfur. We
must therefore act upon the Prosecutor’s request to the
Council to take effective measures to enable the Court
to carry out its mandate in Darfur, in particular by
asserting the need for all States to cooperate with the
Office’s investigations.
In that regard, the United Kingdom looks forward
to the Arria Formula meeting on Security CouncilInternational Criminal Court relations, on 6 July,

18-189105/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

initiated by the Netherlands and sponsored by the United
Kingdom and others. We encourage our fellow Member
States to engage constructively with that meeting and
to consider carefully what more we as a Council can do
to ensure that the Court receives the necessary support.
The United Kingdom joins those States which believe
that the Council should consider steps that it might take
to address non-compliance findings by the Court when
they are referred to the Council by the Court’s judges. In
that connection, the United Kingdom again calls on the
Government of the Sudan to fulfil its legal obligations
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate fully
with the Court and to arrest and surrender the suspects
to it without further delay.
The United Kingdom continues to be frustrated
that fugitives from the Court, including President
Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun and Mr. Hussein, are still
travelling to certain countries unhindered. For its part,
the United Kingdom will continue to raise its concerns
with the relevant Governments, including through the
European Union. We renew our call on all States parties
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court and
abide by its obligations under the Rome Statute. We
also urge them to consult the Court if they feel they are
unable to cooperate with it for whatever reason.
Finally, we again thank the Office of the Prosecutor
for its continued commitment to pursuing these
investigations and achieving justice for the victims of
Darfur, despite the fragility of the security situation,
access restrictions and the lack of cooperation. We urge
them to continue with this important work.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of France, I sincerely thank Prosecutor Bensouda
and her team for the important work they have been
doing for six years in the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). France appreciates
the importance that such a mission represents for her and
her team, who are engaged on a daily basis in rooting
out and identifying culpability; for the victims, who
await recognition and reparation; and for witnesses,
who have chosen to place their trust in justice in a
context that is anything but simple. That is why it is
important that we steer a clear course. Our focus is on
combating impunity for crimes committed in Darfur.
Our biannual debate today is a clear reminder of that.
When the Security Council, in resolution 1593
(2005), referred the situation in Darfur to the ICC
Prosecutor 13 years ago, it was because members were
6/20

20/06/2018

collectively convinced that they must act to ensure that
no further atrocities were committed in Darfur and that
there would be no reconciliation or stability in the Sudan
without justice for the victims. Those objectives have
not yet been achieved. It is the Council’s responsibility
to take resolute action to combat impunity in the Sudan
and to put an end to the crimes committed in Darfur.
Ensuring that justice is served is essential to any longterm stabilization in Darfur and the Sudan.
Certainly, the overall improvement in the security
situation makes stabilization possible, which is an
encouraging development. However, many challenges
remain. That is particularly true in Jebel Marra,
where people continue to suffer. France also remains
concerned about the persistence of intercommunal
conflicts and militia activities, which remain a major
cause of concern for the populations, in particular for
the most vulnerable. Too many women still fall victim
to sexual violence in Darfur. We must also remain
attentive to the plight of the displaced populations.
There are still nearly 2 million displaced people in
Darfur, for whom lasting solutions have yet to be found.
That requires continued efforts to end the fighting
and violence against civilians, in particular in Jebel
Marra, including by reaching a cessation of hostilities
agreement.
Addressing the root causes of the conflict is also
essential, in particular with regard to land, access to
natural resources and restoring the rule of law. It is also
imperative to pursue efforts to advance the political
process. In all these areas, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur plays an important
role. It must continue to implement its mandate in the
course of the ongoing reconfiguration. In particular, it
is essential that the mission has access to areas where
the protection of civilians and humanitarian access are
critical, be it in Jebel Marra or elsewhere.
The fight against impunity for the most serious
crimes and respect for human rights are also
fundamental to achieving long-term stabilization in
Darfur. In order for people who have suffered to regain
confidence in their environment and return to a normal
life, it is essential that the perpetrators of crimes be
identified and held accountable for their actions.
France recalls once again the importance of the
obligation to cooperate with the Court, in accordance
with the resolutions adopted by the Council. That
applies to the implementation of the arrest warrant
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

against President Al-Bashir and the four other suspects
identified by the Court. France rejects the trivialization
of non-cooperation on the part of States Members of
the United Nations, especially States parties to the
Rome Statute. Of course, that obligation is primarily
incumbent on the Sudan, which must execute arrest
warrants against its nationals for acts committed on
its territory and cooperate with the Court pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).
The judges of the International Criminal Court
have repeatedly recalled the obligation of States parties
to the Rome Statute to cooperate with the Court and to
execute arrest warrants when the people against whom
they are issued are on their territory. Therefore, France
regrets that persons subject to arrest warrants have not
been arrested, in defiance of resolution 1593 (2005),
the Rome Statute and the decisions of the International
Criminal Court.
We must fulfil the Court’s legitimate requests
so that it may fully carry out its mandate. We must
ensure that cooperation with the ICC is effective and
that arrest warrants are executed. The same applies
to the implementation by the Council of its own
resolutions, in particular resolution 1593 (2005).
In that connection, France reiterates its proposal that
States which, according to the Court, have not complied
with their obligations to cooperate with the Court be
invited to address the Security Council. It will then
be up to the Council to determine, on the basis of that
exchange of views, what action to take.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing, although we take strong
exception to the way she has been rather flippant in
setting the tone for others to follow, in that regard, when
she addresses one of the most respected African leaders
in our region, whose role in bringing about peace and
stability in our region means so much to the peoples of
our region. We know what the uproar would be like if
she referred to leaders from other regions in the same
way. As an African, I find this very sad. It is a double
standard that we continue to be haunted by.
Ethiopia’s position on the issue of the Sudan and
the International Criminal Court (ICC) has been
very consistent and clear. I have already given a hint
concerning our narrative in that regard. It is in line with
the position of the African Union, which has repeatedly
called for the suspension of the proceedings against the
President of the Sudan, Omar Al-Bashir, and urged the

S/PV. 8290

Security Council to withdraw the referral of the case in
the Sudan. We continue to believe that the Council has
abdicated its responsibility with regard to that matter.
The withdrawal of the referral would have enormous
positive implications for peace and security of our
region and the mandate of the Council. We continue
to believe that, given the extremely weak nature of
the case, its continuation makes absolutely no sense.
Increasingly available information is reinforcing our
conviction in that regard. In fact, it would only damage
the credibility of the Council, for the lack of action
concerning the matter would not be consistent with
the primary responsibility that the Council shoulders
with regard to international peace and security. Most
important, recent events underscore the need for the
Council to seriously re-examine its position on the
matter.
The Sudan has been playing a constructive role
in combating terrorism, human trafficking and illicit
migration, as well as dealing with other regional
peace and security issues, which has been broadly
acknowledged to date. It has enhanced its bilateral and
multilateral cooperation and engagement on all those
issues, and that has been considered very valuable
under the leadership of the Sudanese President. The
lifting of the bilateral economic sanctions imposed on
the Sudan by the United States for the past two decades
is a major positive development, which is a result of the
Sudan’s improved international relations.
As we have been saying for quite some time now,
the situation in Darfur has continued to show marked
progress. The hostilities between the Government of
the Sudan and rebel forces have decreased substantially,
and the security situation on the ground has improved
significantly. The level of intercommunal violence has
once again plummeted, and humanitarian access across
Darfur continues to improve, which has been confirmed
by the joint strategic review of the African Union and
the United Nations that provided us with a very useful
analysis of the situation in Darfur. We therefore believe
that there is a need for a paradigm shift in our approach
to dealing with the Darfur situation. The Sudanese
Government has demonstrated its political will to
sustainably address the challenges in the region. It has
also exerted much effort to address the challenges that
the Sudan as a whole is facing. What is expected from
the international community is to intensify its efforts to
assist the Government’s work to alleviate the suffering
of the people of Darfur.

18-189107/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Of course, we also recognize that much remains
to be done with regard to addressing the root causes
of the conflict in Darfur and ensuring long-term
stability. For that reason, we call on the Government
to redouble its efforts to implement all remaining
tasks. The international community should also live
up to its commitments, and the Council in particular
should exert pressure on armed movements to negotiate
seriously ending the suffering of the people in Darfur.
In the light of the positive developments that I just
mentioned and the constructive role that the Sudanese
Government is playing in a range of issues, it is only
appropriate that the international community change
its approach to dealing with the Sudan. That is why we
welcomed the lifting of the unilateral sanctions imposed
by the United States against the Sudan. It is also high
time that the Council begin seriously to consider the
issue of the Sudan and the ICC.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We express our gratitude for the convening of this
meeting and thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her
briefing on the situation in Darfur and the valuable
work that she is carrying out with her team. Pursuant
to resolution 2363 (2017), Peru supports the political
process in that country and action to address the root
causes of the conflict and to ensure the safe return
of the approximately 1.8 million internally displaced
persons, among other urgent measures.
It is fitting to recall that, shortly after the Rome
Statute’s entry into force and the assumption of its
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations,
the Security Council demonstrated its trust in the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court for
the first time by referring the situation in Darfur to it.
That was a necessary step in efforts to guarantee access
to justice and accountability. We therefore renew our
support for the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
today, but we are aware of its complex nature and that
it requires the full cooperation of States, beginning
with national authorities directly concerned. In that
regard, it is appropriate to remind the authorities of the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan of their duty to
execute arrest warrants issued by the Court. Similarly,
we regret that some States parties to the Rome Statute
have not lived up to their obligation to cooperate with
regard to the investigation and prosecution of crimes
that fall under its jurisdiction and especially the
obligation to detain and surrender to the Court persons
subject to an arrest warrant who enter their territory.
8/20

20/06/2018

Likewise, we urge all States to act in accordance with
their obligations pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
While instances of non-compliance with the Court’s
orders clearly undermine its credibility, it is also true
that failure to take measures to address such situations
affects the credibility of the Council. In that regard, as
the non-cooperation focal point of the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, Peru welcomed the
New Zealand initiative of December 2016 to address
that problem.
We must also remember that, while the Court is
essential for preventing the most serious crimes from
going unpunished, its jurisdiction is complementary
to the responsibility of every State to protect its
people. Similarly, cooperation with the Court should
be understood as an opportunity to strengthen justice
and the rule of law in domestic and international areas.
That is predicated upon promoting greater confidence
in legal institutions and effective deterrence. Trust in
the justice system and the predictability of its response
to atrocity crimes is particularly relevant for a country
like the Sudan, which has been affected by conflict.
Nothing justifies impunity.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight the
important work being done by the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur in the exercise of
its mandate in all areas of Darfur, and reaffirm our
support for the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation listened very carefully to
the briefing we heard from the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda. Over the past few years, the political and
security situation in Darfur and the Sudan have
improved considerably, a development that has been
welcomed by the international community. This is due
partly to the cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations as well as the international
community as a whole. More important still, it is due
to the efforts and the contributions of the Sudanese
Government itself.
The Government of the Sudan has been working
for many years now to strengthen its own capacity in
the field of security and governance and to promote a
political process of reconciliation, in particular over the
past year, when it has engaged in an active campaign to
collect weapons, which has made a major contribution
to peace and stability in Darfur. We very much welcome
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the progress that we have witnessed in Darfur and the
efforts undertaken by the Sudanese Government itself
to bring about the current situation.
The progress made in Darfur demonstrates
that the Sudanese Government is entirely capable
of progressively assuming and taking over its
responsibilities for the maintenance of peace and
stability in the region of Darfur. We hope that the
international community will continue to respect the
leadership of the Sudanese Government when it comes
to the issue of Darfur.
We hope that the international community will also
contribute effectively to peace and stability in Darfur,
with a focus on capacity-building in the areas of
security and governance. We also call on it to provide
humanitarian and economic assistance and to stand
with the Sudanese Government and help it in its efforts
to promote reconciliation reconstruction in Darfur
in order to ensure that all of these regions can enjoy
sustainable peace and lasting development.
China’s stance on the Sudanese issue with respect
to the ICC remains unchanged. China hopes that the
Security Council and the ICC will fully respect the
sovereignty of the Sudan. They must also address
the legitimate concerns of the African Union and the
Sudanese Government when it comes to this issue and
fully respect the views of the African Union and the
League of Arab States, which cannot be ignored.
China has long been of the view that Heads of State
enjoy privileges and immunities under international
law by virtue of their office and that the referral of a
situation by the Security Council to the ICC in no way
necessarily undermines or strips the immunity enjoyed
by such Heads of State.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I wish to thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing today and to
assure her of our continued and full support for the
efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
of her Office. It is imperative that her call for the full
backing of the Council and member States be positively
received, respected and acted upon. For the Council,
this means following through on our decisions, in this
case our unanimous decision to refer the situation in
Darfur to the ICC.
Regrettably, once again little has changed since
the Prosecutor last briefed the Council in December
2017 (see S/PV.8132). It is particularly frustrating that

S/PV. 8290

all arrest warrants remain outstanding and that the
suspects remain at large. We reiterate our call on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the
Court, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005). In
addition, further steps by the Government of the Sudan
are also needed to ensure justice for the women, men
and children who have been victims of the horrendous
crimes committed during the conflict in Darfur.
Victims’ voices must be heard.
The success of the referral of the Darfur situation
to the Office of the Prosecutor continues to depend
heavily on the cooperation of States, in particular States
parties to the Rome Statute. In this regard, it is deeply
concerning that the President of the Sudan has been able
to continue to travel internationally, including to States
parties to the Rome Statute, which have an obligation
to cooperate with the Court in fulfilling its mandate.
Like other States parties, we continue to raise the issue
of non-cooperation with the relevant Governments.
Without its own enforcement mechanism, the Court
relies on States to fulfil its mandate, including by
executing arrest warrants. As we and several other
State parties have stated previously, the Council should
approach cases of non-cooperation in a structured
manner and, as a minimum, discuss which tools it has
for an appropriate response.
Turning to the current situation in Darfur, we
welcome reports that over the last six months, both the
level of violence against civilians and the number of
internally displaced persons have decreased. We are
pleased to observe a continuing improvement in the
overall situation and to see that clashes with the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid remain confined to
Jebel Marra. Nonetheless, we remain concerned about
reports from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur regarding continued attacks on
villages and civilians. In addition, despite the fact that
the number of reported incidents of rape remained
relatively low during the reporting period, sexual and
gender-related violence remains a serious problem
in Darfur.
We agree with Prosecutor Bensouda that for a
lasting peace in Darfur to be achieved, the root causes
of the conflict must be recognized and addressed in a
holistic manner. Adequate steps to do so have yet to
be put in place, for example in response to persistent
poverty, gender inequality, inadequate access to social
services, the adverse effects of climate change, land
issues and violations and abuses of human rights.

18-189109/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Building effective rule-of-law institutions is a critical
part of the process of addressing the remaining
challenges successfully.
In conclusion, let me once again underline the
significant contribution that the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor have made to ensuring accountability
for perpetrators and justice for victims of serious
international crimes. As supporters and as members
of the international community, we have an obligation
to continue to support its work, including by ensuring
sufficient financial funding for the Court to be able to
carry out its mandate.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful for the
very informative briefing that we have heard from the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, on her twenty-seventh report
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
We have taken note of the progress made in
investigations as well as of the difficulties that the
Office of the Prosecutor has faced in the course of
investigations as well as in its judicial activities,
relating to situations that hamper the fulfilment of the
task entrusted to the Office by the Security Council.
The situation in Darfur triggered the first referral
of a case by the Security Council to the International
Criminal Court. Since then, 13 years have elapsed,
and said case still languishes at the investigation
stage — an investigation that, as the report indicates,
faces major obstacles. The Council cannot and must
not be indifferent to the fact that the investigation
has dragged on for more than a decade. The time that
has passed makes it harder to shed light on the crimes
committed and to attribute responsibility.
Bolivia believes that those who have committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity must answer to the
courts. There can be no denying that this is an important
element for consolidating peace in Darfur. In voicing
our support for the work of the International Criminal
Court, we wish to recall that when the Security Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the Court in resolution
1593 (2005), it not only activated the jurisdiction
of the Court with respect to trying persons but also
urged it to support the promotion of the rule of law,
the safeguarding of human rights and the fight against
impunity, while underscoring the non-jurisdictional
activities of the ICC such as the promotion of peace,
reconciliation and institution-building.
10/20

20/06/2018

Against that backdrop, we encourage the Office
of the Prosecutor to include, in its next report to the
Security Council, details on the activities undertaken
by the Court to promote the strengthening of judicial
organs and institutions in the Sudan, now that the
priority is the consolidation of sustainable peace
in Darfur.
We also urge the Court to join in the efforts of
the international community, particularly regional
organizations, to strengthen political processes in the
Sudan, particularly those related to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. We believe that, as indicated in
resolution 1593 (2005), cooperation and coordination
between the Court and the African Union are crucial.
The commitment of that regional organization to
fighting impunity is undeniable, as set out in its
Constitutive Act. In addition, we recall that the African
Union set up a ministerial committee to address issues
related to the case. In that context, we call for the
establishment of constructive dialogue to facilitate
the necessary work and strengthens trust between
both institutions.
Over the past years, we have seen positive
developments in the Sudan, as mentioned in the
recent strategic review (see S/2018/530) of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which affirms a general improvement
in the security situation in Darfur and increased
cooperation between the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations to facilitate UNAMID’s work on the
ground. Bolivia believes that it was possible to reach
such a point primarily thanks to the joint work of the
African Union, the United Nations and the Government
of the Sudan. All such efforts should continue, with a
focus on strengthening peace in Darfur.
It is important to highlight that the development
and the future of international criminal justice are
closely linked to the concepts of the cooperation and
complementarity of States. The International Criminal
Court is a complementary court to the primary and
sovereign capacities of each State to administer justice
in its territory. In addition to achieving effective
and timely prosecutions, it is therefore necessary to
re-establish local capacities. That demonstrates that it
is now necessary to carefully review the case of Darfur.
We reaffirm that the International Criminal Court is
a global undertaking of interest to all States and that
its mission is intrinsically linked to the strengthening
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of international criminal justice, peace, security and
respect for human rights and to ensuring due process.
In that context, on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute, we
must take this opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness
of the Court and on whether the model developed meets
the expectations of cooperation and universality. The
Security Council and the membership of the United
Nations in general must take stock of the cost of the
International Criminal Court in pursuing investigations
and trials within its competence Moreover, when we see
that various States, including members of the Security
Council, are still not a State party to the Rome Statute.
For that same reason, the debate on the impunity
enjoyed by many of those responsible for crimes
against humanity or war crimes undermines the relative
capacity of the Court and, at the same time, weakens
the effectiveness of its work. We stress the point that we
cannot continue a frank dialogue while such countries
do not meet their own international obligations.
Bolivia fulfils its obligations as a State party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and supports efforts in the pursuit to justice in fighting
impunity. We therefore urge all States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to ensure its
universal jurisdiction. To that end, we believe that the
value of the principle of universality of the International
Criminal Court is vital.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the Russian Federation’s second
victory in the World Cup football championship
this morning.
We would like to welcome and thank Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda for her briefing on the twenty-seventh
report on the situation in Darfur in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). We appreciate the work of
the Prosecutor, as well as the report that she has just
presented to us.
As we have already reiterated on many occasions
before the Chamber, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is a State that supports respect for international law
and international humanitarian law. That is why we
commend the great efforts of the Security Council to
fight impunity for serious crimes and to promote the
principles of justice and responsibility, as well as to
demand accountability of all those responsible for war

S/PV. 8290

crimes, genocide, crimes against humanity and other
related crimes, as well as its unremitting effort to
establish institutions or methods to deal with such evils.
However, with regard to the International Criminal
Court, we would like to point out that we adhere to all
the declarations and resolutions issued by the African
Union on the way in which the Court deals with some
African issues, in particular concerning the proceedings
against the President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that the
International Criminal Court has no jurisdiction to
charge a President of the Republic, in full discharge
of his duties, given the fact that, as the symbol of
national sovereignty, he enjoys immunity. International
law on the immunity of senior State officials must be
respected. The required cooperation by the Office of
the President and the Court is being diminished by
the lack of credibility of that judicial institution as
a result of its inability to meet its responsibilities in
an efficient, honest and transparent way. It is not by
chance that several countries, including countries that
are party to the Rome Statute, have not cooperated in
the arrest and detention of President Omar Al-Bashir
on account of their not sharing the interpretation of the
Court with regard to immunity.
The fact that so many years have passed without the
Court being able to make progress in that case clearly
demonstrates the absence of grounds. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea therefore shares the position of the
African Union with regard to the International Criminal
Court’s action concerning Darfur. Accordingly, we
join the repeated request of the African Union for the
suspension of proceedings against the President of the
Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, and the withdrawal of the
referral of the case.
Meanwhile, Equatorial Guinea welcomes the
positive political developments in Darfur, thereby
improving the security and stability of the country.
Under the leadership of President Al-Bashir, the Sudan
plays a very active and positive role in combating
sectarian violence and terrorism, which is already
having encouraging results on the ground.
In accordance with the principles of responsibility
and justice, like the African Union, which is calling
for the restoration of peace and justice in Darfur, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is fully convinced that
dialogue and national reconciliation, in line with the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, are basic elements

18-1891011/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

for achieving a proper solution to the problems in the
Sudan and a broad and lasting peace. The actions of
the international community should support that
momentum and not hinder it.
I will conclude by encouraging the Government of
the Sudan to continue to make every effort to uphold
calm and respect for international humanitarian law
and human rights for all parts of the population under
its sovereignty, as well as to maintain the positive
momentum and to strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations country team in the
country in order to achieve peace and prosperity for the
entire Sudanese population.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We take note of her briefing on the ICC twenty-seventh
report on the Sudan.
The State of Kuwait, in its capacity as the Arab
member in the Security Council, recalls the 514th
resolution adopted at the twenty-second Arab Summit
in Sirte, in 2010. The resolution represents the Arab
position vis-à-vis the proceedings of the ICC against the
President of the Republic of the Sudan, a position that
rejects the politicization of the principles of international
justice and their use to challenge the sovereignty, unity
and stability of States under the guise of international
criminal justice. The Arab position underscores the
need to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of the Sudan. That is challenged by the
ICC decision, which is considered to be a precedent
against a sitting Head of State, enjoying immunity
as provided for heads of states by international law.
The decision of the ICC did not gain the support of
regional organizations to which the Sudan is party,
such as the League of Arab States, the African Union
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. All
these organizations are part of the international labour
organizations, as set forth in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is of vital importance
to ensure coherence and harmony in their work, as well
as in the work of other international organizations, such
as the ICC.
The Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Darfur (S/2018/530), issued last month, demonstrated
the significant reduction in intercommunal conflict
and the continued efforts by the Government of the
12/20

20/06/2018

Sudan to extend the ceasefire and achieve continued
progress in the weapons collection campaign, as well
as a significant reduction in the crime rate. The twentyseventh report of the Prosecutor, which is before us,
also welcomes the continued stability of the security
situation in Darfur.
Therefore, when the Security Council addresses
the issue of Darfur, it must do so in a comprehensive
and coherent manner in order to assist the efforts of the
Government of the Sudan to build peace and remove
any obstacles to peace, as called for in relevant Security
Council resolutions. Accordingly, we hope that the ICC
proceedings will not become an obstacle to achieving
peace in the Sudan. That is the noble objective of the
entire international community, especially in the light
of the positive, tangible developments that we have all
witnessed in Darfur, a region that has moved away from
the hardest phase of conflict towards building peace.
In conclusion, we renew our commitment to
respecting the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations on that matter,
including respect for State sovereignty. We reaffirm
the importance of respecting the sovereignty and
independence of the Sudan.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing.
The United States strongly supports justice and
accountability for war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. Although the best way to promote
accountability for such atrocities may depend on the
circumstances, the United States will always believe
that victims, including the victims in Darfur, deserve
justice. Hundreds of thousands of people have been
killed during the conflict in Darfur, with more than
2 million remaining internally displaced and 5 million
negatively affected since the onset of the conflict.
Although there are now fewer reports of civilian
displacement across Darfur, internally displaced
persons (IDPs) still cannot safely return home and risk
attacks when they leave IDP camps. As the 21-23 May
attacks by the Sudan’s Rapid Support Forces on three
separate IDP camps demonstrated, even IDPs who stay
within camp boundaries face substantial risks.
The United States is troubled by the resurgence of
violence in Jebel Marra in April and May, which resulted
in injuries and deaths of civilians, including children,
the destruction of homes and food, and the displacement
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of 9,000 people. We also remain concerned by violence,
including intercommunal violence, in other areas of
Darfur outside of Jebel Marra, and the lack of access
in various parts of Darfur afforded to the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). Of particular concern are the increasing
reports of a potentially calamitous harvest failure
across the Sudan in October because of the ongoing
economic and fuel crises, which might contribute to a
return to a return to large-scale conflict and conflictrelated atrocities as conditions become more unstable
and people become desperate for resources.
We call on the Sudanese Government to show
restraint and to allow UNAMID, the United Nations
country team, humanitarian organizations and the
media unfettered access to the areas where violence has
taken place and where communities remain vulnerable
to violence so that they can investigate these troubling
reports, monitor current needs and conditions, and
provide assistance to those in need.
It is shameful that sexual violence, including
such violence committed by personnel in military
attire and Rapid Support Forces uniforms, remains
prevalent in Darfur and that the Sudanese Government
often denies that this violence is taking place, despite
clear evidence to the contrary. As the United Nations
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
has noted, conflict-related sexual violence against
children has increased recently and cases of conflictrelated sexual violence in Darfur go uninvestigated.
That deterioration and the lack of accountability
are unacceptable.
The culture of impunity that continues to surround
those atrocities, in particular those involving sexual
violence, must end. With hopes that peace could return
to Darfur, the United States included ceasing military
offensive and aerial bombardments in Darfur and the two
areas as a key component of the five-track engagement
plan that we launched with the Sudan in June 2016. We
are pleased that the Government of the Sudan made
some progress under that framework, including ceasing
military offensive and aerial bombardments, during
that period. However, much more progress is needed.
We are determined to remain engaged as we work
to develop a phase-two follow-up engagement plan,
which will aim for improved respect for human rights
and religious freedom, a sustainable end to internal
conflicts and improvement in humanitarian access,
among other priority objectives.

S/PV. 8290

To achieve stable and lasting peace in Darfur, justice
and accountability are essential. Those responsible for
human rights violations and abuses in Darfur, including
by targeting civilians, must be held accountable. That
includes allegations that official security forces use
excessive force against civilians and that members of
armed militias perpetrate atrocities against civilians
in Darfur. We welcome the arrest by the Sudanese
Government of former Janjaweed commander Musa
Hilal, who is subject to United Nations sanctions for his
commission of atrocities in Darfur following clashes
between the Sudanese security forces and our militia,
loyal to Hilal.
However, we are concerned about the lack of
transparency around Hilal’s military trial and the
charges he faces. We call on the Government to
investigate promptly and credibly all allegations
against Hilal, including those related to atrocities, in
accordance with the Sudan’s human rights commitments
and obligations, and to hold Hilal to account if he is
found to have committed violations.
The United States has noted for many years that it
is unacceptable that the suspects in the Darfur situation
have not been brought to justice and remain at large.
In particular, we have expressed disappointment that
Sudanese President Omar Al-Bashir continues to travel
around the world. His being received on such visits has
served only to diminish the seriousness of the charges
against him and to compound the tremendous suffering
of the victims. Regardless of the power wielded by
those who are responsible for violations and abuses,
we must stand with the victims as we have in the past.
For example, in Cambodia and Sierra Leone, where
leaders have in the past committed atrocities against
their own citizens, they have been called to answer for
their alleged crimes.
Moving forward, we will use all appropriate tools
at our disposal to press the Sudan to improve its human
rights practices, protect fundamental freedoms and
promote justice for the people of Darfur. A Sudan that
adheres to the rule of law, respects human rights, allows
unfettered humanitarian access to all populations in
need and breaks the cycle of impunity is one that will
enjoy sustainable peace and prosper. We look forward
to the day when the Sudan is a demonstrable proponent
of human rights.
In conclusion, I would reiterate the concerns of the
United States about the ICC’s activities with respect to

18-1891013/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the situation in Afghanistan, which is different from
the current situation in many ways. We continue to have
a long-standing and principled objection to any ICC
investigation or other activity concerning United States
personnel, absent United States consent or Security
Council referral.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to echo the congratulations offered
by the representative of Equatorial Guinea on the
victory of Russia’s football team and wish the team
continued success.
We are pleased that Mr. Iliichev is present at
today’s meeting. He is the Director of the Department
of International Organizations of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Russia and a long-time friend of the
Security Council.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her semi-annual briefing to the Council
and for her efforts to uphold international rule of
law, justice, transparency and accountability. I also
welcome His Excellency Ambassador Omer Dahab Fadl
Mohamed, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of the Sudan, to the Chamber.
We took note of the twenty-seventh report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court pursuant
to resolution 1593 (2005) and would like to make the
following observations.
Kazakhstan welcomes Khartoum’s commitment to
stability in Darfur and to strengthened cooperation with
the United Nations and the African Union (AU). Such
efforts have resulted in the continuing improvement
in the security and humanitarian situation in Darfur,
an overall reduction in intercommunal clashes and the
consolidation of Government authority throughout the
area. Our delegation believes that those positive results
would not have been achieved without respect for the
national ownership, sovereignty and independence of
the Sudan. We encourage the Government of the Sudan
to maintain that positive momentum and to continue to
work diligently with the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
country team to advance the peace process, address
the root causes of the conflict and achieve peace and
prosperity for the entire Sudanese population.
14/20

20/06/2018

Kazakhstan is confident that constructive and
inclusive dialogue, in accordance with the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, is the only way to
establish peace and stability in Darfur. We encourage
the Court to join regional and international efforts
to reach the objectives of the Doha Document by
supporting the Sudan’s capacity to promote the rule of
law, address impunity and protect human rights.
In conclusion, as a member-observer of the African
Union, Kazakhstan underscores the critical role of the
AU in resolving the crisis in Darfur and its return to
peace and justice. We therefore suggest that the Court
take into consideration the unified position of the
African Union and establish dialogue with the Openended Ministerial Committee of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs on the ICC.
Lastly, we believe that our joint efforts and mutual
trust among all parties and institutions will definitely
lead to a stable, peaceful and prosperous Sudan.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me
take this opportunity to express our appreciation
for the work of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and that of her Office, and her
commitment to continuing to advance the cause of
international justice. As mentioned by the Prosecutor,
justice, including ending impunity and providing
accountability, continues to play an important role in
addressing the root causes of conflict and is key to
ensuring long-term stability.
Both the report and the briefing by the Prosecutor
highlight that the States Members of the United Nations
must cooperate with the Court and underscore the
importance of the support of the Security Council and
other stakeholders for the mandate of the Office of
the Prosecutor. We note the Office’s observation that
reported violence against civilians in Darfur appears
to have decreased slightly, as compared to the previous
reporting period, but we remain concerned about the
accounts of clashes, attacks on villages and aerial
bombardment in the Jebel Marra area, as well as the
consequences of such actions, including casualties
among civilians, their further displacement and the
destruction of their homes.
Notwithstanding the decrease in the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in Darfur, the
problem still exists and requires our close attention and
an appropriate solution. In that regard, and in the context
of the authorities’ decision to close all IDP camps by
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the end of the year, we note that resolution 2363 (2017)
stresses that any return should be safe, voluntary and in
accordance with applicable international law. In other
words, due to the limited level of access to health care,
schools and work in the areas of concern, any forced
return should be prevented.
The volatile human rights situation in Darfur is
also cause for great concern. Sexual and gender-based
violence must be closely monitored and prevented.
Persons in vulnerable situations in particular, including
women and girls, must be protected. Furthermore,
despite the release of some detainees, reported arbitrary
arrests and detentions require scrutiny and review.
The discussed withdrawal of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
must be compensated by an increased presence of the
United Nations country team and closer cooperation
among relevant stakeholders. Increased efforts by the
authorities to provide security, promote intercommunal
reconciliation and deal with the root causes of the
conflict are crucial. The adoption and implementation
of an agreement on the cessation of hostilities by the
Government and armed movements, as well as the full
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, are equally important. We cannot forget the
importance of the international community’s support
for the peace process and the development of the region.
Poland supports the ICC and the Office of
Prosecutor Bensouda in ensuring accountability
and achieving justice for the victims. We endorse
the Office’s request that the Council take effective
measures to enable the Court to carry out its mandate in
Darfur. As identified in the report, such measures may
include adopting a persuasive course of action against
States that were referred to the Council by the Court
in its non-compliance decisions and related referrals,
facilitating financial assistance from the United Nations
and effectively encouraging all States to cooperate with
the Office’s investigations.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her semi-annual briefing on the activities of the Court
with regard to the situation in Darfur. As a State party
to the Rome Statute Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its full
support for the efforts of the International Criminal
Court to promote international justice and combat
impunity both in Darfur and the rest of the world.

S/PV. 8290

My delegation notes with satisfaction the situation
of peace and relative stability in the Darfur region,
after several years of crisis. We call on the international
community to work towards consolidating the progress
made. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire supports the ongoing
political process and encourages the Government of the
Sudan to redouble its efforts to further address the root
causes of conflict to achieve lasting peace and stability.
Côte d’Ivoire remains firmly committed to
respecting human rights. We believe that the fight
against impunity is an important aspect of the national
reconciliation process and that the quest for lasting peace
in Darfur remains dependent upon accountability for
those who are guilty of committing serious crimes and
human rights violations. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates its appreciation for the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor to address that need for justice.
We encourage the Sudanese authorities, in the
context of enhanced cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor, to provide an adequate response to
the concerns expressed, in particular with regard to
clarifying the allegations of human rights violations
and bringing to justice those responsible for such
violations and other atrocious crimes committed during
the conflict in Darfur.
As highlighted in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations (S/2018/530)
on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, published on
1 June, despite the efforts of the Government of the
Sudan to re-establish authority over Darfur as a whole,
weak institutional capacity and the lack of financial
resources have a negative impact on the establishment
of rule of law, justice and security institutions.
According to the same report, attacks against
civilians, including sexual and gender-based violence,
continue in Darfur, despite the efforts of the Government
of the Sudan to establish the rule of law. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore encourages the international community to
assist in the establishment of strong institutions capable
of meeting the challenge of establishing the rule of law
in Darfur.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to commend the
Government of the Sudan for the significant progress
made in improving the security situation and stability
in Darfur. We note with satisfaction the incorporation
of that progress in the reorientation of United Nations

18-1891015/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

work towards peacebuilding, development and recovery
activities, with the exception of the Jebel Marra area.
The lifting of various sanctions imposed on the
Sudan by certain States and the improvement in the
sociopolitical situation in Darfur constitute positive
developments that contribute to amplifying the peace
and development dynamics under way.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for the actions of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court in cases relating to the situation in
Darfur and calls upon the international community
to support the efforts of the Sudanese Government to
definitively restore peace and stability to that region.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me to join
others in welcoming the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to the Security Council. We
express our sincere gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her briefing and report. We also pay tribute to the
Prosecutor and her Office for their tremendous efforts
and leadership in a sometimes difficult context. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its full support
for the International Criminal Court. The city of The
Hague is its proud host.
The ICC is the principal institution created to
strengthen international rule of law by bringing
to justice those responsible for gross human rights
violations and international crimes. In that sense,
the ICC plays a crucial role in the Security Council’s
efforts to promote peace and security in Darfur. I will
address three issues today: first, the outstanding arrest
warrants; secondly, accountability; and, thirdly, the
need for cooperation with the Court.
First, with respect to the outstanding arrest
warrants, 13 years ago, the Council adopted resolution
1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur to
the ICC. The Kingdom of the Netherlands deplores
the fact that all suspects of the Darfur situation still
remain at large. Let us not forget that the charges
against the suspects include genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. One of the people at large,
Mr. Banda, is accused of leading an attack on the
African Union Mission in the Sudan, in North Darfur.
Twelve peacekeepers were killed during that attack.
We regret that the Government of the Sudan has not
arrested all the suspects and has not brought them to
The Hague.
16/20

20/06/2018

Furthermore, we are deeply disappointed that
some of the suspects, like the President, continue to
travel unhindered to other States. We are even more
disappointed that, when the President travelled to
States parties, he was not arrested. We call upon all
States to meet their obligations under resolution 1593
(2005) — all States should cooperate fully with the
Court; all States should fulfil their obligations. In our
view, all States should arrest and surrender all those
persons against whom an arrest warrant has been issued
by the ICC.
Secondly, with regard to accountability, to date
there has been no accountability for victims of crimes
in Darfur. I pay tribute to the fact that some victims
and family members from Darfur are present here
today. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the recent relative decrease in violence in Darfur, but
remains deeply concerned about the continued human
rights violations, as well as the continued impunity.
We remain alarmed by the reports of continued
conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests
and extrajudicial killings. The Council must ensure
accountability for those and other gross human rights
violations. Accountability is the only road towards
sustainable peace.
Let me quote the words of the Permanent
Representative of Senegal, my friend Mr. Fodé Seck, in
his statement last December in the Council.
“No peace can be built on the vestiges
of impunity or failure to hold perpetrators
responsible. Accountability should never be
ignored” (S/PV.8132, p. 9).
It is the responsibility of both the Government of the
Sudan and the Security Council to uphold that critical
principle. International law should prevail.
Thirdly, I will address the need for cooperation
with the Court. The Council referred the situation in
Darfur to the ICC 13 years ago because of the atrocities
committed there. Under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the Council decided that the
Government of the Sudan must cooperate fully with the
Court and the Prosecutor. The Council also urged all
States and regional and international organizations to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor. The
Court needs that cooperation to function effectively, as
the Prosecutor made abundantly clear today. In our view,
all States should therefore extend full cooperation to
the Court. Only with the full cooperation can the Court
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

fulfil the mandate the Council gave it. Regrettably, to
this day, full cooperation is not happening.
It is unacceptable that the victims of international
crimes in Darfur have been waiting for more than 13
years. It is unacceptable that the victims of international
crimes in Darfur are still waiting for the Council to
ensure that its own decisions are adequately followed
up. It is unacceptable that the victims of international
crimes in Darfur are still waiting for justice.
The Council should take action when the Council
concludes that States have breached their obligation
to cooperate. When the Court deems that, the Council
should invite non-compliant States to come to it and
should decide on concrete follow-up action, and we
support the suggestions related to that just made by our
Polish colleague.
In conclusion, history has taught us that we cannot
have lasting peace without justice, accountability or
reconciliation. If we are all fully committed to that
goal, we can help the victims in Darfur and their loved
ones and families. They deserve justice. International
law and the Charter must be upheld.
The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
I wanted to comment on the Prosecutor’s report,
but there is basically nothing to comment on. There has
been zero progress in the investigations. The report, a
document that in theory should deal with the Court’s
activity, is largely devoted to listing the international
travels of the President of the Sudan, while the rest of it
is stuffed with quotations from the Secretary-General’s
reports and verbatim transcripts of Security Council
expert briefings.
One topic, however, is worthy of attention and I will
consider it in more detail. The International Criminal
Court (ICC) continues to call on States Members of the
United Nations, including those that are not party to
the Rome Statute, to arrest and turn over to the Court
various subjects of its investigative activities. I am
referring in particular to the arrest of the President of
the Sudan based on resolution 1593 (2005). However, the
resolution clearly states that States that are not party to
the Rome Statute have no obligation under it, and they
are therefore not required to satisfy this type of request
from the ICC. If my memory does not deceive me, that
was inserted into the resolution at the suggestion of the

S/PV. 8290

United States. However, the mere fact that a situation
has been referred to the ICC by the Security Council
does not automatically cancel the immunity of official
representatives of the Governments involved. We hope
that the States parties to the Statute also realize that.
The immunity of Government officials from
criminal prosecution is one of the key norms of
customary international law and an extremely
important factor for stability in international relations.
According to customary law, there are no exceptions to
the personal immunity of high officials, while all other
government officials enjoy functional immunity. What
the ICC has created, therefore, is a situation where
we are seeing States consistently refusing to comply
with the warrants issued by The Hague for the arrest
of the President of the Sudan. This is not surprising.
Governments act based on their international legal
obligations. This situation will continue to steadily
erode the level of trust in the International Criminal
Court. That, alas, is the reality and our assessment of
the situation. I am therefore unfortunately compelled
to say that the ICC today is not a body capable of
effectively carrying out the tasks that the Security
Council originally entrusted to it.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Once
again, we would like to commend you, Mr. President, on
your presidency of the Security Council for this month,
and to congratulate your country on its outstanding
organization of this year’s FIFA World Cup.
As you mentioned in your statement, Mr. President,
the Sudan, like other States that are not party to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), has no obligation to the Court with regard to
all the provisions of its Statute, including part IX, on
international cooperation. That is why we are here today
not to address the Court but the Council, in full respect
for the Charter of the United Nations. The Sudan is an
active member of the international community, and we
are therefore fully committed to respecting customary
international law and the various international treaties
and conventions to which we are party. Combating
impunity is one of our top priorities in that regard, and
we seek to achieve effective peace and justice in Darfur
while dealing with a conflict that is coming to an end.

18-1891017/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We were surprised to hear Prosecutor Bensouda
refer in her statement to Abdel Hussein, a new name
that was added only today to her list. As we will prove
later on, our regional organization, the African Union,
has always categorically insisted, in all its resolutions at
the summit level, on its total commitment to combating
impunity. The Council has already seen for itself that
the main reason for many members of the African
Union to become party to the Rome Statute is to be able
to fight impunity. That is why the African Union and
its Member States — bitterly, objectively, continually
and consistently — criticize the International Criminal
Court, especially the Office of the Prosecutor, for
its practices and the many ways in which the Statute
contradicts international law. The African Union and
its Member States have underscored their commitment
to fight impunity.
The idea of establishing an international criminal
legal system as a means for applying international
criminal law was implemented only in 2002, when
the Rome Statute of the Court came into force.
Unfortunately, this young regime quickly fell victim
to distortions and corruption — which the Prosecutor
calls distraction and asks us to ignore it. Because the
principle of universality has always been subject to
politicization, the system has fallen victim to abhorrent
selectivity, whereby where the Court and the Office
of the Prosecutor have focused their jurisdictional
activities on African States almost exclusively. The
response of the African Union has been a harsh one.
Furthermore, the Court has sought to arrest the
President of an African State — the Sudan — while
arrests have never been seen in any other region of
the world. My brother the representative of Ethiopia
eloquently addressed this issue today. The accusation
is not because of a committed crime that falls under
the jurisdiction of the Court, but because of the
nationality of the accused person. This politicization
and selectivity in the work of the Court were exposed
by WikiLeaks in February 2009. The objective is to
achieve political aims by putting pressure on certain
States and exploiting them politically in order to reach
great bargains.
The report of the Office of the Prosecutor that
was submitted for our consideration today admits that
the political exploitation, distortion and corruption
have led to a dangerous situation. I would like at this
point to paragraph 9 of the report, which refers to the
response to the rejection by the Hashemite Kingdom of
18/20

20/06/2018

Jordan to the accusation by the Court of violating its
international commitments:
“the Appeals Chamber also invited expressions
of interest for observations from States Parties
and professors of international law, because
Jordan’s appeal ‘raises legal issues that may have
implications beyond the present case’”.
The ICC feels that it is imperilled as a result of a
situation in which it was put by the previous Prosecutor,
Luis Moreno Ocampo, a corrupt individual. The ICC
now finds itself in an out-of-control situation. The Rome
Statute is contradictory to international customary
law and to the immunities enjoyed by Heads of State
and Government. You yourself were particularly clear
on that point, Mr. President, in your statement as the
representative of the Russian Federation to the Security
Council. There is also much controversy about the
legality and legitimacy of Article 13 (b) of the Rome
Statute, particularly pertaining to cases referred by the
Security Council to the ICC.
This situation led the African Union in its Summit
held in January to request an advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice concerning the immunity
of Heads of State. Before that, the African Union
had attempted for several years to communicate and
undertake a dialogue with the Security Council in order
to put an end to the procedures being enacted against the
President of the Republic of the Sudan under Article 16
of the Rome Statute. We have always sought to be above
board about these questions so as to ensure that we can
have a decisive ruling concerning the position under
international law with regard to the issue of privileges
and immunities to be enjoyed by Heads of State. We
wanted to be clear on this issue because we believe that
all the States Members of the United Nations, whether
or not they are party to the Rome Statute, want clarity
and decisiveness on this issue.
It is regrettable that the former and current
Prosecutors, in their 27 different reports on Darfur,
have come up against difficulties linked to the fact that
they are incapable of defining their own mission or
their own raison d’être. There have also been problems
with the drafting their various reports and statements
submitted to the Security Council under resolution
1593 (2005), which have also been incoherent. We
have said repeatedly — and the representative of the
Russian Federation also made this point — that issues
relating to Darfur and Libya are always submitted in
18-18910

20/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the context of reports that do not seem to be reports of
the International Criminal Court, but rather reports that
are issued by a monitoring body.
We see that the Prosecutor and her Office have
chosen an erroneous methodology in their report for
our consideration today. They lied about an aerial
bombardment of the Jebel Marra region in central
Darfur during the reporting period between January
and June. The aerial bombardment never happened at
all. This lie is added to another lie contained in the
report issued by the Prosecutor’s Office in September
2016. It claimed that chemical weapons had been used
by the Sudanese armed forces in Jebel Marra region.
That accusation was fabricated by the British group
Amnesty International. Unfortunately, the British
representative mentioned this dangerous accusation in
her statement, which could revive the conflict in Darfur.
It is therefore no surprise that today the Sudan is
firmly opposed to the actions and activities of the ICC.
The report described us as being hostile to the Court. The
meddling of the Court imperils security and political
and social stability in the Sudan. All of this presents
risks to the situation in Darfur and serves to incite rebel
mvements to commit fresh violations targeting victims,
whom the Prosecutor claims to be protecting.
We would like to draw the Council’s attention
to another serious issue, namely, the fact that the
Prosecutor and her Office have stepped outside the
proper framework of what should be their jurisdiction.
They have gone beyond the jurisdiction set for them
in resolution 1593 (2005). The resolution sets clear
geographical limits for the case referred to the Court. It
was to deal only with Darfur. However, paragraph 33 of
the Prosecutor’s report refers to protests in Khartoum
and the arrest of 411 people who were protesting
austerity measures and taken by the Government. The
relevant paragraph states that “hundreds of people
reportedly continue to be arbitrarily detained in [the]
Sudan for prolonged periods of time.” We insist once
again upon the need for accountability pertaining to
such acts, which are not within the framework defined
in the resolution.
Lastly, the Prosecutor’s report mentions a quotation
from two statements delivered by the representative of
Senegal in June and December 2017. The quotation
was selectively and partially cited to such an extent
that its meaning was completely distorted. Moreover,
my friend the representative of the Netherlands also

S/PV. 8290

brought up this issue. We are happy to present the
Council with the complete quotation, which overall
corresponds with our beliefs and those of the African
Union and the international community. I would like to
quote what the representative of Senegal mentioned in
his two statements:
“Subscribing to the principles of accountability
and justice, my country — like the African Union,
which calls for re-establishing peace and justice in
Darfur — continues to believe that dialogue and
reconciliation are essential steps towards bringing
out comprehensive and definitive peace and finding
a lasting solution” (S/PV.8132, p. 19).
The President (spoke in Russian): The
representative of Ethiopia has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to add a few
words to what I said earlier.
First, let us not kid ourselves. There are many
double standards with regard to ensuring international
justice and fighting impunity. We strongly believe
that the original referral was absolutely wrong. We
in the region knew that was the case. Therefore, our
position on the matter is in no way to be understood
as allowing impunity. By the way, the African Union
is perhaps the only organization in the world whose
charter, which is called the Constitutive Act, provides
for the organization to intervene in the internal affairs
of member States in situations in which war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide have been
committed. I doubt that any other organization has that
kind of provision. I might be mistaken.
Having once made a mistake, the Security Council
seems to insist on not rectifying it. Frankly, the Council
has no case here, and Member States have to realize that.
Incidentally, my objection to what the Prosecutor
said was essentially based on the form and style of her
presentation, not its substance. Otherwise, the fault
lies with the Council, not with the Prosecutor. The
referral was wrong, and it needs to be withdrawn. I also
agree with what the Permanent Representative of the
Sudan said in connection with the statement delivered
by our colleague from the Netherlands concerning the
Permanent Representative of Senegal’s past statement
(see S/PV.8132).

18-1891019/20

S/PV.8290

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give
the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda to respond to the
comments and questions made.
Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to reply to the comments made moments ago by the
representative of the Republic of the Sudan. As the
Security Council is aware, only rarely do I take the
opportunity to respond to comments made following
my reports on the Darfur situation. I have not done so
for two years. However, today I feel compelled to do so.
I always listen carefully to the statements delivered by
the representative of the Republic of the Sudan. I regret
the hostile and disrespectful language directed at me
personally, as well as my Office and the International
Criminal Court (ICC) at large.
It is perhaps ironic that, owing to the Government
of the Sudan’s policy of complete non-cooperation with
my Office, it is here in the seat of the body that referred
the Darfur situation to my Office that I have come
closest to anything resembling a so-called dialogue
with the Government of the Sudan. This is a state of
affairs that I wish to remedy, and I once again repeat
my offer to the Sudan to discuss the real issues at stake
here and engage on the issue of surrendering any or all
of the suspects to my Office. Despite these repeated
demands made and the groundless allegations levelled
against me and the Court, I remind all parties that the
ICC, including my Office, is entirely independent and
regulated by a robust legal and procedural framework
that guarantees fair trial rights and due process to all.
I strongly reject the continued baseless allegations of
conspiracy theorists and improper motives. It is tiring
and demonstrates a lack of respect for not only the
Council and its important work, but also the victims of
atrocity crimes and the cause of international criminal
justice, more broadly.
Let me be clear: I and my Office are interested
only in pursuing accountability for alleged crimes
in connection with the Darfur situation in a fair and
impartial manner in accordance with the Rome Statute.
We hope that our efforts will bring about justice for

20/20

20/06/2018

the thousands of victims of those alleged crimes, while
respecting all rights of the suspects. That deep need for
justice and accountability is of course why the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to my Office in the first
place. Our investigations have uncovered, and continue
to uncover, evidence that supports the allegations of the
most serious crimes allegedly committed by the suspects
in the Darfur situation, which include representatives of
the Government of the Sudan and its current President.
This is a fact that the Government of the Sudan cannot
simply wish away. Furthermore, to the extent that it
must be said again, I remind all those listening today
that the warrants of arrest were issued only after the
independent judges of the Court were satisfied that
there were reasonable grounds to believe that the
suspects of those warrants committed crimes within
the jurisdiction of the Court as alleged by my Office.
As is the case in any national system, which my Office
complements, those allegations should be answered by
the suspects. To date, the Government of the Sudan has
refused to surrender any suspect to the Court so that the
truth can be determined by the chambers of the Court
in full transparency. So to the Government of the Sudan
I say this. Rather than uttering the same tired slurs, it
should transfer the suspects to the Court and let the
facts and the evidence speak the truth.
I now address the victims, who continue to yearn
for justice. They should take courage in the example set
by the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
Ratko Mladić was indicted in 1995, not arrested until
almost 16 years later, finally convicted last year of
crimes that include genocide, and sentenced to life in
prison. The victims should therefore not be discouraged
by inaccurate statements aimed at shielding those who
bear criminal responsibility. They should not stop their
pursuit of justice or their willingness to come forward
with evidence to my Office. In our pursuit of justice in
the Darfur situation, I assure them that my Office will
not stop; that I will not stop. We are committed to doing
our job by the Rome Statute, and without fear or favor.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-18910
