S/PV.7959

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7959th meeting

Tuesday, 6 June 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Morales Ayma. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Ms. Velo
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Ashikbayev
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Guèye
Ms. Lövin
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Klein
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Preventive diplomacy and transboundary waters

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-15798 (E)
*1715798*

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of condolences over the recent
terrorist attacks
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to take this opportunity to express my most heartfelt
condolences to the families, the Governments and the
nations of all of the victims of the recent terrorist attacks.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Preventive diplomacy and transboundary waters
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, ministers and
other representatives present at today’s meeting. Their
participation is an affirmation of the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): Water,
peace and security are inextricably linked. With
demand for freshwater projected to grow by more than
40 per cent by the middle of the century, and with
climate change having a growing impact, water scarcity
is a growing concern.
By 2050, at least one in four people will live in
a country where the lack of fresh water is chronic or
recurrent. Strains on water access are already rising
in all regions. Without effective management of our
water resources, we risk intensified disputes between
communities and sectors and even increased tensions
among nations.
Three-quarters of United Nations Member States
share lakes or river basins with their neighbours.
Important river basins, such as the Nile, the Indus, the
Ganges, the Euphrates-Tigris and the Mekong provide a
lifeline for the economy, trade, culture and livelihoods
of surrounding communities. All told, there are more
than 270 internationally shared river basins that serve
as the primary source of fresh water for approximately
40 per cent of the world’s population. That is why it is
essential that nations cooperate to ensure that water is
shared equitably and used sustainably.
2/22

06/06/2017

Indeed, water has proven to be a catalyst for
cooperation among nations, even those that are not on
good terms. In the second half of the twentieth century
alone, 287 international water agreements were signed.
For example, in South America, Lake Titicaca, the
largest freshwater lake on the continent, has long been
a source of cooperation between Bolivia and Peru. The
1960 Indus Water Treaty between the Government of
India and the Government of Pakistan has survived
three wars between those two countries. In my own
experience, the Albufeira Convention, agreed during
my time as Prime Minister of Portugal, continues to
promote good relations on water management between
Portugal and Spain.
(spoke in English)
I should like to make a brief comment on that
agreement. During the time of my predecessor, the
discussions between the Governments of Portugal and
Spain were extremely difficult, and whenever there
was the perception that an agreement might be possible
there was an uproar in the press of both countries over
the question of whether or not the Government were
betraying the vital interests of their countries. When I
became Prime Minister and José María Aznar became
Prime Minister of Spain, we decided that our common
interests were far more important than the difficulties
in the elaboration of the treaty, and so, with two small
teams on both sides, it was possible to quickly achieve
something that we both considered to be a reasonable
compromise — not a perfect solution for either country
but a reasonable compromise.
Until the last moment, the uproar went on and the
discussions in the media were furious about this issue,
but the proof that political will is decisive is that the
agreement was signed and, from that moment onwards,
the discussion completely stopped. Things are working
perfectly between the two countries, with enormous
benefits, namely, in the common management of the
rivers — allowing, for instance, floods to have a much
less devastating impact than in the past. Something
that had looked almost impossible became easy when
there was the political will to do it, and once there was
the political will to do it nobody paid a price. On the
contrary, everybody benefited. I think that this is a
lesson that can be used in many other parts of the world
where people are afraid to go the extra mile to reach an
agreement with a neighbour or with a partner.
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Elsewhere in Europe, the Convention on the
Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes has fostered collaboration and
conflict resolution since 1992. As of March last year,
the Convention became open to all United Nations
Member States, offering the opportunity to create a
global framework for preventive diplomacy for dealing
with transboundary water issues.
The United Nations actively promotes mediation
and dialogue as effective tools for preventing and
resolving disputes over water and other natural
resources. For example, the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia is
collaborating closely with the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea and other partners to build capacity
in water diplomacy and to modernize the regional legal
framework on the management of transboundary water
resources. I look forward to visiting the Aral Sea in the
coming days. While there, I will discuss with all five
Governments of Central Asia how the United Nations is
supporting mediation to prevent and resolve local and
transboundary disputes over water in Central Asia and
elsewhere. We stand ready to engage in preventative
diplomacy and promote dialogue and mediation on
natural resources and other issues wherever and
whenever necessary.
Last year, the High-level Panel on Water, convened
by former Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the
President of the World Bank, produced an action plan that
champions a comprehensive, inclusive and collaborative
way of developing and managing water resources, and
improving water- and sanitation-related services.
The United Nations has also published a guide
containing practical strategies and best practices in the
area of water diplomacy As we work to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris
Agreement on climate change, we will expand on these
initiatives. I commend this Security Council meeting
for highlighting how water is and should remain a
reason for cooperation, not conflict. Let us commit to
investing in water security to ensure durable peace and
security for all communities and nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

S/PV.7959

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
participating in this meeting of the Security Council.
The Council has the important responsibility to maintain
peace and safety. Now more than ever, we should work
to build bridges and not walls and to promote popular
dialogue and diplomacy to solve all our conflicts for the
benefit of life.
It is an honour for me to preside over this meeting.
I should like to share some reflections on a theme that
affects and commits to life, the welfare of all people
and the balance and subsistence of our Mother Earth.
I refer to water. This topic has an important impact on
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Our planet, the human family and life on Earth are
experiencing a water crisis that will intensify in the
coming decades. According to data provided by the
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the
planet will have a global population of approximately
10 billion people by 2050, which will require a 50-per
cent increase in the demand for food. The Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, by that
same year the demand for water will have increased
by 54 per cent. If consumer patterns hold, two-thirds
of the world population will live with water shortages
by 2025.
The situation is very serious. More than 800 million
people lack access to drinking water, and more than
2.5 billion do not have access to basic sanitation.
According to the United Nations, every day between 800
and 1,000 children under five die of diseases related to
lack of access to drinking water and sanitation. It is also
enlightening to know that since 1947, 37 conflicts have
erupted between States because of water-related issues.
I wish to thank the United Nations and highlight the
role it plays through its agencies in addressing this issue,
which remains one of the most important challenges to
humankind. In that regard, 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development has deepened our understanding of the
need to achieve universal access to water and sanitation
that is equitable for all humankind.
Additionally, States have the obligation to manage,
responsibly and an integrated manner, water resources
at all levels, including transboundary waters, under the
principle of cooperation. In 2010, I proposed, on behalf
of my country, that the General Assembly declare
the access to water a human right so as to promote
its enforcement and to gradually ensure its universal
recognition and application. At its sixty-fourth session,

17-157983/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

in July 2010, the General Assembly adopted resolution
64/292, which recognized drinking water and basic
sanitation as a human right that is essential to the full
enjoyment of life and of all other rights. In that regard,
we continue to put forward our proposals so that all
basic services are eventually declared human rights.
Unlike other resources for which alternatives can
be found, such as oil, clean water does not have a
substitute. There is no life without water. There are now
7 billion people using the same available sources of
water — a limited, vulnerable and scarce resource that
we must use judiciously. I come from a country with
many indigenous peoples who live in rural areas. Our
people have always considered water to be the source
of life and a public good that belongs to everyone,
not just to one set of people in particular. It a nutrient
that Mother Earth produces and should be respected
and conserved.
With regard to water, our peoples and communities
were treated unfairly during the colonial era, as well as
in the more recent republican era. We were not consulted
about how the water was to be used, and that affected
our rights to our land and other natural resources. The
essential value of water as a social and cultural good
and its link with our own identity was disregarded.
During the neoliberal phase in my country — and I state
this in all sincerity — the drinking water supply was
privatized, as greater emphasis was placed on profits.
The increasing needs of cities could not be met. Costs
increased, which led to protests to have it returned
to the control of the State. Against that backdrop, in
their new Constitution of 2009, the people of Bolivia
agreed that natural resources are strategic resources
and belong to the public. They fall under the direct,
indivisible and imprescriptible control of the people.
We also stipulated that water is a fundamental right and
vital to life; it is an indispensable resource that allows
humankind to live in harmony with Mother Earth.
We are facing a complex water crisis that leads to
the emergence of new challenges, which traditional
water-management polices and modalities are illequipped to address — for example, the fact that water
is considered to be a human right and not a private
business or commodity. It defies logic that water is
subjected to market conditions that focus on its use as
opposed to it being freely accessible and universal; the
urgent need to identify priorities for its use for vital
purposes and to earmark increased available funds for
water and basic sanitation infrastructure to shore up the
4/22

06/06/2017

global deficit of financing for water projects — which
contrasts sharply with exorbitant military spending — its
impact on human and economic development, its many
uses, protection of the environment and respect for the
cultural values of communities.
Similarly, we must point out that the vast majority
of the world’s most important reservoirs are currently
being overused and are at risk of being polluted. A
high percentage of fresh water sources are shared by
two or more States, while agreements do not always
exist as to their origin, ownership or use, thereby
causing conflict that should, more or less, become
opportunities for effective collaboration. According
to the United Nations, there are 276 transboundary
water basins in the world — 60 in Africa, 68 in Europe,
46 in North America and 38 in South America. Two
hundred and fifty-six of those basins — 92.7 per cent
of them — are shared by two, three or four countries.
Twenty of those basins — 7.2 per cent — are shared
by five or more countries. We are all closely linked by
water. Traditional water-management policies are the
result of the effects of climate change and have exposed
a crisis that spark new local, regional and global
tensions, which jeopardize the peace and security
of nations. They are clearly important because the
Security Council has already addressed the complexity
of the topic on multiple occasions. Developments in
international water law, which is a key component in
the United Nations system, encourages new paradigms
to be identified and adopted, with a view to promoting
more effective water management. Water conflicts can
then be resolved through renewed effective preventive
diplomacy of transboundary waters. Since 1947, three
hundred international conventions on water have
been agreed.
As the Secretary-General mentioned, the United
Nations was established to prevent wars. Increasing
competition for resources in recent times means that the
focus is on preventing conflicts and sustaining peace.
The water crisis we face is one of the greatest threats
posed to life on the planet. The organs of the United
Nations, on the basis of their respective mandates, must
redouble their efforts so that together we can stymie
that threat. In that regard, I would like to share a few
observations with the Council, which will, no doubt, be
built upon today and in future debates.
First, water is vital to sustaining the life of all
people and living beings and for maintaining balance
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

on Mother Earth. Water is shared but vulnerable
universal heritage.
Second, fresh water is limited and cannot be
replaced. As such, all of its sources must be conserved
and safeguarded against pollution, the effects of climate
change and overuse in activities that are not essential.
Third, the fresh water available is found in areas
that are shared internationally. Its use must pave the
way for opportunities that promote collaboration,
interaction and harmony among peoples, not that spark
conflicts surrounding its origin, ownership or use. Water
jeopardizes peace and security among peoples; it must
not be the cause of domestic or international conflicts.
Fourth, water must bring together all States,
nations, communities, peoples, social movements and
individuals so that together they can share their concerns
and knowledge, reach consensus and develop more
effective and collaborative water-management policies.
Fifth, water has inspired the development of new
instruments of international law that incorporate
principles surrounding its use, conservation,
cooperation efforts, the sharing of information and
technology and focus on its use for vital purposes,
which all deserve States’ full attention.
Sixth, water should inspire a new global awareness,
with a view to protecting and conserving the resource
for future generations, while ensuring its universal
access and seeking to avoid conflicts.
Seventh, States should consider entering into
governance agreements that emphasize the sustainability
of transboundary water resources and provide for the
establishment of institutional mechanisms that ensure
the reasonable use of such resources.
Eighth, States have a duty to actively and
permanently cooperate with each other. They should
provide timely information on any significant
changes emanating from the use of transboundary
water resources.
Ninth, States should refrain from adopting
unilateral measures that endanger or affect the rights
of other States with which they share transboundary
water resources.
Finally, as the Charter of the United Nations
establishes, States have an obligation to seek solutions
to their disputes through negotiation, investigation,
mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement,

S/PV.7959

recourse to regional agreements and organizations and
other peaceful means, such as good offices. Where
water flows, peace must also flow.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for International Development Cooperation
and Climate.
Ms. Lövin (Sweden): Let me first express my
condolences and those of the Swedish Government
and people on the loss of life following the vicious and
cowardly attacks in Kabul and London. Our thoughts
are first and foremost with the families of those who
lost loved ones and those who are now recovering from
their injuries. We share the shock and outrage of the
British and Afghan peoples and I assure them that
Sweden stands with them at this time.
Moving on to the subject of today’s discussion,
I would like to thank Bolivia for putting the issue of
preventive diplomacy and transboundary waters on the
agenda. Water is one of the essential building blocks of
human life. Without it, nothing can survive. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his insightful and thoughtprovoking statement. He underlined for us the challenges
and opportunities presented by transboundary waters.
He also underscored the vital importance of preventive
diplomacy as a tool for averting conflict and fostering
cooperation through water management.
Today’s meeting coincides with another important
meeting focused on water, specifically on our seas
and oceans. Sweden is proud to co-host the Oceans
Conference with Fiji, which started yesterday. We
believe that the Conference can be a game changer and
lead to a reversal in the decline of the oceans to the
benefit of people, the planet and prosperity.
The topic at hand is vital and urgent. The effects of
climate change are real. They are being felt every day,
not least by those who depend on rivers, lakes, seas and
oceans to sustain their lives and livelihoods. Sweden
is not excluded from such concerns. We are currently
facing unprecedented low groundwater levels in parts
of our country, which is affecting countrywide water
supply levels almost throughout the entire contry. It
is imperative that we all respond to the challenge by
raising the level of our global ambition to meet our
global responsibility.

17-157985/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sweden is deeply and fully committed to the
prevention agenda being pursued by the SecretaryGeneral, which the Council discussed it in January
(see S/PV.7857). Such commitment to a more holistic
approach to prevention builds on an acknowledgment of
the many varied and interlinked drivers of conflict. The
issue of the management of transboundary waters is an
important example. A large proportion of the world’s
population depends upon shared water resources for
domestic, agricultural and industrial uses. How shared
water is managed between communities has a profound
effect on all aspects of human life, as well as economic
growth and sustainable development. Considering
its importance, it is not surprising that shared waters
can also be a source of tension that fuels conflict and
threatens peace. The negative effects of climate change
have the potential to increase such tensions. To quote
the Secretary-General,
“climate change is a threat in itself and a multiplier
of many other threats — from poverty to
displacement to conflict”.

06/06/2017

preventing conflict. The Aarhus Convention is an
important instrument for ensuring the participation
of the public and non-governmental organizations
in environmental decision-making. In that regard,
it is important that the rights of indigenous peoples
be recognized, taken into account and included in
decisions regarding water resources.
Secondly, regional actors have a crucial role to play.
As the Secretary-General underlined, Europe has a long
history of managing shared waters. We have developed
extensive systems for transboundary water governance,
including an overreaching treaty framework. The
European Union has lessons to share in that regard.
So, too, has Sweden, where we have made efforts to
gain experience in the area of water diplomacy for the
benefit of all countries. The Stockholm International
Water Institute and the UNESCO International Centre
for Water Cooperation and Global Water Partnership,
which is hosted by Sweden, hold extensive knowledge
pertaining to transboundary water and actively engage
in water management dialogues.

In response, we need to support countries’ efforts
to make informed and efficient decisions when
responding to the effects of climate change, including
on transboundary waters. The United Nations needs
an institutional home for the security risks related to
climate change that are already affecting countries. Such
a home would ensure that the United Nations has the
skills set needed to provide adequate risk assessments
and deliver comprehensive risk-management strategies
with regard to the impact of climate change. Together
with increased capacity for more integrated, crosspillar analysis, such work would also provide the early
warning needed to support the Council’s work to prevent
conflicts from emerging. That need was underlined in
March with the adoption of resolution 2349 (2017).

Finally, we should enhance and deepen our
efforts to work together around transboundary waters.
Cooperation needs to be extended beyond managing a
shared resource to the areas of increasing the quality of
water and protecting the environment. Cooperation over
shared waters can have far-reaching positive impact and
build trust far beyond the issue of managing a shared
resource, which further reduces the risk of conflict.

Improving the management of water resources so
as to ensure water security must be a top priority at
global, regional and national levels. We simply cannot
afford not to responsibly and sustainably manage our
waters. Issues of shared waters can and must be turned
into opportunities for cooperation. Doing so can help
prevent conflicts and deliver positive outcomes for all
communities across borders. We have a number of tools
at hand to support such efforts.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the Minister of Fisheries and Maritime
Economy of Senegal.

First, international law relating to water, which
sets out key principles around prevention and avoiding
transboundary harm, can play a significant role in
6/22

The waters that we share — whether rivers, lakes,
seas or oceans — sustain life and support our common
prosperity. However, they are coming under threat
more and more. No country acting alone can respond.
Instead, we must work together as partners across
borders in order to secure our shared future and protect
our planet for everyone.

Mr. Guéye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should like
at the outset, Sir, to say what an honour and a pleasure
it is for the Senegalese delegation to see you personally
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council,
which you decided to devote to the important issue
of transboundary waters and preventive diplomacy.
That decision has made it possible for the Council to
consider, for the third time in 14 months, the issue of
water and its relationship with peace, in the wake of the
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Arria Formula meeting held on 22 April 2016, under
the effective presidency of Mr. Macky Sall, President
of the Republic of Senegal, and the open debate held
on 22 November 2016 (see S/PV.7818), presided over by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Senegal abroad,
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye.
The fact that this body has met three times, with
growing interest on the part of Member States and
in such a short time, on this issue is an affirmation,
if such were needed, that this is a relevant topic. We
would highlight also the well-considered decision
made by our respective countries, Senegal last year
and Bolivia today, to consider this issue from the
perspective of prevention, which the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres — whom I thank for
his important statement — decided to place on the
list of absolute priorities within the framework of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
It can never be said often enough: the continued
scarcity of water resources, together with their
unequal distribution throughout the world, leaves us
no room for inaction. In fact, given rapid demographic
growth, runaway urbanization, the worrying issue of
global warming and the increasing need to invest in
hydraulics, the question of access to water is today
more burning than ever in a world where 60 per cent of
water resources are located in nine countries.
This frightening state of affairs requires a paradigm
shift on the issue of water in order to set in motion
a preventive approach that is based on two major
pillars: cooperation, in order to ensure access to water
resources and mediation, in order to resolve differences
among States.
We believe, therefore, that the goal is no longer
simply to make clear how water is related to peace
and security, or the fact that we need to prevent waterrelated conflicts, but, rather, how to share experiences
of successful cooperation. That is why it is my pleasure
to talk to the Council about the Senegal River Basin
Development Organization (OMVS), which represents
a success story in the area of the joint management
of transboundary waters. Given the serious
consequences of the severe droughts of the 1970s, three
countries — Senegal, Mali and Mauritania — guided
by the ideals of solidarity, sharing, fairness and peace,
decided in March 1972 to adopt a forward-looking vision
that resulted in the creation of the OMVS, successor to
the Senegal River Riparian States Organization.

S/PV.7959

Those three founding countries, joined in 2006
by the Republic of Guinea, defined what has become
known as the Water Charter, which is based on the
idea that since water is a rare commodity and therefore
potentially an object of conflict, it must be shared on
the basis of its uses, not among member States, so as
to ensure joint management of the basin in a spirit
of solidarity.
This resource-sharing among uses is based on
the following principles: the obligation to ensure a
balanced management of water resources; the fair and
reasonable use of river water; the obligation to preserve
the environment; the obligation to negotiate in case
of conflict; and the obligation for each riparian State
to inform other riparian States before undertaking
any action or project that could have an impact on
the availability of water, or about the possibility of
implementing a future project.
This vision was very forward-looking because the
Charter, well before its time, established the principle
of “polluter pays” and grants representatives of users,
territorial communes, non-governmental organizations
and decentralized management committees observer
status within the Standing Commission on Water. In
doing so, OMVS member States ensured access to water
for riparian communities and enabled them to invest
in energy, agriculture and transport while promoting
good-neighbourly relations in the region.
It is in that same spirit that Senegal will be
undertaking its presidency of OMVS after the election
on 17 May of President Macky Sall to preside over the
Conference of Heads of State and Government for the
upcoming two years.
President Sall intends to modernize the organization
at an accelerated rate and implement new projects in the
area of energy and the navigability of the river, and to
promote inclusive cooperation in a spirit of solidarity
so as to ensure that the Senegal river unites and does
not divide riparian countries.
Historically, as we know, rivers have been the cradle
of great civilizations, and we should never lose sight of
this historic role if we wish water and transboundary
waters in particular to continue playing a uniting role.
But knowing the geostrategic challenges surrounding
this resource, we cannot exclude the threat of future
conflicts concerning water. In this light, the Council
has no other option but to turn to prevention.

17-157987/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is therefore important to promote cooperation
in the management of transboundary water resources,
which would make it possible to guarantee peace
and provide for the interests of all. But for this, the
international community must muster the political will
to strengthen its mediation capacity, in particular by
helping the existing cooperation framework or, where
there is a need for it, in helping to establish new ones.
It is all the more necessary to recall, as underscored
by Mr. Danilo Türk, President of the Global High-level
Panel on Water and Peace, in the Council last November,
in saying that of the 263 international watercourses,
only 84 have joint management institutions, and many
are inefficient.
It is our common responsibility, therefore,
to promote a mediation that is complementary to
cooperation, particularly within the framework of the
United Nations, three quarters of whose Members share
watercourses with their neighbours.
We wish also to welcome the outstanding work
done by the Secretariat, in particular the Department of
Political Affairs, and to thank them for their valuable
support for their mediation efforts throughout the
world. Given all of these efforts, we wish to seize this
opportunity to invite the Security Council, the guarantor
of international security, to take a careful look at the
issue of transboundary waters in order to strengthen
its conflict-prevention efforts. Make no mistake, the
future of preventive diplomacy lies in cooperation.
Given the multiplicity and interrelatedness of existing
security challenges, our motto should remain that of
preventive multilateralism.
That message is exactly what the Senegalese
initiative on water, peace and security is trying to
promote. It seeks to show that, with the support of
the international community, countries can be helped
to replace competition for access to water — a source
of conflict — with cooperation around this strategic
resource, and, in that way, prevent conflicts and
strengthen relations between States.
Finally, it remains for me to reiterate the unwavering
commitment of Senegal to continue its efforts to prevent
water-related conflict, and for the the idea of creating
a Group of Friends on Water, Peace and Security has
emerged and will no doubt soon become a reality.
Mr. Ashikbayev (Kazakhstan): First and foremost,
on behalf of the people and the Government of
8/22

06/06/2017

Kazakhstan, I would like to offer our sincerest
condolences to Afghanistan and the United Kingdom
for the deadly attacks that occurred recently. We would
also like to extend our sympathies to the families of the
victims and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
My delegation warmly welcomes the distinguished
presence in New York of His Excellency Mr. Evo
Morales Ayma, President of the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, and thanks him for his insightful remarks
on the relationship between preventive diplomacy and
transboundary waters. We also thank the Bolivian
presidency for its foresight and proactive action in
drawing attention to this important topic, which is
in line with the Secretary-General’s priorities on
preventive diplomacy. My delegation would like to
make the following observations and recommendations.
First, threats of transboundary water disputes
are very important, as shared water resources flow
through different countries. My country defined water
security as one of its priorities during its campaign
for the non-permanent seat it occupies on the Security
Council. Like armed conflicts, water-related conflicts
need early action and negotiations. In that regard, I refer
to President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev’s policy address
entitled “Kazakhstan’s Concept Vision on Sustaining
Global Partnership for a Secure, Just and Prosperous
World”. The address sets forth numerous principles
applicable to averting water-related conflicts. History
has proved that there is a causal relationship between
water resources and conflict. Water diplomacy and
development can therefore save millions of lives. Water
is a critical part of Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 6, which drives all the other SDGs, which are so
necessary for peace and prosperity.
Second, water is vital for peace and progress in
the Central Asian region. In that regard, we welcome
the attention the Secretary-General is paying to the
problems of the Aral Sea and water-management issues
in general in Central Asia. I would like to remind the
Council that the area of the drain bottom of the Aral
Sea is around 6 million hectares. Annually, about
100 million tons of salt rise and are carried hundreds
or a thousand kilometres away. In that regard, we stand
ready to follow up on the outcome of the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to the site of one of the largest
environmental disasters in the history of humankind,
which now directly affects the lives of over 30 million
people today and is a threat to the entire world.
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

As the largest landlocked country in the world,
Kazakhstan has never taken water security for granted,
and water resources management is high on our
agenda. We could experience serious water scarcity
in the medium to long term, with significant impacts
on our socioeconomic development, with a projected
50 per cent shortage by 2040. With our Central Asian
neighbours, we are working on water-related regional
arrangements and transboundary water-resources
management. We believe that immediate action has to
be taken to ensure that freshwater resources are not
negatively impacted by climate change, urbanization,
population growth and pollution.
We greatly appreciate the efforts of international
partners, including the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the World Bank, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Islamic Development Bank and individual
countries, aimed at assisting Central Asian nations to
find common ground on water security in the region.
We also commend the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia in that regard.
Kazakhstan has initiated the creation of a Central
Asian investment fund for water projects to co-finance
the construction and renovation of water facilities. We
have also proposed establishing a regional centre for
water security and jointly developing and signing a pact
on water and environmental security in Central Asia.
Third, water disputes need early resolution because
water flows across legal and political boundaries,
thereby increasing the number and categories of
potential stakeholders. Boundary-crossing also means
that various actors can take recourse in more drastic
alternatives with quick results, such as cutting off
water supplies, rather than undertaking negotiations.
Our third recommendation is therefore to harmonize
the interests of upstream and downstream stakeholders,
which may vary sharply.
Likewise, and fourth, approaches on water use
and effective management must be balanced. Waterresource management should be an issue for discussion
and peaceful resolution and not devolve into hostilities.
We also require greater emphasis on water data and
policy innovations with regard to access to clean water
and sanitation.

S/PV.7959

Fifth, water negotiations must focus on substance
and result in mutually beneficial agreements at lower
cost and with timely implementation. They must
be fair, free, open and inclusive. They must engage
women, youth and vulnerable groups. They should be
conducted with mutual recognition and respect, leading
to joint problem-solving successes.
Sixth, cooperation in transboundary waters
should be used as effective confidence-building
measures at all levels, from small-scale community
and local Government projects to complex regional
and international collaborations carried out by
Governments, the private sector and civil society at
each level.
Seventh, neighbouring countries, regional and
subregional organizations and development banks can
assist in water disputes as they do in armed conflicts.
All national and international legal frameworks and
mutually agreed arrangements on international waters,
be they bilateral, regional or multilateral, must be
respected and implemented by all Member States.
Eighth, the United Nations Inter-Agency Mechanism
on All Freshwater Related Issues, Including Sanitation
needs to strengthen its capacities to render more
effective guidance to Member States, which in turn
must implement the recommendations of the Highlevel Panel on Water. We believe that the global water
road map and the SDG 6 Fund need to be strengthened.
Member States should be empowered to assist least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries
and small island developing States.
Finally, Kazakhstan will work towards a watersecure world, on water-disaster risk reduction and
resilience and supports national action and regional
and global cooperation for changing the way the world
looks at water and how we manage it.
Ms. Velo (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to thank the presidency of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for having convened today’s briefing, which
will contribute in increasing the attention paid to the
links between natural resources, climate and security.
(spoke in English)
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
As highlighted on the occasion of the first debate
in the Security Council on water, peace and security

17-157989/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

last November (see S/PV.7818), water scarcity, together
with other megatrends, such as population growth,
rapid and chaotic urbanization and food insecurity, can
be an instability multiplier and a driver of migration
and conflict. The Secretary-General has reminded us
of this fact today, as he did last week in his speech on
climate action at the Stern School.
I would like to highlight that, in tackling climate
change and implementing the 2030 Agenda in a timely
manner, the Paris Agreement remains a cornerstone
in cooperation among countries. At the same time,
transboundary water cooperation is a powerful tool
for the long-term prevention of conflicts. We consider
today’s briefing especially timely because it is taking
place in the light of the renewed focus by the SecretaryGeneral on preventive diplomacy, which Italy fully
supports, and of the crucial impact of water issues on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustaining
Peace Agenda where the nexus between peace, security,
development and human rights is clearly established. In
that respect, I would like to develop three main points.
First, a global multilateral framework for
promoting water cooperation and ensuring the
protection
and
preservation
of
international
watercourses is fundamental, and we have the tools
to achieve it. The 1997 Convention on the Law of the
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses
enshrines prevention at its very core. Also, allow me
to recall that the Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International
Lakes — the first water convention finalized by United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe — was
opened last year to all States Members of the United
Nations, thereby becoming another effective tool for
transboundary water cooperation worldwide. As a party
to both of those instruments, Italy strongly encourages
their ratification and full implementation by Member
States, as they represent a fundamental platform for
the further development of regional frameworks and
conventions on water cooperation. The International
Fresh Water Treaties Database lists over 400 water
agreements: they are the most effective benefits-shared
alternative to confrontation.
Secondly, Europe has long-standing experience in
this field. The Central Commission for the Navigation
on the Rhine and the International Commission for
the Protection of the Danube River are two of the first
examples of water-related multilateral frameworks
in history. Building on that experience, the European
10/22

06/06/2017

Union has always been committed to promoting water
cooperation in other regions of the world.
Thirdly, I would like to underscore my country’s
engagement in addressing water challenges at both the
multilateral and bilateral levels. As a member and host
country of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Italy
has actively participated in the establishment of the
Global Framework on Water Scarcity, whose goal is to
mobilize under a single integrated framework all actors
dealing with water scarcity in its social, environmental
and economic dimensions, with a focus on agriculture
and taking into special account the effects of climate
change. Furthermore, within the Global Framework,
last April we adopted the Rome Statement on Water
Scarcity in Agriculture, which, inter alia, underscores
the importance of water governance and promoting
integrated approaches to watersheds.
At the national level, Italy recently implemented
a new strategy for basin management with the
aim of promoting an integrated approach to water
management and soil conservation. Through shared
governance, public and private stakeholders join
efforts in improving the maintenance of our river
basins, fostering local development to create economic
opportunity and mitigating hydrological risks. Such
a cooperative approach, in a shared legal framework,
is key to preventing water-related disputes. Moreover,
Italy increased its development aid in 201. We will
double that increase in 2017, and triple it in 2018. We
want to ensure that those resources are directed towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and that
they have an impact on capacity-building, including in
the sustainable use of natural resources.
In conclusion, resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake
Chad basin region, recognized the adverse effects of
climate change and ecological changes among other
factors on the stability of the region, including through
water scarcity, and emphasized the need for adequate
risk assessment and risk-management strategies by
Governments and the United Nations relating to those
factors. We supported and co-sponsored the resolution
because we believe in international cooperation,
institution-building and partnerships. Benchmarks in
that regard will allow us to achieve not only international
water-related development goals, such as those set out
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, but
also to tackle the root causes of conflict and avoid
international confrontation.
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Italy remains steadfast in these efforts for prevention
and peacebuilding. Water, which has nurtured life and
the human family, fostered civilizations and inspired
many a creative mind, can also motivate our actions
and be an instrument of peace.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to extend my
warmest welcome to His Excellency President Morales
Ayma and to thank him for convening this meeting
on the important subject of preventive diplomacy and
transboundary waters and for presiding over it himself
personally. This is an excellent opportunity to build on
the open debate, held under the Senegalese presidency,
on water, peace and security last year (see S/PV.7818).
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Guterres
for his insightful remarks.
Sound and peaceful water resource development
and management are crucial to achieving peace and
prosperity. That was true in Japan throughout its
history of nation-building and economic development.
The same must have been the case in most countries.
When several countries share rivers, lakes or aquifers,
water management becomes a bigger challenge. Often,
vying for scarce water resources has led to conflicts
or perpetuated existing ones among different States,
ethnic groups or communities. External factors
such as climate change, population increases and
environmental pollution may put further pressure
on water resources, thereby exacerbating tension.
However, in many instances, sharing water resources,
with due respect for the needs of others, has brought
adversaries together to achieve peace and prosperity.
That is where we see opportunity for cooperation and
preventive diplomacy. Cooperation among stakeholders
in the area of water resources management can
constitute a part of confidence-building measures and
can prevent conflicts.
The international community can contribute
to confidence-building by facilitating dialogue on
transboundary water issues and by providing assistance
to water-management projects. Japan has long supported
countries in improving access to water, developing
water management and governance capabilities and
in dealing with water-related challenges to promote
stability and de-escalate underlying tensions. Japan has
been a proud partner of the Central Asian nations in
promoting regional cooperation.
Water is one of the many areas of our cooperation.
When Prime Minister Abe visited the region in 2015,

S/PV.7959

he agreed with every leader of the five Central Asian
States bilaterally that the issue of the efficient use
of natural resources was essential for sustainable
development. Prime Minister Abe expressed the
intention of Japan to cooperate with regional countries
for effective management and sustainable use of water
resources in the region. For example, in Tajikistan, an
upstream country, which depends heavily on watersourced power generation, Japan has promoted a
project to improve the efficiency of hydroelectricity
utilization. In central Uzbekistan, a downstream
country, Japan provides assistance for improving
irrigation systems so that water can be supplied in a
more stable manner for agriculture, while at the same
time cutting electricity consumption used for pumps.
Japan believes that improving water management in
both upstream and downstream countries benefits both
groups of countries, thereby contributing not only to
sustainable water use in the region but also to regional
confidence-building.
Turning to Africa, in the Sudan, Japan provides
assistance to improving the water supply in the eastern
region and to developing policy recommendations on
integrated water resource management so that waterrelated challenges can be dealt with in a more systematic
manner, based on data.
Japan also takes a multisectoral approach based on
water provision and capacity-building in agriculture,
health and rural governance. Considering that water
has been one of the sources of conflict in Darfur and
other regions, we believe that assistance in the areas of
water resource development and management increases
confidence in post-conflict reconstruction efforts and
leads to stability within a society.
Conflict can be prevented by developing areas of
practical cooperation and building confidence. I have
touched upon just a few examples of such cooperation
by my country. When transboundary water management
becomes a diplomatic issue between nations, it goes
without saying that seeking peaceful solutions is
important. Interested countries may learn from the
success stories of others that are being shared today.
Japan will continue to support countries in improving
water management and access as building block for
sustainable peace and security.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, and your
country for the initiative of convening this important

17-1579811/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

meeting. Egypt believes that competition over limited
resources, in particular shared water resources, may
increase the chances of conflict, especially given the
negative impact of climate change. That is already
evident in a number of conflicts on our agenda in the
Security Council.
Egypt has raised its water scarcity problem at many
international and regional forums. Egypt has a single
source of fresh water, namely, the Nile River. Egypt
derives 97 per cent of its water resources from the Nile
River and is entirely dependent upon it. Egypt is part of
the dry belt area of North Africa, where it rarely rains.
Egypt is also water deficient; it uses 102 billion cubic
metres per annum, whereas its total available water
supply from conventional resources is 58.8 billion
cubic metres per annum. That includes Egypt’s share
from the Nile River, as well as water from rain, floods
and aquifers. Egypt is below the water poverty line,
as the per capita share decreased to 625 cubic metres
per annum and is likely to decrease further to 470
cubic metres per annum when the population reaches
120 million by 2025.
Egypt believes that water should be a tool for
cooperation, development and water security. Hence,
together with its brotherly countries in the Nile River
basin, in 1999 we launched the Nile Basin Initiative,
which seeks to enhance cooperation among all the
countries of the basin to achieve common goals and
interests. The Initiative has been highly successful. We
are now seeking to consolidate our gains and restore
its inclusive nature, following Egypt’s suspension
of its participation in the Initiative’s activities.
It is worth noting that Egypt believes that the
establishment of a Nile basin commission should be
based on sound principles that respect the interests of
all countries and are in conformity with the established
rules of international law. Such a commission should
include all Nile basin States, without exception,
in order to achieve the desired goals. However, we
have a number of concerns regarding the incomplete
framework agreement, including the fact that the
agreement recognizes the violation of the principle of
consensus that led Egypt to suspend its participation in
the technical activities of the Initiative since 2010.
Egypt still believes in the importance of serious
and constructive dialogue to restore the inclusive nature
of the Initiative and to settle the outstanding disputes.
Egypt welcomed President Museveni’s kind invitation
12/22

06/06/2017

to hold the Nile Basin States Summit on 17 June in an
endeavour to break the current impasse on this vital
issue.
Egypt believes that cooperation is the optimal
way to determine the best use of the Nile River. Such
cooperation can take the form of bilateral projects with
Nile River countries in order to make use of the water
without compromising the interests of other countries.
The Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam was concluded among Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan on that basis. We would like to stress
the importance of all parties’ full compliance with and
implementation of the provisions of that declaration.
Egypt believes in the vital role of preventive diplomacy
in preventing future conflicts on shared water resources
through the following tools.
First, we must follow the two principles of “no
harm” and “prior notification” among co-riparian
countries. In that regard, when countries upstream
develop projects on a shared water course without
rigorous studies showing the potential harm to countries
downstream and means of adaptation, by so doing they
are flagrantly violating those two principles.
Second, States must honour their obligations under
international law, including bilateral and multilateral
agreements on transboundary water resources. They
must refrain from unilaterally developing projects on
a shared water course without consulting with other
riparian States. It is worth noting that undertaking
consultations in accordance with legal rules and in
good faith will be for the good of all and will ensure the
sustainable use of the shared water course.
Third, everyone should know that any unilateral
measures on shared water resources will not produce
the desired outcomes of a given project, but rather harm
the interests of other riparian countries in various ways,
such as a decline in the arable land area, a reduction
in energy production, increased environmental
degradation and poor water quality, rendering it unfit for
human use. We should be cautious and seek to prevent
this from happening in order to avoid internationalizing
these issues, which will be inevitable in the case of a
conflict that threatens international peace and security.
Fourth, we should avoid interpreting the principle
of the fair and equitable use of shared water resources
in a way that harms other riparian countries. How can
a certain usage be described as fair and equitable if it
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

harms the interests of other countries, in particular those
downstream, and threatens their stability and security?
Fifth, other non-State international actors,
in particular international donors, banks and
construction companies, should respect international
standards regarding water facilities on transboundary
watercourses. Such facilities should not be funded
or erected without the prior approval of all riparian
countries, in particular those downstream, in order
to avoid disputes and prevent future conflict among
riparian countries.
Sixth, information should be exchanged on
successful international expertise in the field of
shared water resource management. A comprehensive
confidence-building approach should be adopted
in good faith, avoiding any unilateral measure that
would harm not only downstream countries, but the
hydrological cycle of the shared watercourses.
Seventh, the United Nations should play a clearer
role in developing cooperation mechanisms among
riparian countries along international rivers, building
capacity to optimize the use of water and working to
prevent water-related conflicts. This includes raising
awareness about international law principles governing
the use of international rivers and enhancing compliance
with these principles.
Water can contribute to or threaten international
peace and security, and therefore requires further
attention so that related problems can be addressed in
a timely manner. Egypt is therefore of the view that it
is high time for the Security Council to take action and
produce an outcome that reflects all of the important
points to which I have alluded in my statement today.
We call on the Security Council to begin consultations
on producing an outcome of this important meeting
that would form the basis for future Security Council
resolutions or debates on preventing conflicts that
might arise in relation to shared water resources.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to see you, Sir, in the chair of
the President of the Security Council.
We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
In recent times, we have heard about the issue
of water here at the Security Council with enviable
regularity. We agree that the issues of access to
water resources, their sustainable use, recovery and
preservation play an important role because of the

S/PV.7959

timeless importance of water to life, human and
economic activity and to maintaining ecosystem
balance. As we see it, the discussions and debates on
those issues have been valuable and have reaffirmed
our understanding that the time has come to move
from words to action and to take specific measures
that could alleviate the international community’s
concerns about water. It would be appropriate to turn
to the long-standing outputs of specialized bodies, both
within the United Nations and outside of it, that day in
and day out use statistical and analytical data and the
practical experience of interacting with Member States
to implement targeted strategies in the area of water
resources that take specific political, geographical and
other factors into consideration.
There are many solutions on the surface. They
include raising the level of social, economic and
scientific and technological development of countries,
strengthening their potential in the area of water-resource
management and extending financial and technical
assistance, while bearing in mind specific needs and
development strategies. All of those measures, insofar as
they apply to water management, are listed as principal
ways of implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of
the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development. They open up additional opportunities
for further cooperation among States on the issue of
water resources, while balancing the three dimensions
of sustainable development. The International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”,
2018-2028, whose proclamation was supported by more
than 100 countries, including Russia, can and should
become a platform and a catalyst for the implementation
of those measures.
A major source of help in the area of water resource
management are regional and international legal
documents and mechanisms, such as the Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Mekong River Basin Commission
and others. In our view, the main issue lies in the fact
that the potential of the existing specialized platforms
and mechanisms is unjustifiably underestimated and
not fully utilized. Instead of guiding countries towards
taking mutually acceptable decisions within specialized
organizations, we are seeing increasingly frequent
attempts to situate transboundary water resources
within the context of discussing issues of peace and

17-1579813/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

security. That could lead to their being regulated
pursuant to the top-down principle and could also harm
the interests of countries concerned. In that regard, we
also recall that water, like other national resources, is a
subject of national sovereignty.
With regard to the possibility of using preventive
diplomacy on water resources, over the decade of its
existence preventive diplomacy has proven to be a good
tool for reducing tensions when they arise for specific
reasons and for guiding situations along an alternative,
peaceful course. The main characteristic of preventive
diplomacy, and precisely what makes it so useful, is
the fact that it is used exclusively at the request of the
State concerned and in line with that State’s national
strategies. That precludes any automatic recourse to
the mechanism and, at the same time, ensures that
the sovereignty of the country and its primary right
to prevent conflict and overcome its consequences are
respected. Therefore, any attempt to dictate under the
pretext of preventive assistance could discredit the very
idea of so-called preventive diplomacy and result in
growing distrust in it on the part of those countries that
find themselves a step away from an armed conflict.
Mr. Klein (United States of America): I thank you,
Sir, for this initiative on security and water, which is a
good follow-up after the meeting held last November
(see S/PV.7818) under Senegal’s presidency.
I too would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing.
As we have heard today, growing demand, rampant
pollution and changing water conditions contribute to
water insecurity in many regions of the world. Water
is becoming an increasing factor in migration, civil
unrest and State failure. Transboundary water problems
are particularly challenging but there are successful
models for dealing with them throughout the world.
One such example is the growing cooperation among
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia
on the Sava River.
Soon after the stability pact for South-Eastern
Europe was signed in 1999, those countries began
to work together to improve the joint management
of the Sava River. With backing from their political
leadership and a broad base of support from external
partners, cooperation began in 2001 and culminated in
the establishment of the International Sava River Basin
Commission in 2005. It is one of the first regional
agreements put into place after the wars in the Balkans
14/22

06/06/2017

ended. It demonstrated the genuine potential of water
to strengthen regional ties. It was a common project on
navigation use and conservation that improved people’s
lives and promoted peace and security.
The United States brings a similar viewpoint to
water issues in our own neighbourhood. As we said
during the open debate on water, peace and security
in November 2016 (see S/PV.7818), for more than 100
years the United States has had close relationships
with both our neighbours on water management. The
United States, Canada and Mexico have benefited. My
country has a long history of supporting cooperation
on shared waters. We are a contributor to the Shared
Water Partnership, multi-donor group managed by
the Stockholm International Water Institute, which
Minister Lövin mentioned. The Partnership aims to
build political will for cooperation on water worldwide
and to support Government-led efforts to solve difficult
transboundary water challenges. We strongly encourage
other donor countries to support the Shared Waters
Partnership, and for countries in need to make use of
the Partnership so that it might support their efforts to
cooperate on water.
While there is no standard approach to solving
disputes related to water, our experience points to four
key ingredients for preventive diplomacy to address
transboundary water issues. The first ingredient
involves increasing the capacity of Member States
and stakeholders to better understand and engage on
transboundary water challenges. Countries require the
ability to negotiate, resolve disputes and implement
agreements relating to their water resources. Secondly,
there must be sound data to establish a common
understanding of the available water resources and
the potential benefits and costs of development. All
parties in a potential dispute should have the same
understanding of what is at stake. Thirdly, it is important
to incentivize cooperation through investments in
joint projects that demonstrate the benefits of working
together. The final and most important ingredient, in
our view, is political will. Political leaders should make
cooperation a priority, set clear goals and empower
technical experts, which is in line with what the
Secretary-General outlined in his statement today.
Making progress on how we address transboundary
water issues should not be episodic. We need to build on
our successes so that countries and their people realize
that, whether it is across sectors or across borders,
cooperation on water opens up new opportunities for
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

growth and reduces risks for all of us. I would like to
thank you again, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
conveys its deepest condolences to the victims of the
terrorist attacks that recently took place in Afghanistan
and the United Kingdom. We hope that the injured have
a swift recovery. China strongly condemns terrorist
acts in all their forms.
China commends Bolivia’s initiative to convene
this high-level open briefing on preventive diplomacy
and transboundary waters. China welcomes President
Morales Ayma as he presides over the meeting. We also
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
Water is essential for human survival and the
sustainable development of economies and societies.
Transboundary water resources affect the common
interests of river basin countries or countries within
the lower or upper reach of river basins. Enhanced
transboundary water resource cooperation is conducive
to promoting regional security and stability, ecological
conservation and sustainable development. I would like
to emphasize the following three points.
First, it is important to strengthen development
and the protection of transboundary water resources.
We must avoid conflicts by utilizing water resources
reasonably. Countries in transboundary water basins
should bear in mind the importance of safeguarding
regional peace and security in the spirit of win-win
cooperation through various means, such as improving
disaster prevention and increasing agricultural
efficiency. We must take an integrated approach
towards soundly developing, reasonably allocating,
conserving and efficiently using transboundary water
resources, with a view to comprehensively enhancing
our ability to ensure water security. We must enable
the sharing of water resources in order to promote
win-win cooperation.
Secondly, enhanced dialogue and consultations
among countries in river basins represent effective
means of managing transboundary water resources. As
parties directly involved in transboundary water issues,
countries in river basins should make an effort to build
and improve coordination mechanisms. They must step
up their communications with respect to transboundary
waters, foster mutual trust and deal with disputes in
a timely and proper manner. The United Nations and
regional organizations should fully respect the wills

S/PV.7959

of the countries concerned. In view of the specific
contexts on the ground, they should play a constructive
role of promotion. They should help those countries
in river basins defuse tensions and build consensus in
order to make transboundary water resources a subject
of regional cooperation.
Thirdly, we should deepen international cooperation
on international water resources and step up capacitybuilding for developing countries. It is important to
strengthen international water resource cooperation
arrangements. We must put into place a solid legal
framework for transboundary water cooperation.
We should further support the United Nations Highlevel Working Group on Water Resources, the Highlevel Panel on Water Resources and peace, and other
mechanisms in their work, actively provide technical
assistance to developing countries and improve water
resource management and the sustainable use of
water, all with a view to fostering synergy among the
international community with respect to water.
Great emphasis should be placed on addressing
issues of water shortages in Africa. We should support
African countries in cooperating on transboundary
water resources and help them build water conservancy
infrastructure, all in order to bring concrete benefits to
African people. The protection of water resources should
be incorporated into the framework of peacebuilding
in order to ensure water security in post-conflict
situations. Along with the rest of the international
community, China stands ready to continue promoting
the sustainable development and utilization of water
resources so that transboundary waters can serve as
pillars of cooperation and peace, thereby making even
greater contributions to the prosperity and development
of humankind.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): To echo others, I would
like to begin on a sad note by extending my sincere
condolences to our colleagues from Afghanistan and the
United Kingdom, whose countries have once again been
the targets of cowardly and senseless terrorist attacks.
At the outset, let me thank the Bolivian presidency
for convening the today’s meeting on such important
topic. The World Economic Forum’s 2017 Global
Risks Report ranks water crises as a top-10 global risk.
The report links potential water crises to a cluster of
environmental risks, notably extreme weather events,
failures of climate change mitigation and adaptation, as
well as to migration and conflicts.

17-1579815/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

As of today, nearly 1 billion people in the world
are in danger of experiencing shortages of food and
water. Moreover, 90 per cent of the world’s current
population live in countries that share rivers, lakes or
aquifers with other countries. Those transboundary
watercourses are overexploited and vulnerable to
pollution. That all serves to underline the fact that
transboundary water cooperation is essential for
maintaining national, regional and global stability.
There is no doubt that many countries and peoples,
similar to thousands of years ago, are facing fierce
competition over access to water resources. In regions
where water is both scarce and in high demand, the
problem may trigger a significant decrease in economic
growth, leading to uneven distribution of limited water
resources, lower living standards, rising unemployment
and humanitarian needs. All this may result in forced
migration or even cause armed conflicts.
We fully share the view that such current trends
clearly require that Governments, the United Nations
system, civil society, the private sector and local
authorities work together to address holistically and in
a comprehensive manner this challenge and mitigate
the associated risks.
To achieve this outcome, Ukraine advocates
strengthening river basin cooperation and international
partnerships with regard to sustainable water
management and environmental protection as well as
the transfer of affordable technologies on water and
energy. We also endorse the developmental approach
of acquiring technical knowledge and technological
capacity through education and the relevant research
activities, particularly in developing countries.
We are convinced that progress in upholding peace
and stability in the area of water security also depends
on adequate management of the growing demand
for resources under the conditions of reduced supply
combined with population growth. To minimize the gap
between supply and demand in access to fresh water, the
international community will require effective security
and developmental strategies for resource management
and conservation.
We believe that creating effective legal and political
frameworks is crucial for preventing conflict and
fostering cooperation on transboundary water issues. It
is only natural that many, if not all, colleagues around
this table referred in their statements to successful
examples of regional cooperation in this field.
16/22

06/06/2017

As a State party to the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe Convention on the Protection
and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes, or Water Convention, adopted
in 1992, Ukraine supports and promotes knowledgeand experience-sharing as regards the water and
security nexus.
In this regard, it is also important to note that
together with 13 other countries and the European
Union, my country is actively working on the sustainable
and equitable water management of the Danube river
through the International Commission for the Protection
of the Danube River. That organization has grown into
one of the largest and most active international bodies
with river-basin management expertise in the world; it
is an excellent example of regional water diplomacy.
Another good example is the involvement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in water-related environmental and security issues in
Central Asia, a useful tool of preventive diplomacy.
We firmly believe that our desire and will to protect
the planet must be translated into action. For this,
States Members of the United Nations need to move
from declaring their aspirations to taking concrete
steps to secure the future we want for present and
future generations.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset, let me
thank Council members for their words of condolence
and support here and elsewhere following the horrific
attack in London this weekend. The perpetrators sought
to terrorize us, to divide us, but make no mistake: they
will fail. Together we will defeat them, and we will
need Security Council unity and activism against this
terrible scourge.
Turning to this afternoon’s meeting, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and I want
to join others in paying tribute to you, Your Excellency
President Morales, for your leadership in bringing
this crucial issue of transboundary water security to
the Security Council. It is an issue that we used not
to discuss in this Chamber, but it is one that warrants
our fullest attention. The stakes are high: more than
three quarters of States Members of the United Nations
share river basins with another country, and more
than 2 billion people live in shared river basins in the
developing world.
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

Sadly, we know what can happen when the water
runs dry. In Somalia, drought is driving the acute
food shortage that threatens to tip over once again into
famine. One powerful lesson from the last famine in
Somalia six years ago was that famine is not simply
about food but also about water. In north-eastern
Nigeria, lack of water is exacerbating the man-made
crisis, as we saw for ourselves when we visited in
March. Thousands of displaced people, the majority of
whom are women and children, have become sick from
diseases spread by dirty water and poor hygiene as the
conflict continues.
We have to act, and we have agreed to act.
Through the global goals, we all committed to deliver
improved water security, improved access to drinking
water and sanitation, and stronger transboundary
water management.
And yet the outlook for 2030 is fragile. We are
simply not on track. The United Nations estimates
that by the time we are supposed to have achieved
Sustainable Development Goal 6, demand for water
in many developing countries will outstrip supply by
40 per cent. If such scarcity is combined with weak
governance, population growth, migration and climate
change, we may face a potential upsurge in global
conflicts in future. This, therefore, is a clear call for
preventive diplomacy, as so many of my colleagues
have already said. All of us in this Chamber have a part
to play.
In South Asia, for example, the United Kingdom has
provided $30 million towards water governance over the
past five years. One billion people across Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Nepal and Pakistan
rely heavily on just three rivers, and, despite facing
similar problems posed by water demand and climate
change, regional collaboration between these countries
is limited. That is why we have supported a regional
approach to these rivers in order to address the shared
challenges of development and climate change. We
are working with the World Bank’s South Asia Water
Initiative, bringing together different disciplines and
experiences, technical and political, across the region,
so that together we can identify and resolve challenges
affecting these transboundary waters.
But to tackle this problem on a global scale, we
will need more than bilateral or regional action. We
will need to work together, through this institution and
others. Holding this meeting is an important step, but

S/PV.7959

this effort needs to be sustained. We cannot solve it
through one meeting a year.
The Group of 20 (G-20) also has a role to play,
including through incentivizing water cooperation.
This is not an issue for just the developing world.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and the Global Water Partnership
estimate that water insecurity costs the global economy
$500 billion every year. And yet we fall a long way
short of meeting the $198 billion of global investment
that is needed every year for water governance and
infrastructure. So we need to see investment in
institutions and infrastructure to deliver improved water
security within States and between States. Building
effective institutions and delivering better governance
is just as critical as building infrastructure. The G-20
can play a critical role through diplomatic efforts,
development cooperation and harnessing the potential
of the private sector, Governments and communities to
mobilize investment in water security.
Finally, if we are to make progress on this issue
before 2030, we need to see the bigger picture. Across
the world, climate change is undermining water
security. In almost all climate-change scenarios, the
world’s driest regions become drier, and across the
globe flooding will become more common. If we are
not taking steps to address climate change, we are
fighting with one hand tied behind our back.
The Paris Agreement provides the right global
framework for protecting the prosperity and security
of future generations while keeping energy affordable
and secure for our citizens and businesses. The United
Kingdom played a major role in securing the Paris
Agreement, and I am proud to restate in this Chamber
today that we are wholly committed to it.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for my delegation to be taking the floor at this
meeting, which you, Mr. President, have convened.
I would like at the outset to express the solidarity
of the people and the Government of Uruguay with our
brother peoples and Governments of Afghanistan and
the United Kingdom, who have been struck once again
by cowardly terrorist attacks.
Mr. President, I would also like to congratulate you
on having convened today’s meeting and thank you for
your statement. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.

17-1579817/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

Historically, transboundary waters have served the
development of nations, either as navigational routes
for the transport of people and goods or as vectors for
the production of energy or the extraction of natural
resources, through fishing, for example. Nevertheless,
these waters — which down the centuries have united
the peoples who share their shores — have on occasion
become a source of friction and conflict between them.
Water does not fall within the set of resources
defined as a global public good, but is rather a scarce
natural resource whose management can stoke political
sensitivities at the international level. Water stress is a
reality that may well continue to worsen and bring in
its wake an exacerbating of existing tensions, resulting
in shared river basins and aquifers generating hostility
rather than cooperation if appropriate policies are not
adopted. In order to understand the sensitive nature of
the issue, it should suffice to note that a significant part
of the world’s population currently lacks access to safe
drinking water and adequate sanitation.
Governments should adopt a cooperative approach to
the peaceful management of transboundary water flows.
Uruguay therefore firmly believes in this cooperative
approach, which is why we support negotiation as a tool
for reach agreements that guarantee the peaceful use of
these waters. Accordingly, we are party to treaties that
exemplify cooperative management of these waterways.
By way of example, I would point to the border
treaty between Uruguay and Brazil of 12 October 1851,
and its successor treaties, in which the midline, talweg
and joint ownership or basin regimes were established
for shared river and lake resources. These treaties
set up binational commissions for the management
of river and lake resources, such as the BrazilianUruguayan Joint Commission for the Development of
Mirim Lagoon Basin and the Cuareim River, and more
recently, in 2010, the Agreement on River And Lake
Transport on the Uruguay-Brazil Waterway.
With respect to the Argentine Republic, through
the Uruguay River Treaty of 1961 and the 1973 Treaty
concerning the Ríver Plate and its Maritime Front,
the borders were settled between both countries and
statutes corresponding to the use and management of the
waters were promulgated. These legal instruments are
the fruit of a pragmatic approach to finding innovative
and creative solutions designed to adequately address
our respective interests. This approach has led to the
establishment of a legal architecture of precise balances
18/22

06/06/2017

and reciprocal concessions. In both, the borders are set
forth in meticulous detail based on criteria using the
midline or the talweg systems, depending on the section
of the river and respecting the way the watercourse
winds as it flows, in order to demarcate the islands,
thereby arriving at innovative solutions by which some
of those islands are under the sovereignty of one or the
other of the parties, although physically located on the
other side of the borderline.
These instruments define the exclusive jurisdiction
of each party and the waters of common use where
the navigation channels are located, and provide for
the unrestricted freedom of navigation and special
norms for channels and for fishing, inter alia. The
texts of these treaties also provide for the founding
of binational bodies for the administration, oversight
and use of the rivers, which led to the establishment,
respectively, of the Administrative Commission for the
Uruguay River and Administrative Commission for the
River Plate, the latter with headquarters on Isla Martín
García. This island, which falls under Argentine
jurisdiction despite its proximity to Uruguay, is the
headquarters of the Administrative Commission and
has been declared an exclusive natural reserve for the
conservation and preservation of indigenous fauna and
flora. Both Commissions adopt decisions by consensus
and, using this framework, it has always been possible
for agreements to be reached, with the sole exception of
a dispute between the two countries that was resolved
after being brought before the International Court
of Justice.
Pursuant to these agreements, joint monitoring of
water quality and navigability of watercourses is carried
out and permits for commercial activity and construction
for each party are granted, taking into consideration
the protection of water resources as the lifeblood of the
riparian economy as well as the protection of wildlife
and the diversity of local species. It is also important to
highlight that in 2010 Uruguay signed the Agreement
on the Guaraní Aquifer with Argentina, Brazil and
Paraguay in order to promote the conservation of the
aquifer, provide environmental protection of the area,
and guarantee the multiple, rational, sustainable and
equitable use of its water resources.
In terms of transboundary waters, the best form
of preventive diplomacy is the one that focuses on
strengthening the legal frameworks that regulate them
and on setting up the necessary institutional framework
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

for their management and administration through
dialogue and cooperation between the parties.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We wish to express solidarity
with the United Kingdom and Afghanistan. Of course,
the United Kingdom knows that we stand shoulder to
shoulder with it during these difficult times.
It is indeed a great opportunity for me to be able to
extend a warm welcome to you, Sir, and to thank you
for presiding over today’s important meeting, and we
thank the Bolivian delegation for organizing it. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his briefing,
which, as usual, was very insightful.
Mr. President, water is, as you so eloquently
highlighted, a vital natural resource, indispensable
to realizing sustainable peace and development.
Unfortunately, due to population growth, urbanization,
industrialization and climate change, water scarcity is
projected to rise. Therefore, in an era of water stress,
the way States manage their transboundary waters
will be extremely crucial to realizing peace, stability
and development.
We are firmly convinced that transboundary rivers
and lakes could and should be, as you stressed, Sir, a
source of genuine cooperation and partnership between
Governments and peoples. Of course, affirming this in
theory is by far much easier than carrying out the same
in practice. The latter requires overcoming obstacles
to a win-win approach that are political, psychological
and cultural, as well as other types of impediments that
affect the development of realistic partnerships that
accord with the reality on the ground.
It is therefore self-evident that the mismanagement
of transboundary waters in the ways just indicated
could lead to political tension and conflict. This is not
naturally ordained by a higher power, however; it is
not ineluctable. What is in fact natural and in accord
with the interest of all concerned is cooperation,
which is facilitated by the natural bond among peoples
that transboundary rivers help to engender. But the
realization of this in itself requires wisdom, realism and
commitment to a spirit of cooperation that brooks no
desire to monopolize transboundary water resources.
The colonial history of Africa makes this issue all
the more critical. Our strong conviction of the critical
importance of cooperation as a more important theme
whenever the topic is addressed is borne out of past
experiences. History has shown that water can be

S/PV.7959

instrumental in transforming a potentially conflictive
situation into one of cooperation and partnership.
Creating and building a win-win partnership is indeed
possible, as long as States accept that transboundary
resources must be used equitably and reasonably.
With the right political will, unwavering commitment
to continued dialogue to solve disagreements and
participatory mechanisms, transboundary rivers create
favourable conditions for peace, economic cooperation
and regional integration which could benefit all
riparian States.
That is why studies demonstrate that, despite
the fiery political rhetoric, no State has gone to war
specifically over water resources, and there are more
examples of cooperation than of conflict, with hundreds
of agreements negotiated and signed by States,
resulting in productive and well-functioning bilateral
and regional mechanisms. It is for these reasons that
we remain committed to and actively pursue a path of
cooperation in bilateral and regional transboundary
water management issues.
Ethiopia strongly believes in the utilization of
transboundary waters, including the Nile River, as a
source of regional cooperation for shared development.
For Ethiopia, the Nile basin is a natural endowment
that belongs to all riparian States, which should lead
to strengthened friendship and greater understanding.
Let me take this opportunity to reaffirm the political
commitment of Ethiopia to continuing the regional
dialogue with a genuine and lasting commitment
to shared prosperity and overcoming poverty. This
is also in conformity with the 2030 Agenda, whose
major clarion call is leaving no one behind. That is
why, in fact, the topic is best addressed by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
All the same, the Nile Basin initiative is an example
of cooperation and partnership that we have in our part
of the world whose ultimate objective is achieving
harmonious utilization of the river. The riparian States
negotiated the Nile River Basin Cooperative Framework
Agreement for almost 13 years and now the Agreement
is signed by six riparian States and ratified by three
States. It is our sincere hope that once the remaining
three riparian States ratify the Agreement, a permanent
River Basin Commission will be established.
The cooperation between Ethiopia, Egypt and the
Sudan and the signing of the Declaration of Principles
by the leaders of the three easterly countries is also

17-1579819/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

06/06/2017

another manifestation of regional cooperation which
needs to be enhanced further. No doubt, there are
differences between upstream and downstream States
of the Nile, but the most important thing is that we have
a mechanism for dialogue anchored in the principle of
mutual understanding and respect. We believe such
bilateral and regional governance mechanisms should
be allowed to develop and consolidate within their
own regional contexts. Internationalizing these issues
will not help; it would instead complicate matters
undermining efforts at the bilateral and regional levels.

discussion that we are having today owes much to this
felicitous initiative undertaken by Senegal.

The 2030 Agenda provides us another historical
opportunity to ensure access to clean water for all.
The timely and full implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) is the best tool to prevent
conflict and ensure inclusive development for all.
In this context, enhanced international cooperation
would be indispensable to fully implement SDG 6 and
other water and water-related Development Goals and
Targets in developing countries, particularly in least
developed countries.

Access to water and sanitation was recognized
as a human right by the United Nations in 2010 in a
compromise resolution, which owes a great deal to the
efforts undertaken by the Bolivian presidency. Many
human activities depend on water resources and, at
the same time, global demand for water has grown
considerably, which is leading to an increase in pressure
being placed on water resources. These tensions will
continue to rise in the upcoming decades. The World
Bank estimates that, as a result of population growth,
the water needed for agriculture is expected to increase
by 50 per cent between now and 2050 and water needed
for energy production will increase by 85 per cent.

Ethiopia has been actively and constructively
engaged in water dialogues that Member States have
undertaken this year in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 71/222 on the International Decade
for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”,
2018—2028, which it co-sponsored. It is such kind
of development-oriented dialogues, together with
adequate and sustained financial, technological and
capacity-building support for the most vulnerable
countries, that could bring concrete solutions for the
water-stressed world. This is how we all could prevent
conflicts and promote durable peace and security.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to express France’s deep sympathy
for and solidarity with the United Kingdom and
Afghanistan in the wake of the terrible attacks that
struck London and Kabul.
I would like to thank President Morales for his
presence at today’s meeting and express our gratitude
to the Bolivian presidency for this relevant initiative on
the topic of preventive diplomacy and transboundary
waters and congratulate it on the high quality of the
concept note, which clearly describes the problem
we are discussing today. I would like to also thank
Senegal, who, in November 2016, had the excellent idea
of organizing a debate in the Security Council on the
topic of water, peace and security (see S/PV.7818). The
20/22

I shall limit myself to three brief observations,
which I think are important.
My first comment is that water is a vital resource
at the heart of development and human rights, but
which also touches on security and peacekeeping. The
debate on transboundary waters is essential because
it is urgent and legitimate for the Security Council to
address these issues.

The pressure on water resources has major
consequences
in
terms
of
security.
While
environmental factors are rarely the sole cause of
conflict, it is undeniable that access to and the use
of natural resources can contribute to the outbreak of
violence. According to the United Nations Environment
Programme, at least 40 per cent of the conflicts that
have broken out over the past 60 years are somehow
related to natural resources, such as gold, minerals and
oil, but also fertile land and water.
Conflicts related to sharing water can arise
locally among consumers, as well as among States
at a transboundary level. With regard to both
surface or underground water, conflicts related to
transboundary waters are frequent. They lead to the
unequal management of water resources and punish in
particular the poorest populations. Upstream countries
put significant pressure on downstream countries and
too often impose their rules. This then becomes a
serious issue of justice.
Water is a real factor of stability and fairness. It
therefore deserves our full attention and should not be
neglected in the anticipation and settlement of disputes.
Too often a source of division, water resources can
17-15798

06/06/2017

Maintenance of international peace and security

and must become a factor for cooperation and peace
between States.
My second point is that there are effective
international tools that must promote in order to
prevent water conflicts. I am of course thinking of the
two major multilateral conventions that should guide
all our action in this area: the New York Convention on
the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International
Watercourses and the Helsinki Convention on the
Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and
International Lakes. These two conventions are, to my
mind, complementary and not rivals.
The Helsinki Convention is, in some respects,
more ambitious than the New York Convention. It is
mandatory, it covers groundwater and goes further in
terms of protecting the environment. It also provides a
mechanism for dialogue and arbitration — a veritable
tool for facilitating and pacifying water management in
the context of tensions between riparian States on the
same river, lake or aquifer. I recall that the Convention
has been open to all States Members of the United
Nations since March 2016.
The principles underlying these two texts
are fundamentally similar. They are essentially
the principle of reasonable and equitable use of
transboundary waters, and an undertaking not to cause
significant harm to ones neighbours. Both texts also
provide a very comprehensive toolkit, detailed and
adapted recommendations, and good practices based on
long experience. Let us learn to make use of these tools,
recommendations and good practices.
I should like to add an important point about the
New York and Helsinki texts. These conventions set
down key principles but leave much leeway for the
parties concerned and do not impinge on the sovereignty
of States. I believe that this is a great strength; conflicts
are resolved much better on a local or regional basis.
We need to promote governance bodies based on river
basins, as local parties are best able to assess their
needs and discuss the equitable sharing of their waters
in order to ensure sustainable and peaceful access to
their resources. To that end, we must facilitate dialogue,
propose appropriate tools and support cooperative
approaches proposed by the parties on the ground but
in no case make decisions on their behalf.
My third and last remark is of a more general
nature. Climate change exacerbates most environmental
issues and makes development issues more complex.

S/PV.7959

Water is no exception. Water resources are becoming
increasingly scarce and under increasing pressure due
to the combined effect of global warming, population
explosion and increasing water demands. The cost
of access to the resource will rise and tensions will
intensify. Some 90 per cent of natural disasters are
related to water. Floods, droughts, storms — these
disasters tend to multiply as a result of climate change.
These constraints affect the living conditions of human
beings; cause or contribute to serious humanitarian
crises, such as famine; and give rise to conflicts among
neighboring States. Water issues are thus closely linked
to the challenge of climate change. It therefore seems
to me that in order to prevent water-related conflicts,
the challenge of climate change must also be met and,
to that end, Paris Agreement on Climate Change must
be implemented.
In conclusion, I pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral, who, with great foresight, has stressed the need
to decompartmentalize the approaches to sustainable
development, human rights and peace and security.
The issue of water illustrates with particular force
the concrete imperative of a comprehensive approach.
We must anticipate water-related crises, strengthen
dialogue and promote the creation of sustainable
partnerships by focusing on a long-term vision. There
is an urgent need to preserve our water resources so
as to preserve our future and that of our children in a
peaceful and sustainable environment. This is one of
the critical issues of our time, and its importance will
only grow in the coming years. France will remaining
resolutely committed in that regard.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more speakers on my list, but I should like to take this
opportunity to make a further statement.
Some participants today have not enjoyed being
addressed as brother or sister, but I wish to tell them
that we come from the Earth and shall return to the
Earth. We are all children of Mother Earth, and as such
we are all siblings. No human being comes from the sun
or the moon; we all come from the Earth. That is why
I use the terms “brother” and “sister”. I apologize if I
have upset anyone.
I would also like to say that I have been surprised
by various statements concerning cooperation and
collaboration. I come from a very humble background.
Sometimes, when we hear certain statements from
certain countries, we do not feel secure, but having

17-1579821/22

S/PV.7959

Maintenance of international peace and security

heard so much talk of cooperation and collaboration,
I feel that the Security Council is genuinely concerned
about maintaining peace, social justice and security in
the world.
Whenever a coup d’état takes place, mistrust
arises. As an international Organization, we have
the responsibility to defend democratically elected
Governments and Presidents. The largest number
of coup d’états in Latin America have taken place in
Bolivia. When armed troops took control in my country,
three Generals became President in one year. I did not
wish to discuss the political situation in my country, but
I feel that it is a good way to close.
I have been surprised by the various statements
on the issue of water, with respect to which we must
cooperate and work together in joint projects and
investment, which will be of great help to our peoples.

22/22

06/06/2017

I therefore thank all speakers for their important
statements. We are very diverse. Listening to speakers
experess their opinions in the Security Council, I
sense our physical, economic, geographic, ideological
and pragmatic diversity. It is our right to be diverse,
but whatever differences we may have, I feel that it is
important to work together to the benefit of the most
neglected peoples of the world.
That is my experience as a person of very humble
origins who knows what it means to live in poverty.
That is why I believe we must maintain our plurinational
States, a plurinational America and a plurinational
planet. We are diverse, and we must understand each
other in our diversity. For me and many others, the
synonym of diversity is plurinationality in which we all
enjoy the same rights and duties for the good of society.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

17-15798
