158

37/244.

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

Long-term financial and institutional arrangements for the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/218 of 19 December 1979 by
which it endorsed the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for Development, 214
Recalling also resolution 36/ 183 of 17 December 1981
in which the General Assembly, in considering the longtenn arrangements for the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development, requested the
Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology
for Development to submit its recommendations, through
the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session for consideration and decision,
Taking note of the report of the Intergovernmental Committee on its fourth session, 215 in particular of paragraph 7
on institutional and financial arrangements, of the statement
of understanding of the Chairman incorporated therein, 216
1. Decides that, in accordance with its resolution 36/
183, the long-term financial and institutional arrangements
for the United Nations Financing System for Science and
Technology for Development shall be as follows:
LONG-TERM FINANCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE UNITED NATIONS
FINANCING SYSTEM FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT
I. FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
1. The United Nations Financing System for Science
and Technology for Development shall be organized on
a voluntary and universal basis, open to the participation
of all States as full members.
2. The Financing System shall be endowed with substantial resources and shall be composed of two types of
resources: core and non-core.
3. Contributions to the core component of the Financing System shall be voluntary within the framework
of a financing plan, covering a period of three years at
a time.
4. The target for core resources for the period 19831985 shall be at least $300 million based on a progressive
build-up of resources.
5. The core resources of the Financing System for
the period 1983-1985 shall be provided by developed and
developing countries in freely convertible currencies.
6. Developed countries and developing countries shall
contribute to the core resources of the Financing System.
The pattern of contributions of both developed and developing countries will be determined in the financing
plan, which will reflect a mutual and joint undertaking.
7. Non-core resources will represent an important
element of the Financing System and shall consist of a
variety of resources, including co-financing, multilateral
and bilateral contributions, cost-sharing, joint ventures,
equity participation, trust funds and the like. The Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for
Development will evolve policy orientations for the mobilization and use of the non-core resources.

214
Report of the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology
for Development, Vienna, 20-31 August 1979 (United Nations Publication,
Sales No. E.79.1.21 and corrigenda), chap. VII.
215
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 37 (A/37/37).
216
Ibid., part two, para. 23.

8. The Financing System shall aim to establish areasonable equivalence between the levels of its core and
non-core resources in order to ensure an overall global
target for the Financing System of not less than $600
million for 198 3-1985.
9. The Financing System shall dispense both grants
and loans, which shall be provided on such terms as the
Financing System deems appropriate in the light of the
economic situation, the prospects of the recipient country
and the nature and requirements of the activity concerned.
Combinations of loans and grants may also be made where
appropriate. The proportion of the resources of the Financing System to be committed in any financial year for
financing operations shall be decided by the Executive
Board of the United Nations Financing System for Science and Technology for Development with due regard
to the long-term viability of the Financing System and
the need for continuity in its operations. Loans will be
provided on concessionary terms. Grants should be extended mainly to the least developed countries and for
the support of a number of high-risk research and development projects in developing countries. The secretariat of the Financing System shall submit projects and
programmes to the Executive Board for consideration and
approval.
II.

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS

10. The institutional arrangements of the Financing
System shall consist of the Intergovernmental Committee
on Science and Technology for Development, the Executive Board of the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development and a
secretariat.

A.

Intergovernmental Committee on Science and
Technology for Development
11. The Intergovernmental Committee on Science and
Technology for Development shall continue to be the
directing and policy-making body. Its principal functions
shall be the following:
(a) General policy orientation of, and direction for,
the Financing System;
(b) Decisions on policy proposals, including recommendations on levels of resources;
(c) General review and evaluation of the activities of
the Financing System;
(d) Election of members to the Executive Board in
accordance with the criteria stated in paragraph 13 below;
(e) Consideration of reports of the Executive Board.

B. Executive Board of the United Nations Financing
System for Science and Technology for Development
12. The Financing System shall have its own Executive Board as an identifiable and separate entity, to be
responsible for its operation and conduct. The functions
of the Executive Board shall include:
(a) Mobilization of resources;
(b) Utilization of the resources of the Financing System, particularly approval of projects, programmes and
activities of the System;
(c) Formulation of recommendations on levels of resources of the Financing System;
(d) Decisions on financial planning;
(e) Approval of administrative and financial arrangements involving the Financing System;
(/) Monitoring of the operations of the System in
relation to its objectives.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committel'

13. The Executive Board shall be an effective body
and its composition shall reflect an appropriate balance
between developed and developing countries as well as
between donors and recipients. It shall be composed of
21 directors, to be elected by the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development for
a period of three years, one third to be drawn from developed countries and two thirds from developing countries reflecting an appropriate balance between donors and
recipients.
C. Secretariat arrangements
14. The Financing System will have its own secretariat to process and monitor projects and to carry out
other activities mandated by the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development and
the General Assembly. The arrangements shall be as
follows:
(a) The overall supervision of the management of the
Financing System shall be entrusted to the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme, who
shall be accountable in the exercise of this responsibility
to the Executive Board of the United Nations Financing
System for Science and Technology for Development;
(b) The Administrator will report to the Executive
Board on the operations and activities of the Financing
System and bring forward projects for approval by the
Executive Board;
(c) In order to ensure close and continuous interaction
between the Centre for Science and Technology for
Development and the Financing System, the DirectorGeneral for Development and International Economic
Co-operation or his representative will be invited on a
permanent basis to meetings of the Executive Board;
(d) The Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation, assisted by the Executive Director of the Centre for Science and Technology
for Development, will submit an annual report to the
Executive Board on, inter alia, matters of mutual concern
to the Centre and the Financing System;
(e) The Director-General, in respect of both his responsibility for overall co-ordination of operational activities in the United Nations system and his oversight of
the Centre, shall be entrusted by the General Assembly
and by agreement with the Administrative Committee on
Co-ordination with the co-ordination with other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, including the United Nations Development Programme and
the Centre for Science and Technology for Development,
of the work relating to the Financing System. Such coordination activities shall be carried out through the existing mechanisms of the Administrative Committee on
Co-ordination, particularly the Task Force on Science and
Technology for Development;
(j) The Centre for Science and Technology for Development shall assist the Director-General in fulfilling
the responsibilities assigned to him in the Vienna Programme of Action on Science and Technology for
Development, particularly in providing the necessary
substantive support to the Intergovernmental Committee,
including its work relating to the Financing System;
(g) In view of the expectations of continued use of
the services and field network of the United Nations Development Programme, the focus of the Governing Council of the Programme will in future be mainly on the cooperative arrangements between the Financing System
and the Programme. Accordingly, the Administrator of
the Programme will provide an annual report to the Governing Council containing information on co-operation

159

between the two organizations and on other matters of
common interest;
(h) The Administrator, in consultation with the
Director-General, will report annually to the Intergovernmental Committee on the activities and progress of
the Financing System;
(i) The Centre for Science and Technology for Development will play a meaningful role and, in line with
its mandate and role, will, through appropriate arrangements and when required, co-operate with the secretariat
of the Financing System in preparing, formulating and
bringing to the attention of the Financing System_ suitabl_e
projects and in appraising, evaluating and assessmg proJects financed by the Financing System in the context of
the Vienna Programme of Action;
(j) There will be arrangements for exchange of detailed information between the Financing System and the
United Nations Development Programme, especially
where a common interest exists in specific programmes
and projects. This collaboration may extend to cofinancing arrangements as well as to technical areas in
order to enable the two organizations to draw upon each
other's special skills and experience;
(k) The co-operation of the secretariat of the Financing System will be sought by the Centre for Science and
Technology for Development in elaborating the relevant
major programme areas of the Operational Plan for the
Implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action and
in supporting the Intergovernmental Committee in the
promotion of the optimum mobilization of financial resources to carry out the Vienna Programme of Action;
(/) The secretariat will be small, reflecting its use of
the facilities of other organizations according to agreed
procedures; its administrative and support costs will continue to be met from voluntary contributions;
(m) The secretariat, under the overall supervision of
the Administrator, will have an executive head;
(n) The executive head of the secretariat will be appointed by the Secretary-General on the recommendation
of the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation and the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme;
(o) The executive head will be responsible for the
day-to-day management of the Financing System and for
such other activities as may be necessary to ensure effective operations of the System for both core and noncore resource activities; the secretariat of the System will
provide secretariat support to the Executive Board;
(p) Arrangements will be established with the United
Nations Development Programme for the provision of
administrative services; the nature and terms of such arrangements will be reviewed and evaluated as the operations of the Financing System expand;
(q) Reports to appropriate secretariat and intergovernmental bodies on financial audit and accounting matters will continue to be provided in accordance with United
Nations and United Nations Development Programme
procedures and requirements.
15. The required level of resources and functioning
of the Financing System shall be reviewed periodically,
taking into account the increasing needs of developing
countries. The first of such reviews will be held in 1985.
2. Also decides that the foregoing agreement on the
long-term financial and institutional arrangements for the
Financing System shall take effect as soon as the provisions
of the financing plan have been established together with
institutional arrangements for decision-making of the Executive Board, in accordance with paragraph 1 hclow: in

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

160

the meantime, the existing operating procedures of the System shall continue;
3. Further decides that the following special arrangements will be necessary in early 1983:
(a) The Intergovernmental Committee on Science and
Technology for Development will meet in special session
for a period of one week in February or March 1983 for the
purpose of:
(i) Assessment of the resource situation for the Financing System for the year 1983 together with the
outlook for the two following years;
(ii) Establishment of the provisions of the financing
plan and, in this context, rules for the voting pattern
of the Executive Board;
(iii) Confirmation (final pledges) of contributions for
1983 and, if possible, indications for 1984 and
1985;
(b) At its fifth session in June 1983, the Intergovernmental Committee on Science and Technology for Development will, inter alia, proceed to elect members to the
Executive Board of the United Nations Financing System
for Science and Technology for Development.
115 th plenary meeting
21 December 1982

37/'JAS.

Situation of food and agriculture in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme
of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development
and international economic co-operation,
Noting with grave concern that, over the past two decades, the situation of food and agriculture in Africa has
drastically deteriorated, resulting in a decline in food
production per capita with detrimental effects on dietary
standards, which are already well below the minimum
requirements, as well as in an alarming increase in the
number of people exposed to malnutrition, hunger and
starvation,
Recognizing the high priority attached to food and agriculture in the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation
of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development
of Africa, 217
Recognizing the commitment and determination of Africa
to devoting its limited resources on a priority basis to agricultural development, in accordance with the Lagos Plan
of Action,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the development
of food and agricultural prodµction lies primarily with the
developing countries themselves and that there is an increasing effort and growing commitment by the developing
countries to accelerate the development of their food and
agricultural sectors,
Recognizing the role of food-sector strategies, which
emerged from the World Food Council as a means for interested developing countries to adopt an integrated approach ~or increasing food production, improving
consumption and attracting the necessary additional international resources,
217

A/S-11/14, annex I.

Welcoming the priority assigned to food and agricultural
development in the deliberations of heads of State and Government held in 1981 and 1982,
Noting with interest the conclusions of the African Ministers for Food and Agriculture at the World Food Council
Regional Consultation for Africa, held at Nairobi on 16 and
17 March 1982, 218 as well as the special attention devoted
to food and agriculture by the Ministerial Conference of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
held in Rome in November 1981, and by the World 'Food
Council at its eighth ministerial session, held at Acapulco
from 21 to 24 June 1982, 219
Convinced that increased international support to combat
drought, desertification, African animal trypanosomiasis,
African migratory locust and post-harvest losses, among
other problems, is crucial to the attainment of food selfsufficiency in Africa,
Further convinced that collective action at the global level
can reinforce the efforts of the African countries to resolve
the technological, managerial and financial resource gaps
impeding food and agricultural production in Africa,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation of food and agriculture
in Africa; 220
2. Reaffirms its resolutions 35/69 of 5 December 1980
and 36/186 of 17 December 1981 and calls for their early
and full implementation;
3. Urges all the countries of Africa to implement, in
accordance with their national development programmes
and priorities, measures to increase substantially their food
and agricultural production;
4. Urges the international community to provide increased assistance in support of essential policy adjustments
by African Governments, within the framework of the Lagos
Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, to alleviate
food deficits in Africa, taking into account the conclusions
and recommendations adopted by the African Ministers for
Food and Agriculture at the World Food Council Regional
Consultation for Africa and endorsed by the Council at its
eighth ministerial session;
5. Calls upon the international community to continue
to support efforts undertaken by African countries at the
national, subregional and regional levels to increase food
production through, inter alia, the provision, on a priority
and long-term basis, of additional financial and technical
assistance to Africa by organizations of the United Nations
system, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the United Nations Development Programme
and other organizations involved in the financing of agricultural development, and through an increase in lending
by the World Bank to the agricultural sector in Africa;
6. Also calls for the adoption by multilateral and governmental institutions, when providing financing for agricultural development in the form of grants and loans on
concessional terms, of a positive and flexible approach which
would take into account, inter alia, the recurrent expenditure
arising from investment and the cost of factors of production;
7. Recognizes the role of the international community,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Food Programme, the World Food
Council and the International Fund for Agricultural Development in mobilizing food aid and agricultural assistance
218 See Official Records of the General A.uemblv. Thirtv-seventh Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/37/19), annex III.
·
·
219
/bid., Supplement No. /9 (A/37/19).
220 A/37/390.
