48

General Assembly-Thirtieth 'Session

2. Requests the Industrial Development Board to
report on this matter to the General Assembly at its
thirty-first session.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
3403 (XXX). United Nations Institute for
Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) an4 3202
(S-VI) of I May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order,
Recalling also its resolution 3281 (XXIX) ~f 12_ December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 3217 (XXIX) of
6 November 1974 on the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research,
Considering its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5 which set in motion measures that form
the basis and framework for the work of the competent bodies and organizations of the United Nations
system,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research;5
2. Invites the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to concentrate its work in the sphere
of economic and social training and research so as to
include specific projects on the problems. in t_he areas
identified by the General Assembly at its SIX~ _and
seventh special sessions and in the relevant dec1s1ons
of the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
3. Expresses the hope that the United Nations Institute for Training and Research will have greater and
wider financial support from Member States and organizations.
2420th plenary meeting
28 November 1975
3404 (XXX). Reconstitution of the United
Nations/FAO Intergovernmental Committee
of the World Food Programme as a Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3348 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it endorsed the resolutions of the
World Food Conference,6
Considering that, in paragraph 6 of resolution XXII
of 16 November 1974, the World Food Conference
recommended that the United Nations/PAO Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme
should be reconstituted, so as to enable it to help to
evolve and co-ordinate short-term and longer-term
food aid policies recommended by the Conference,
Recalling the resolutions 7 setting up the World Food
Programme as a programme undertaken jointly by the
United Nations and the Food and Agriculture Organi5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/10014).
6 See Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5-16
November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.75.II.A.3), chap. II.
7 Resolutions 1/61 and 4/65 of the Conference of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and General Assembly resolutions 1714 (XVI) and 2095 (XX).

zation of the Uip.ted Nations and establishing, for the
purpose of providing guidance on policy; admini~tration and operations, an Intergovernmental Comrruttee
of twenty-four members elected half by the Council of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and half by the Economic and Social Council,
Concurring with the proposals made, on the recommendation of the Intergovernmental Committee, by
the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations at its sixty-sixth session and the
Economic and Social Council at its fifty-ninth session,
to reconstitute the Intergovernmental Committee so as
to ensure the effective evolution and co-ordination of
multilateral, bilateral and non-governmental food aid
programmes, in the light of the recommendations set
forth in resolution XVIII adopted by the World Food
Conference on 16 November 1974,
Desirous at the same time of maintaining as much
as possible the established rules and procedures relating to the operation of the World Food Programme,
1. Decides that the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme
shall be reconstituted as the Committee on Food Aid
Policies and Programmes, which shall comprise thirty
States Members of the United Nations or members of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, fifteen of these members to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and fifteen by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, it being understood that outgoing
members shall be eligible for re-election;
2. Resolves that States already elected as members
of the United Nations/FAQ Intergovernmental Committee of the World Food Programme, pursuant to the
provisions of previous resolutions, shall continue as
members of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and
Programmes for the remainder of their respective terms
and requests the Economic and Social Council and the
Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to elect three additional members
each, one member each for a term of one year, one
member each for a term of two years and one member each for a term of three years;
3. Decides that thereafter all members of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes shall be
elected for a term of three years and requests the Economic and Social Council and the Council of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
make such provisions as will ensure that the terms of
office of five members elected by each of the two
Councils shall expire in each calendar year;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, when they elect members of the
Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes, to
take into account the need for the balanced representation of economically developed and developing countries and other relevant factors, such as the representation of potential participating countries, both
contributing ~nd recipient, equitable geographical distribution and the representation of both developed and
developing countries having commercial interests in
international trade in food-stuffs, especially those
highly dependent on such trade;
5. Further decides that, in addition to discharging
the functions hitherto exercised by the Intergovernmental Committee, the Committee on Food Aid Poli-
