1933rd

lnited Nations

PLENARY MEETING

;ENERAL
\SSEMBLY

(Closing meeting)
Thursday, 17 December 1970,
at 10 a.m.

WENTY-FIFTH SESSION

NEW

)fficial Records

AGENDA ITEM 80
Implementation of the recommendations of the Ad
Hoc Committee of Experts to. examine' the
Finances of the United Nations and the
Specialized Agencies (concluded):
(a) Report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions

CONTENTS
.genda item 80:
Implementation of the recommendations of the Ad Hoc
Committee "of Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies
(concluded):
(a) Report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative

and "Budgetary Questions
Report of the .Fifth Committee

YORK

.

REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/8266)

Igenda item 82:
Personnel questions (concluded):
(0) Composition of the Secretariat: report of the Secretary"General;
(b) Other personnel questions
Report of the Fifth Committee
.
A.genda item 73:
Budget estimates for the financial year 1971 (concluded)
Report of the Fifth Committee
.
Pending appointments:
(a) Special Committee on the Rationalization of the Procedures and Organization of the General Assembly;
(b) Special Committee on Apartheid;
(co) Special Committee o"n the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples '"

AGENDA ITEM 82
Personnel questions (concluded):
(a) Composition of the Secretariat: report of the
Secretary-General;
(b) Other personnel questions
REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE (A/8098)

AGENDA ITEM 73
Budget estimates for the financial year 1971
(concluded)
5

REPORT OF THE FIFTH COMMITTEE
Agenda item 25:
(a) Questionofthe reservation exclusively for peaceful purposes ofthe sea-bed and the ocean floor, and the subsoil
thereof, underlying the high seas beyond the limits of
present national jurisdiction, and the use of their
resources in the interests of mankind: report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and the
Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National Jurisdiction;
(b) Marine pollution and other hazardous and harmful
effects which might arise from the exploration and
exploitation of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, and
the subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of nationaljurisdiction: report of the Secretary-General;
(c) Views of Member States on the desirability of convening
at an early date a conference on the law of the sea:
report of the Secretary-General;
(d) Question of the breadth of the territorial sea and related
matters
"
Report of the First Committee......................

7

Agenda item 22:
The situation in the Middle East (concluded)

24

Statement by the Secretary-General
Completion of the work of the twenty-fifth session......

24
25

1. The PRESIDENT: Yesterday the Rapporteur of
the Fifth Committee presented the reports on the items
now before us and, the General Assembly decided not
to discuss them.

2. I invite members to turn their attention to the report
of the Fifth Committee on agenda item 80 [A/8266]. The
General Assembly will now take decisions on the two
draft resolutions recommended in paragraph 38 of the
report.
3. I shall first put to the vote draft resolution A.It
was adopted unanimously by the Committee. May I
take it that the'Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Agenda item "2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation.................

32

Closing of the session.................................

32

Draft resolution A was adopted unanimously (resolution 2735 A (XXV».

4. We shall now turn to draft resolution B. It also
was adopted without objection in the Committee.
5. If I hear no objection, shall I take it that the Assembly also adopts draft resolution B?
Draft resolution B was adopted (resolution 2735 B
(XXV».

6. One decision taken under this item requires action
by the General Assembly. I ask representatives to turn

President: Mr. Edvard HAMBRO (Norway).
1

A/PV.1933

2

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

to paragraph 18 of documentA/8266.. May I take it
that the General Assembly approves the Fifth Committee's recommendations?

result, all States Members of the United Nations a~
particularly the.larg~st contri~utors are faced with an
even more senous mcrease m the financial burden
which they must bear.

It was so decided.
7. We now turn to the report of the Fifth Committee
on agenda item 82 [A/8098].
8. May I draw the attention of members to the decision adopted in paragraph 31 of the report. In the Committee the decision was adopted without objection.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of that decision?

It was so decided.
9. We shall now vote on the two draft resolutions
recommended by the Fifth Committee. They are set
forth in paragraph 32 of the report.
i.

I.

10.

I first put to the vote ·draft resolution I.

Draft resolution I was adopted by 81 votes to none,
with 13 abst~ntions(resolution2736A, B andC(XXV)).
11. Draft resolution II relates to the amendments to
. the Staff Rules of the United Nations .made by the
Secretary-General in the year ending 31 August 1970.
It was adopted without objection in the Committee.
12. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
. General Assembly also adopts it.

Draft resolution 11 was adopted (resolution 2737
(XXV)).
13. We turn next to the report ofthe Fifth Committee
on item 73 [A/8099].
14. I shall now call on those representatives who wish
to explain their votes before the vote.
15. Mr. TARASOV(UnionofSovietSocialistRepublics) (translated from Russian): In connexion with the
forthcoming vote, the Soviet delegation wishes to
explain briefly to this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly its position on the budget estimates for 1971.

T~e commemorative session of the Assembly that
is now ending has provided a good opportunity for
a thorough study of ways and means of achieving a
radical ration~lizationofthe administrative and budgetary activities of the United Nations with a view to
further improving the Organization's efficiency in the
economical use of the resources of Member States.
We must regretfully state, however, that these hopes
have not been fulfilled and that the work on the budget
estimates for 1971 has been a source of further disappointment to many delegations, including my own; The
budget now being considered shows an unprecedented
growth in both absQlute and relative terms. Never
before in the history of the United Nations has the
budget of the Organization increased in one year by
almost $25 million, or more than 14 per cent. As a

16.

17. The Soviet delegation feels obliged to state that
there is absolutely no need for such a rapid increase
in the United Nations budget. These many millions
of dollars which have been added and which represent
wealth created by the peoples of Member States will
be spent not on activities for the maintenance of international peace and security or on useful programmes
that serve the interests ofall peoples but on maintaining
the constantly expanding staff of the United Nations.
Secretariat, on paying for the superfluous and overlapping units which still exist in the Secretariat on
financing the unjustified increase in the numbe~ of·
meetings and in documentation and, lastly, on meeting
inflationary pressures.
18. The Soviet delegation cannot for reasons of principle support such an improper course of action. The
money of the people of Member States must be used·
to finance measures which are of real interests to all
the people and not to pay for measures of any kind
which are unjustified, dubious and sometimes actually
contrary to the Charter.
19. The Soviet delegation is forced to note with regret
th!3-t, despite the categorical objections of numerous
delegations, the budget estimates for 1971 again include
illegal appropriations for the· financing of measures •
undertaken in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, such as payment of the interest and principal
on the United Nations bonds issued to cover the
expenses ofthe United Nations operations In the Congo
and in the Middle East, and those connected with the
financing of the so-called United Nations Commission
for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea, whose
activities run counter to the real interests of the Korean
people, and of the Memorial Cemetery in Korea. The
Soviet delegation reaffirms its position of principle on
this question and insists on the removal from the regular
United Nations budget (jf the items for the financing
of these illegal measures which violate the Charter.
This explains our unfavourable attitude towards sections 12 and 17 of the budget estimates.

/-

~

20. We should also like to reaffirm our position on
sections Band 14 of the budget estimates. We regard
it as illegal to finance technical assistance activities
from the regular budget. As delegations are aware,
the Soviet Union f~vours today, as it has in the p~st,
the provision of technical assistance to developmg
countries both on a bilateral basis and through the
United Nations. Under the agreements in force, the
Soviet Union is providing assistance in the field UL.._.,:•. ~cJ:~
economic and technical development to more than 40
developing countries on different continents and makes
sizable voluntary contributions to the United Nation~
technical assistance programmes. Consequently, we
object to sections 13 and 14 of the budget estimates
and voted against them not because we deny the impo~­
tance of technical assistance but because of our basic
approach to the observance of the United Nations

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970

3

:',II'I!'! ,
,.,

""':,!III"

Charter-namely that the regular United Nations budget is a budget for administrative expenses. We believe
that technical assistance should be financed exclusively
on a voluntary basis.
21. As in the past, the Soviet Union will pay its share
of these expenses in national currency.
22. The Soviet delegation will vqte against the draft
resolution on salary, scales for the professional and
higher categories. Since the material position of United
Nations staff in these categories is already better than
that of civil servants anywhere in the world and since
United Nations staff receive other sizable material
benefits, we feel that there is no justification at all
for deciding to grant another salary increase.
23. In addition, we shall be unable to support the
draft resolution on the nature of the growth in the volume of expenditure under the United Nations budget,
because it gives an inadequate and one-sided account
of the reasons for the growth of the Organization's
budget.

I

29. In this connexion, the Soviet delegation would
like to express the hope that, both in implementing
the budget for 1971 and in preparing the budget
estimates for 1972, the Secretary-General will do everything in his power to effect the greatest possible savings
and to avoid incurring in the future enormous expenses
which may ultimately place the Organization in a very
difficult financial situation, to say the least.

24. The Soviet delegation will vote against the draft
resolution on appropriations for new construction in
New York. At the present time, the problem of new
construction is closely interwoven with the question
of the rational distribution of Secretariat units among
the cities where the construction of new premises is
already under way. In addition, the que~tion of new
construction is closely linked with real staff requirements and should be considered in the light of the
additional long-range financial implications for
Member States of the spiralling inflation in the United
States. Unless all aspects ofthis problem are studied,
no new construction should be started or the Organization will find itself in a dangerous fmancial impasse.

30. Mr. MSELLE (United Republic of Tanzania): I
do not have a: long statement to make. I should simply
like to bring to the attention of the General Assembly
two points with regard to draft resolution V and draft
resolution VI in paragraph 170 of the report [A!8099J.

25. The Soviet delegation did not oppose the adoption
in the Fifth Committee of the resolution on the establishment of an electronic data-processing centre at
Geneva, on the understanding that a number of essential pre-conditions for the establishment of such a
centre will be met and, in particular, that all the
specialized agencies of the United Nations will agree
to participate in the work of the centre and not rent
their own electronic data-processing equipment.

32. I should like to deal with draft resolution V first.
This draft resolution was adopted on the basis of the
recommendation of the Advisory Committee as contained in paragraph 58 (b) of document A!8008!Add.3.
It will be realized that that paragraph of the Advisory
Committee's report, apart from recommending that the
base salary scales for professional and higher
categories should be increased by 8 per cent including
two post adjustments effective from July 1971 also contains the following phrase:

26. On the subject of the draft resolution on the
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses .of the United
Nations for 1971, the Soviet delegation wishes to state
that, under the Charter, the Security Council has the
exclusive right to decide matters relating to the financing of measures taken by the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
a violation of the Charter to give the United Nations
Secretariat the right to spend up to $10 million for
this purpose, and the Soviet delegation will therefore
vote against this draft resolution.

I

'28. The budget for 1971 is not being unanimously
adopted inasmuch as a good many delegations have
already voted against it or abstained in the Fifth Committee. This is a clear indication that there are serious
differences on this question among States Members
of the United Nations, including those States which
bear the main burden in financing the Organization's
activities. If this serious divergence of views on so
important a que~tion develops further, the Organization may run into considerable difficulties. This will
be very sad for all of us-both for those who favour
further restraint in budgetary matters and for those
who are unjustifiably calling for unlimited expansion
of the budget.

27. In view of all these factors, the Soviet delegation
will'vote against approval of the budget estimates for
1971 as a whole.

31. These two draft resolutions deal with the revision
of the base salary scales of the professional and higher,
categories as well as the provision of a special committee for the review of the United Nations salary system.
It has occurred to my delegation as well as to a number
of other delegations that a few things have been omitted
from these two draft resolutions-points which were
incorporated in the draft resolution adopted in the Fifth
Committee.

"it being understood that no further adjustment of
the said scales would be' made until such time as
the aforesaid review has be.en completed and its
results approved by the General Assembly" .
This recommendation, whic.h was adopted by the
Advisory Committee, does not appear in the Fifth Committee's report in either draft resolution V or draft
resolution VI.
33. There is no unanimity on where the phrase I have
quoted from the report of the Advisory Committee
should be in those two draft resolutions. When I say
"no unanimity" I do not mean in regard tothe content

4

General Assembly -

Twenty~fifth Session -

but in regard to where it should be. In other words,
many of us believe that it can be incorporated in either
draft resolution V or draft resolution VI. My
delegation-and I am speaking also on behalf of the
delegation of Argentina-would recommend that the
decision of the Fifth Committee, based upon the proposal in paragraph 58 (b) of the Advisory Committee's
report, should be included as paragraph 2 of draft
resolution V. The representative of Argentina and I
suggest the following wording:
"decides that no further adjustment of the base salary scales for the professional and higher categories
shall be made lintil such time as the review called
for in General Assembly resolution. . . has been
completed and its result approved by the General
Ass~mbly". .
34. The second point I WIsh to raise is, as I have
said, in connexion with draft resolution VI. It pertains
to paragraph 1. I raised a similar point in the Fifth
Committee becausethere are certain omissions. I think
this was due to the rush in the preparation of this document. Unfortunately, in spite of the fact that I had
pointed it out in the Fifth Committee, this appears
to have been omitted from the paragraph before us.
Paragraph 1 reads:
"Decides to establish a Special Committee for the
Review of the United Nations Salary System, consisting of government"experts from eleven Member
States to be nominated by the President of the
General Assembly .... "

We would like to insert the words "of the United
Nations" after the words "government experts from
eleven Member States". The phrase would then read,
"government experts from eleven Member States of
the United Nations".
35. The second addition would be inserted after the
words "the President of the General Assembly". We
should like to insert here the words "with due regard
to geographical balance". That phrase is extremely
important not only for my delegation but for a large
number of other delegations, particularly the sponsors
of this draft resolution. As amended it would read:
"to be nominated by the President of the General
Assembly with due regard to geographical balance, it
being understood" and so on.
36. These, are not amendments but simply a restatemen.t of the true facts of what took place in the Fifth
Committee.

Plenary Meetings

the draft resolutions on agenda item 73 have been com.
pleted?
39. The General Assembly will no~ proceed to take
a decision on the eleven draft resolutions recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 170 of its report
[A/8099J
40.

First, I put to the vote draft resolution I A.

Draft resolution I A was adopted by 97 votes to
10, with 7 abstentions (resolution 2738 A (XXV)).

41. Since draft resolution I B was unanimously
adopted by the Fifth Committee, may I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I B was adopted unanimously (resolution 2738 B (XXV)).

42.

We shall vote now on draft resolution I C.

Draft resolution I C was adopted by 101 votes to
none, with 11 abstentions (resolution 2738C (XXV)).

43.

We shall now vote on draft resolution 11.

Draft resolution Il was adopted by 107 votes to 10
(resolution 2739 (XXV)):

44.

We shall vote now on draft resolution Ill.

Draft resolution III was adopted by 105 votes to
none, with 11 abstentions (resolution 2740 (XXV)).

45. I believe there has been no objection to draft
resolution IV. May I take it that the General Assembly
adopts draft resolution IV?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 2741
(XXV)).

46. I call on the Under-Secretary-General to make
an announcement concerning a correction handed in
by the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
47. Mr.' STAVROPOULOS
(Under-SecretaryGeneral for General Assemblv Affairs): I
wish to announce that the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania suggested corrigenda in draft
resolutions V and VI. These corrigenda have already
been circulated in document A/8099/Corr.l.

37. The PRESIDENT: I will ask the Secretariat to
get in touch with the representative of the United
Republic of Tal.J.zania to be sure we understand the
amendments correctly so that we can vote on them
in due time.
.

48. The PRESIDENT: We shall now vote on draft .
resolution V.

38. That exhausts the list of speakers who expressed
a wish to explain their votes before the vote. May
I ask those representatives who wish to explain their
votes after the voting to do so after the votes on all

49.

Draft resolution V was adopted'by 89 votes to Il,:··..··;'O"''C;\i.lIfiwith 15 abstentions (resolution 2742 (XXV)).

We shall now vote on draft resolution VI.

Draft resolution VI was adopted by 104 votes to
4, with 12 abstentions (resolution 2743 (XXV)).

1933rd meeting -

17 December 1970

50. In paragraph 1 of the resolution just adopted the
General Assembly decides to establish a Special Com"
mittee for the Review of the United Nations Salary
System, consisting of government experts from eleven
Member States to be nominated by the President of
the General Assembly, it being understood that these'
States will nominate individuals of recognized standing
and experience to serve on the Committee. In making
this announcement I want it to be understood that I
have exactly the same reservations and regrets about .
this Committee as about the other Committees it has
been my sad duty to appoint. I hereby nominate the
following States to participate in the .special Committee: Argentina, France, India, Japan, Niger,
Nigeria, Peru, Poland, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the Unitea Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
If I hear no objections I shall take it that the Assembly
agrees with those nominations.
It was so decided.

51.

We shall now vote on draft resolution VII.

DrOIt resolution VII was adopted by 108 votes to
none, with 11 abstentions (resolution 2744 (XXV».' .

52. We shall now vote on draft resolution VIII.
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by 108 votes to
none, with 10 abstentions (resolution 2745 (XXV».

53. We shall now vote on draft resolution IX.
Draft resolution IX was adopted by 109 votes to
none, with 8 abstentions (resolution 2746 (XXV».

54. We shall now vote on draft resolution X.
Draft resoLution X was adopted by 119 votes to none,
with 1 abstention (resolution 2747 (XXV».

55.

Finally we shall vote on draft resolution XI.

. Draft resolution XI was adopted by 107 votes to
10, with 3 abstentions (resolution 2748 (XXV».

56. May I invite members to turn their attention to
the decision of the Fifth Committee set forth at the
end of paragraph 88 of the report [A/8099]? May I
consider that the General Assembly takes note of that
decision?
.
It was so decided.
Pending appointments:
(a) Special Committee on the Rationalization of the
Procedure and Organization of the General
Assembly;
(b) Special Committee on Apartheid;
l~

.!';!"

·'1-·

(c) Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the

5

Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples.

57. The PRESIDENT: We shall deal first with the
appointment of members to the Special Committee on
the Rationalization of the Procedures and Organization
of the General Assembly.
'
58. Representatives will recall that by paragraph 1
of its resolution 2632 (XXV) of 9 November 1970, the
General Assembly requested me to establish during
the present session a Special Committee on the
Rationalization of the Procedures and Organization of
the General Assembly, consisting of31 Member States,
on the basis of equitable geographical distribution.
59. Following upon the adoption of General Assembly resolution 2632 (XXV), I addressed myself to the
regional groups; informing them of my intentions
regarding the distribution of seats on; and the membership of, the Special Committee. I had the benefit of
the view's of the regional groups on these matters. As
far as possible, I took those views into account.
However, as the number of Member States interested
in: serving on the Special Committee was larger than
the number of seats available, I had to make a selection,
as the General Assembly had vested in me the fmal
responsibility for establishing the Special Committee.
I realize that many delegations will be disappointed
at and regret my decision. I should like to state that
I fully share their regrets and disappointment. Perhaps
representatives would permit me to remind them of
a sign that 'was always posted in the old days in the
saloons of the Wild West. It read: "Please don't shoot
the piano player. He's doing his best."
60. I should like to add that I am particularly grateful
to one delegation which had expressed a desire to be
a member ofthe Special Committee but obligingly withdrew to make my task easier-though still far from
easy.
61. I now wish to inform the Assembly of the decision
I have taken regarding the membership of the Special
Committee. It is constituted as follows: Afghanistan,
Austria, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France, Greece,
India, Japan, Lebanon, Liberia, the Netherlands,
Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Senegal, Tunisia, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Republic, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia.
62. Apart from the problem of the selection of membersof the Special Committee I should like to mention
that I encountered considerable difficulties regarding
the distribution of seats among the various regional
groups. I feel that, as a general question, this matter
of distribution of seats between groups on subsidiary
organs should be carefully studied, in the light both
of past precedents and of recent changes in the numerical strength of various groups resulting from the admission of new Members in the last few years. When I
say that, I want to make it quite clear that in my opinion,

;;%

,~i

L- - - - - - - - . - - - - - - j-'.

;(

5

."

6

:

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

the distribution made in the Committee of Thirty-One
should in no way be usep. as a precedent for similar
committe.es in the future. I believe that this might be
a matter which could be appropriately studied by the
Special Committee which I have just established.
\
63. I should also like to mention that several delegations have suggested that, in view of the general interest
shown in the work of the Special Committee that Committee might, if it so decides, establish a practice of
permitting the representatives of States. Members of
the United Nations but not of the Special Committee,
to make statements before the Committee at the
specific request of the repre~entatives concerned. I
personally feel that such a practice would benefit the
work of the Special Committee..
64. I should also like to inform the General Assembly
that the view has been expressed to me, on behalf
of one regional group, "that if the Special Committee
is prolonged for more than one year, some rotation
in the membership after appropriate consultations,
would be useful. This is a matter which naturally I
must leave to the Committee itself and to my successor
as President.
.
65. This should terminate this question, and I would
ask representatives to turn to the question of the Special Committee on Apartheid. I refer toresolution 2671
A (XXV) of 8 December 1970..In paragraphs :3 and
4 of that resolution the General Assembly decided to
expand the membership of the Special Committee on
Apartheid by not more than seven additional members
and requested me to appoint them, taking into account
the principle of equitable geographical distribution.
66. After appropriate consultations, I hereby appoint
the following additional four members of the Special
Committee on Apartheid with immediate effect: India,
Sudan, Syria and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.
67. I have decided not to proceed at present with
the filling of the remaining three seats on the enlarged
Committee. I believe that two of these seats should
be allocated to the group of Western European and
other States, and one to the Latin American group.
These groups have informed me that they have no
nominations to make at this time.
68. I should also like to draw attention to document
A!8094, in which Costa Rica states that it is withdraw. ing from the Special Committee on Apartheid. I am
happy to announce that Trinidad and Tobago has
agreed to serve on the Committee to fill the vacancy
so caused.
.
·69. I understand that the representative of Costa Rica
would like to address the Assembly at the present
'moment, and I now call on her.
70. Mrs. DE BARISH (Costa Rica) (interpretation
from Spanish): Mr. President, as you and the members
of the General Assembly know, my delegation, acting
on specific instructions from the Government of Costa

Rica, has expressed its decision- to cease particip;;- .
in the activities of the Special Committee onApartheil
as can be seen in the note which is contained in docu~
1l!-ent.A!8094. T~e :e~son that. led us.t<? t~e thi~ deciSlon IS Costa Rica s mterestm partlclpatmg actively
in other tasks in the U.n~ted Nations in which we have
not been able to partICIpate heretofore owing to the
limited number of representatives available to our.
delegation.
71. Costa Rica has been a member of the Special
Committee ever since it was created by virtue ofresolu_
tion 1761 (XVIn of 6 November 1962. Two of OUr
representatives served as Vice-Chairmen from 1963 to
1968-and we have been a member of the SUbCommittee on lilformationand, recently, of the SUbCommittee on Petitions.
72. As is known, Costa Rica is now a member of
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, and in 1971
we will begin our participation in the Commission for
Social Development, where we will be represented for
the first time.
.
73. It is a physical impossibility fo fulfil such obliga-'
tions with a due sense of responsibility, and that is
why we are withdrawing from our participation in the
Special Committee on Apartheid as of 31 December
1970. None the less, we will follow the work of that
body with the same interest as always, because we
consider the Committee to be such an important body.
74. Before concluding, may I express the gratitude
<:>f my delegation, and my personal gratitude, to all
the members of the Special Committee for the cordial
and friendly co-operation' that they have given us in
carrying ont.our functior.s. I should like to make particular reference to the Members of the Bureau, the
Chairman, Ambassador Farah of Somalia, the ViceChairman, Ambassador Jimenez. ofthe Philippines and
the Rapporteur, Ambassador Bhatt of Nepal. I should
also like to state for the record my delegation's
gratitude to the members of the Secretariat that make
up the division in charge of the matters dealt with by
the Special Committee. We should like to express our
appreciation and our friendship to all of them.
75. The PRESIDENT: May I now invite the representatives to turn their attention to the letters concerning the vacancies in the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
76. As a result of the withdrawal of Australia, Honduras, Norway and Italy from membership of the Spe. cialCommittee, the President has nominated, with
immediate effect, Fiji, Sweden and Trinidad and
Tobago as members of the Special Committee to fill
three of the vacancies. May I take it that the General
Assembly agrees with these nominations?
It was so decided.

1933rd meeting - 17 :December 1970

7

77. Before we terminate our discussion of this item,
may I first address the warm thanks of the General
Assembly to the members who are now withdrawing
for the contributions that they made, and once more
express our tribute to the distinguished Chairman of
the Committee, Ambassador Nicol, of Sierra Leone.

82., The Committee recommends the adoption ofdraft
resolutions I and n.

AGENDA ITEM 25

83. The PRESIDENT: A number of representatives
have asked to be allowed to speak on the amendments.
Since the First Committee had a rather exhaustive
debate on this item, may I suggest that the representatives who speak on the amendments try to be as concise
as possible?

Ca), Question of the reservation exclusively for

. peaceful purposes of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor, and the subsoil thereof, underlying the
high seas beyond the limits of present national
jurisdiction, and the use of their resources in
the interests of mankind: report of the Commit-tee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed and
the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of National
Jurisdiction;
(b) Marine pollution and other hazardous and
harmful effects which might arise from the
exploration and exploitation of the sea-bed and
the ocean floor, and the subsoil thereof, beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction: report of the
Secretary-General;
Cc) Views of Member States on the desirability of
convening at an early date a conference on the
law of the sea: report of the Secretary-General;
Cd) Question of the breadth of the territorial sea
and related matters.
REPORT OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE (A/8097)
78. Mr. CERNIK (Czechoslovakia), Rapporteur of
the First Committee: I have the honour to present to
the General Assembly in plenary meeting the report
of the First Committee on item 25 [A/8097J.

Pursuant to rule 68 of the rules ofprocedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of the First Committee.

84. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (inte.rpretation from
Spanish): On behalf of the delegations of Australia,
Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Italy, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Turkey and my own delegation together
with the delegation of Belgium which joined us at the
last minute, this morning I have the honour to submit
to the Assembly and amendment [A/L.625 and Add.]]
to. draft resolution n, C, recommended by the First
Committee on paragraph 35 of document A/8097. As
, will be observed, the proposed amendment is very brief
and limited to suggesting that operative paragraph 5 .
should be repleaced by. the following:
"Decides to enlarge the membership of the Committee so as to include all States Members of the
United Nations."
Of course, if, as we hope, that amendment is adopted
by the Assembly it will mean that operative paragraph
10 of the draft resolution that we are amending would
have to be deleted because it would be unnecessary
inasmuch as all the States Members of the United
Nations would be represented in the Committee.

79. Sub-items (a), (b), (c) and (d) of item 25 were
85. My' delegation is aware that the text the First
discussed in the First Committee at its 1773rd to 1789th
Committee has submitted to the Assembly for approval
meetings, from 25 November to 8 December 1970, at
resulted from lengthy and difficult negotiations. What
its 1794th to 1796th meetings, from 11 to 14 December
might be termed the substance or the core of the draft
1970, and at its 1798th to 1801st meetings, on 15 and
resolution was subscribed to by my delegation, and
16 December 1970.
. we certainly do not wish to break the balance it represents. However, there is a purely functional aspect
80. In connexion with item 25 a. number of draft that affects the membership of the Committee, and
resolutions expressing the positions of the individual' that is the point to which we wish to address ourselves
groups of Member States were submitted. After a series in proposing the amendment I ltave just read out.
of informal consultations the First Committee adopted
four draft resolutions on 15 and -16 December 1970.
86. My delegation wishes to explain to the Assembly
why we have been prompted to propose this enlarge81. I should like to draw attention to paragraph 35
mep.t of the Committee. Past experience has shown
of the report, which contains the texts of the four draft
that if Committees are to operate with due speed
resolutions recommended for adoption by the General
and-why not say it?-even with efficiency, they
Assembly. In the absence of any short title for this
should be reduced in number. Perhaps that is what
agenda item 25, with its four sub-items (a), (b), (c)
the so-called founders of the United Nations Charter
and (d), and in order to facilitate future reference to
had in mind when they decided to keep the principal
these four draft resolutions, they have been set forth
organs such as the Security Council and the Economic
and Social C.ouncil to a limited number.' The entry
under the headings of draft resolution I and draft resolution n. The title of draft resolution I is the actual title
into the pnited Nations of States that had beep
covering the draft resolution' itself. The title of draft
excluded at the outset, and the subsequent process
of decolonization, which also led to the entry of a conresolution II has been drafted to cover the subject matsiderable number of new countries that had acceded
ter of draft resolutions A, Band C as set forth thereto independence, made necessary the subsequent
under. The wording of this title is drawn from the titles
of sub-items of agenda item 25.
expansion of those bodies.

8

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

87. At first there was considerable opposition, particularly on the part ofthose countries whose participation in those organs was assured. Later, pressure from
the great majority finally prevailed and the Members
with special privileges finally recognized the need to
increase the membership of those bodies. In the end,
the criterion of expansion prevailed. The officers of
the. Assembly, the functional commissions of the
Economic and Social Council: all have been expanded.
To what extent? How many seats will there be? What
will the limit be? We do not know. The magic of numbers c'an lead to the most unexpected results. We do
not know why a Committee th;'lt had consisted of 42
countries is now going to be enlarged by just 39
members. Why? Based on what principles? Does not
Article 2, paragraph 1 of the Charter provide for the
Organization to be based on the principle of the
sovereign equality of all of its Members? Why, then,
should anyone wish to discriminate against one third
of the Members of this Organization-the third composed precisely of developing countries? Are we not
saying that the wealth of the seas belongs to us all?
Are we not asking that an international regime be established to govern the sea-bed and ocean floor for the
benefit of all mankind, taking special account of the
needs of the developing countries, as provided for in
the declaration of principles adopted by the First Committee?

interest are discussed in the Assembly it is very r;;
for any member to be absent and we hope the same
will be true of the Committee. In any event what We
are trying to do' is provide and opportunity for all who
have something to say to do so-and, of course, as
full members, not as second-class invitees.
92. If the Committee is to be expanded, let it be done
in terms ofthe interests ofStates and with an awareness
of the importance of the mandate entrusted to it. For
that matter, precedents already exist in United Na~ions
practice. In that connexion, we would recall that when
the Assembly recognized that the problem of disarmament was of vital importance to all States it' decided
to enlarge the Disarmament Commission [resolution
1252 D (XIII)}.so as to include all Members of the '
United Nations, and in which all could defend their
interests on ari equal footing.

93. Another argument adduced by some of the sponsors of the draft resolution was that they could not
break the commitment that had led them to accept
expansion of the Committee by only 39 seats. In that
connexion my delegation would, with all due respect
for those who adhere to that position, point out that
it is well known that a draft resolution submitted to
a committee ceases to belong to its original sponsors
as soon as the committee adopts it; it automatically
becomes a draft resolution which the Committee for88. The task entrusted to the sea-bed Committee is . wards to the Assembly for consideration and possible
amendment and adoption. Therefore, any commit~
as essential as it is arduous. For that reason, in our
ments that may have been entered into by the sponsors
opinion, no State can arrogate to itself the representaof the draft resolution have already served the purpose
tion of another State when such important and complex
for which they were entered into. The First Committee
interests are at stake. My country could not consider
alone bears responsibility of sponsorship of the draft
itself represented by any other State in the Committee;
it has recommended to the Assembly.
nor would it claim to represent any other State there.
In dealing with the problems that may arise, the policies
that will have to be enunciated and the declarations
94. We should also like to say that the very fact that
that may be, made should be expressed and defended
the enlargement of the sea-bed Committee should have
by each sovereign State in terms of its, own interests.
aroused so much interest clearly points to this Organization's vitality and provides manifest evidence that
.} ~.
89. Since the draft resolution now before us would
countries are very seriously interested in items of such
enlarge the Committee to 81 members and, according
overriding importance as those submitted to ,. the
to paragraph 10, would at the same time "invite other
Assembly under agenda item 25.
.
Member States which are not appointed to the Commit95. In the circumstances, my country, which has the '. ',' ~.
tee to participate as observers and to be heard on
specific points", we are, in faCt, already talking about
honour of co-sponsoring this amendment, believes.,'>'
there'is no'reason to exclude from the Committee 'and ::"'_:<:_~'"
a plenary committee, but discrimination is being exercised against that one third since some do not wish
entire group of States. There is no reason either:: ..
to recognize their full rights. That third, as we said
because of its important functions, its enlarged coni;:':'>/
earlier, is composed in large measure of the developing
position, reasons of principle based on the equality,/;ji\:\
countries.
of States, the interest this sl1bject has aroused on th~:·';.\;"F,
costs that may be involved to exclude one thirdqf~\:\"
90. Why are they being excluded? One of the reasons
the Members of the United Nations while the othefHt
given is that considerable expense may be involved.
two thirds can enjoy the benefits of membership. ·'\,:F:
My delegation does not share that reasoning. If a committee is to meet at the United Nations and seating
96. This plenary committee that we are proposini,':c'~
would never breach the principle of a fair- balance:iiqM:
has to be provided for more that 100 countries, includthe geographical representation of the various regiOJ}flh';';
ing observers, the cost of its operation will remain
groups. Th~re is nb more fair distribution than partichi~·t~
the same.
pation by everyone. For that reason we have venture
91. It may be said that some countries do not wish
to make an appeal, at this twenty-fIfth anniversary se~.
to participate in the Committee. That is true. The same
sion, to all delegations to support this amendme~
which is designed to ensure that all States Memb~l'.
phenomenon sometimes occurs in the General
ofthe United Nations can be present in this very imp0l'
Assem1:?ly. 'But when items of specific and primary

il f

t
(

r

s
.\i

1933rd meeting tant Committee and personally defend their own interests in the Committee.
'

are
me
we
!ho
as

,.
me
ess
For
Jns
len
nafed
ion
the
leir,
on,
not
ept
hat
ect
hat
, to
ors
llly
'orble
nitors
Dse
tee
raft
:hat
ave
mi:hat
llch
the
the
yes
md
her
>mlity
the
of
her
ing
: in
nal
icired
,esent
ers
or-

~

97. When we come to the vote my delegation would
liketo request a roll-call vote on the amendment that
we have just submitted.
98. Mr. BENITES (Ecuador) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation considers it very unfortunate
that for phe ,first time in 10 years we must come to
the rostrum to differ from the views expressed by the
representative of Spain.
99. My delegation' considers it unfortunate first,
because of the personal esteem that we have for him
and I hope that he will be able to listen to me, but
even if he is not listening because I see that he is
engaged in conversation with someone' else, and I
assume ,he is not listening to me, the other members
--.:.a:nd it isto them'that I am addressing these words
-will have to listen to me.
100. ' I was saying that it is unfortunate that we are
compelled to differ with Spain because my delegation
has always stood with Spain through difficult times,
because we have regarded their interest as our own,
because we feel, we have felt in the past, and we will
always feel ourselves linked to traditional Spain. aut
at this moment, the representative of Spain is not representing Spain alone. Yesterday he told us that he
represented the European group, with the exception
of Norway. Today he has come forward on behalf of
a group of sponsors for, as he rightly stated, the sponsorship of the draft resolution ended yesterday and
today this is an item which emanates from the First
Committee and not from the sponsors.
101. Now, what have been the arguments adduced
by the representative of Spain? That it is interestedSpain is interested. Of course, we recognize the right-not to say, the duty-of every State to express its
interests. Spain has fishing fleets in the Bay of Biscay;
it fishes off the coasts of Africa; and possibly there
are vast deposits of gas or petroleum in the Spanish
Sahara which some day may be exploited, explored
and developed. I respect Spain's interest in being a
member ofthe sea-bed Committee. But I cannot accept
the arguments that the representative of Spain has
advanced today in this Assembly, precisely to destroy
the work we have built up so patiently. He has,
advanced a number of reasons, and in the first instance
he referred to past experience: Mr. de Pinies, the
Ambassador of Spain, is one of the representatives
with most experience of the work of the United
Nations. As a diplomat he knows full well the history
of the United Nations and what is more he lives that
history day-by-day in the corridors, the conversations
and the negotiations, where he is really a master.
102. What does history teach us? The historical
experience that we have is simply an experience of
disaster. He made particular reference to the Disarmament Commission. The Disarmament Commission
should be functioning now, but it is not, because there
,were manoeuvres engaged in which reduced the whole

17 December 1970

9

framework of disarmament to a small negotiating group
which later was expanded in more or less arbitrary
fashion, and today, it is not this Disarmament Commission which he has talked about that decides in matters
of disarmament, but rather the small Geneva group,
the small group known as the Conference of the
Disarmament Commission.
103. What other historical experiences can he cite
to us as being fruitful? The small Assembly that operated before Spain joined the United Nations, when
it was still in the waiting room and when, before it
entered the Organization we,' with our enthusiasm and
love, helped to ensure that it could honour us with
its presence here? Is he referring to the little Assembly?
From the political standpoint it was a disaster. Which
is the plenary committee that has been successful? I
do not know of any.
104. The representative of Spain has also asked us:
why is there a desire to do without that one third which
remains? But it is not a question of doing without one
third; it is and has been a question of creating a committee where those who have expressed their interest in
this item would be represented. In creating a plenary
committee of all of the Member States, we would compel those who have not expressed any' interest to
become members of this committee.
105. What would be the practical result? Those
developed countries, those States which have fishing
fleets, and those States which want to proceed to
exploit the wealth of the sea even before the precise
limits are defined, would be the favoured ones and
not the large majority of less-favoured States, the
developing States that are still hoping that the wealth
of the sea will not be exploited for the benefit of the '
few.
106. May I recall that this draft resolution, adopted
yesterday in the First Committee was negotiated at
great length. It was discussed in the regional groups
and I can assure members that it was discussed at
least in my regional group, very carefully. When we
discussed the possibility of a plenary committee the
majority-I repeat, the majority-of the Latin American representatives expressed serious doubts, hesitations and even opposition.
107. Today I should like to express my great respect
for the representative of Guatemala who has received
instructions to join the' committee and must do so in
this fashion; I repeat that I have great respect for him
and his country, but I should'like to say that this expression of a wish was made yesterday and not during
the many months when were discussing these problems
of the sea.
108. I cannot speak on behalf of all of the sponsors,
because they no longer exist, as was pointed out in
almo~t legal fashion by Ambassador de Pinies. But
I can state that the majority of them have asked me
to come to this rostrum to oppose a proposal, the sole
purpose and sole result of which are to promote the
interests of the developed countries. It is very touching

10

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

-wit

i

that those who have always opposed large committees
as Ambassador de Pinies has just pointed out and preferred small select groups should come forward today
to propose a committee of 127 members which would
be the most unfunctional that could be created. The
only sure result that this would produce would be the
total destruction of the work which the previous Committee has been doing so well.
109. Mr. PADMADISASTRA (Indonesia) : My
delegation has asked to be allowed to speak in order
to explain its comments on the proposed amendments
of nine delegations of West Europe and other States
and Guatemala, contained in document A/L.625 and
Add.1, proposing the replacement of paragraph 5 of
draft ,resolution II C, by deciding to enlarge the membership of the Committee so as to include all States
Members of the United Nations.
110. In this matter my delegation would like, fIrst,
to recall the present composition of the 42 members
of the sea-bed Committee: 41 States of Africa are represented now by 11; 28 States of Asia by 7; and 24
Latin American States alsc by 7 representatives on
that Committee and, therefore, these three groups are
proportionately under-represented in comparison with
the 21 West European and other States which have
eleven representatives on that Committee. This
inequitable regional representation should, in our
opinion, fIrst be redressed..
111. For that reason my delegation believes that the
increase of 39 States-as proposed in paragraph 5 of
the draft resolution under reference-to be allocated
to the respective groups as announced yesterday by
the Chairman of the First Committee after consultations with regional groups is completely in order and
meets with the desire of the under-represented regions
to come closer to the much-respected principle of our
Organization, that of equitable geographical represen- .
tation. With 6 more members to be added to the present
11-that is 17 members in all-to represent the 21 West
European and other States on a committee of 81, my
delegation believes that there is no reason for discontent.
112. My delegation, together with the other 24 sponsors of draft resolution II C and the 100 members who
voted in favour of It yesterday in the First Committee,
believes there is no reason to retract our decision
and ask instead for a committee consisting of all of
the United Nations. Not only would the expenses of
the Committee thus be tripled, but the large number
of absentees-which usually amounts to about 20 per
cent of the membership-would greatly harm the
smooth proceedings of the committee. Where we can
function with a smaller number my delegation believes
that unnecessary expansion would be costly and even
most harmful.
113. In the light of the foregoing and in a spirit· of
co-operation and compromise which has been demonstrated so much during our present session, my delegation would, in conclusion, appeal.strongly to the sponsors not to insist on pressing their amendments to a

vote. We have taken note of them and they are on
record. By heeding this request the sponsors would
not only assist us in strengthening the balance achieved
in our compromise draft resolution, which is a basis
for our further preparatory work in the Committee,
save much of our public finances and make unnecessary further debates, but would also help to accelerate
the smooth proceedings towards an early conclusion
of our current session.

out
to'
1U
gre
ac(
nu
of
th,
in

114. Mr. SEN (India): I shall restrict my· comments
entirely to the proposal for the expansion of the present
sea-be'd Committee by39 members and the Spanish
amendment [A IL. 625 and Add.I] to convert that Committee into a committee of the whole.
115. The draft resolution adopted by the First Committee is the result of a long, difficult and delicate
process of negotiations spread over a nU1~ber of days,
if not weeks. Why, then, are we reopening a matter
on which the Chairman of the First Committee has
already announced his nominations for four of the
fIve regional groups? Two arguments have been
advanced by the group which fInds the proposed member.ship-a total of 81-inadequate to accommodate all
the claims of that group. I have no doubt that each
country of that group considers its claim to membership
as unassailable. But similar situations have arisen in
the past and the Assembly has followed a straightforward procedure of electing the required number of
members from all the candidates who have shown
interest. If we had time we would have suggested this
solution.
116. The secoI)d argument is that the subject-matter
of the Committee is such lhat a very large number
of members should participate in its work. Here, again,
there have been many instances of important committees being established, but we have never accepted
that because of that consideration a very large committee should be established. In fact, never in the history
of the United Nations has a committee of the whole
been established. I shall mention two examples: the
Preparatory Committee for the Second United Nations
Development Decade in which all Member States were
interested and the Committee for the Twenty-ftfth
Anniversary of the United Nations in which, again,
a large number of Memb~rs were interested-but
neither Committee was expanded for that consideration.
117. Why has this problem arisen? Simply because
Europe insists. Yet in all the Committees Europe is
always over-represented and the other groups have
put up with that situation, however reluctantly. Now,
simply because the Europeans cannot agree ampngst
themselves, we have to change the whole system,
re.open a draft resolution which· has been' adopted in
the First Committee by an overwhelming majority, all\l·;.--'':';''':;
continue to waste time on the last day'ofthe twenty-fifth
session. Even as it is, Europe is over-represented in
the presenfsea-bed Committee and will be in the proposed expanded committee; yet they an~ not satisfIed.
There seems to be no limit to their wishes which they
would like to have imposed. I doubt if others would

11
of
w'
I·
S)
Ol

C(

iIl
o·
1

.i'

c
a
a
t
t
I

1933rd meeting - 17 December !970
willingly agree to this kind of pressure from one group
out of five. I am quite sure they may have to succumb
to pressure, but they would not willingly agree to it.
118. We all admire the Ambassador of Spain and his
great skill in United Nations affairs. However, the
acceptanl:;e of his suggestion would mean that a large
number of unwilling States would be made members
of the proposed committee. As a result the work of
the Committee would, we fear, be made ineffective
in several ways. I shall not elaborate.
1.19. We must be practical and recognize the failure
of the Europeans to agree amongst themselves. We
would move a sub-a'mendment if necessary-in fact
I have already circulated a draft of it-that is, if the
Spanish delegation presses its amendment. We reserve
our right to do so and we make this gesture as a political
concession to the European Group; and we hope that
in future they will remember this concession which
other groups are making to· them.
120. My sub-amendmenP-to theSpanish amendment
contained in document AIL. 625 and Add. 1 would read:
after the word "Committee" replace the words "so
as to include all States Members of the United Nations"
. by the words "by forty members, appointed in c;onsultation with the regional groups". I shall elaborate a
little.
121. We are proposing to increase from 39 to 40 the
number by which the Committee is to be expanded.
As I have said, I shall not make the proposal if the
Spanish amendment is withdrawn and not pressed to
a vote. But this is a formula we have deliberately
devised as a concession to the European Group, and
I hope that, if the Spanish delegation wishes to c~­
operate with all of us, there may be a chance of thIS
amendment being adopted. In other words, we are giving an extra seat to the Europeans, making no alterations in the regional distribution already announced
by the Chairman of the First Committee. We hope
in this way to be able to solve this matter amicably,
without having to introduce new principles and procedures.
.
122. Mr. SCOTT (New Zealand): New Zealand is
a sponsor of the amendment just presented by the represnetative of Spain [AIL.625 and Add.]], dealing with
the composition of the enlarged Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of the. Sea-Bed and we are joined in
sponsorship by the following States: Australia, Belgium, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain and Turkey.
123. Questions of the law of the sea, including that
of the deep sea-bed regime, are of global scope. There
can be few States which will not be affected by future
work in this area and fewer still whose interests can
be. adequately represented by any other State. That
is true whether the State in question is developed or
developing, land-locked or coastal. For most countries-but especially for island nations like New Zealand which are dependent upon seaborne transport for
1.

Subsequently circulated as document A/L.626.

11

all their overseas trade and much of their tourist trade
and for the increasingly important development of
marine resources-,-the question of the use and control
of the marine environment is at once of critical,
strategic, economic and commercial importance.

124. We share the view already stated by a number
of delegations in the First Committee that the sea-bed
.Committee should be large enough in membership to
include all those countries which have important
national interests at stake in connexion with the preparatory work for the 1973 Conference on the Law
of the Sea. It has already become manifest that the
figure of 39 additional members does not meet this
criterion.
125. There are further Members of the United
Nations which cannot be included within the enlarged
sea-bed Committee of 81. It is an interesting commentary that the speakers who have preceded me and who
.are opposed to our amendment are already members
of the original or the enlarged sea-bed Committee. They
have nothing to lose.
126. On a number ofoccasions the 1958 Geneva Conventions on the Law of the Sea have been criticized
on the ground that they were prepared and adopted
by a restricted group of States. In the view of my
delegation there is no good reason for us now to follow
a procedure which would permit exactly the same criticism to be levelled at any convention or conventions
emerging frpm the 1973 conference. It is true, of course,
that all Members will be represented at the conference
itself, but there can, I believe, be no doubt whatever
that the preparatory work, which will occupy two years
before 1973, will defmitively determine the shape of
the product of the 1973 conference. And the involvement of all countries in the preparation for that conference will help to bring about a greater understanding
at an earlier stage of the issues concerned.
127. It is for those reasons that 'we have joined other
delegations and the delegation of Spain in proposing
that the sea-bed Committee should be simply a committee of the whOle. Our proposal is an eminently fair
and equitab1e one. It is in coirformity with the Charter
principle that our Organization should be a ce~tre for
harmonizing the actions of nations in the attamment
of their common ends; and it fully satisfies another
important principle that has been spoken of today, that
of equitable geographical distribution.
128. We warmly commend this proposal to the
Assembly.
129. Mr. FACK (Netherlands): May I be permitted
to add a few brief remarks to the eloquent presentation
by the representatives of Spain and New Zealand of
the ten-Power amendment contained in document
A/L.625 and Add. 1.
130. Few items have engendered such keen and
general interest in the General Assembly this year as
the question of the sea~bed and ocean floor and the
next conference on the law of the sea. Such widespread

T:

12

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

interest is entirelyjustified and understandable because
the question is of direct importance to all mankind,
as has been stated by representatives from all geographical areas in the First Committee.
131. We are dealing with the question of resources
in an area of the world well exceeding half of the total
area of our planet. It is therefore no wonder that the
smaller remaining part of the globe, the land mass in
its totality, is immediatelY and directly concerned. It
seems right and proper to us that the General Assembly
should take this circumstance into account when considering the composition of the sea-bed Committee.

137. I must add one point. The representative of
Spain cited the example of the Disarmament Commission, which became a committee of the whole for the
simple reason that all States were interested in the
question. Here I should like to say that this might be
precisely the reason why the Commission has actUally
hardly ever met.
'

132. In similar circumstances the General Assembly
has in fact taken account of such factors on previous
occasions. It is our considered opinion that all Member
States which feel, firstly, that their national interests
are directly concerned, and secondly, that they are
in a position to make a positive and constructive contribution should be represented on the sea-bed Committee. Consequently, we suggest that the General
Assembly should adopt the ten-Power amendment and
we cannot help feeling that this amendment should
commend itself to all delegations present in this hall,
because, if adopted, it would avoid any further feelings
of bitterness and frustration on the part of those
Member States which might otherwise be excluded
from participation on an equal basis, against their w.ill
and against the dictates of their national interests.

138. It also seems to me most unusual for the European nations, which, adducing arguments of practical
considerations and efficiency, have always been
against the enlargement of General Assembly committees, now to become the advocates of committees of
the whole, when these can be accomodated to their
interests.

133. At the same time, we are convinced that the
preparatory work before us would benefit greatly by
the co-operation and participation of all Member
States, to whichever geographic area they may belong,
able and willing"'-even anxious-to contribute constructively. In our view, the preparatory work would
thus assume a more comprehensive character, and we
therefore confidently hope that the amendment now
before the Assembly will eqioy general support.

141. Mr. SOLOMON (Trinidad and Tobago): When
the Ad Hoc Committee which dealt with this very
,important matter reported to the General Assembly2,
we had great difficulty even in agreeing on the number
of members which the new committee should have.
I remember that quite a number of delegations urged
that because of the importance of the work the committee would have to do and the number of States which
naturally would be interested in a personal way, there
should be an open-ended committee, or a committee
of the whole..

134. Mr. ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil) (interpretation
from Spanish): I wish to say just a few words to explain
why the delegation of Brazil is against the amendment
submitted by the delegation of Spain, regarding the
composition of the Committee. I am referring to document A/L.625 and Add.1
135. We believe that it is really too late to raise this
problem on a question which has already been debated
for a month and in regard to which relative agreement
has been reachea concerning a contingent of 39
members. In informal contacts with the various Chairmen of regional groups I personally stated to the
Ambassador of Spain the reasons why the Latin American group could not as a group accept in principle
the idea of a committee ofthe whole. We are convinced
that the membership of a committee must be decided
by. all the regional groups, in consultation with the
members of the Assembly. The decision of the First
Committee is the result of such informal consultations.
.We are, furthermore, convinced that this idea is c:umbersome and inconvenient and therefore it should be
rejected by the General Assembly.

r

13~. I wish to recall that~ on the basis of the decisib';;
to mcrease tj:le member~hlp of the sea-bed Committee
to 39 members the ChaIrman of the First Committee. ..
Amb~ss~dor Aguilar, has already made the necessary'
nommatIOns.

2
t
b
it
J;

:R
ir
te
s~
,"

}

nl
a

14
h~

0,

th
wi
L~

139. I feel bound to say that the Committee has a
mandate: preparing the conference. It is not in itself,
the conference, to which obviously all States will be
invited.

en
an
Tb
ha'
gre
me

140. For all these reasons my delegation fully supports the arguments advanced here by the delegation
of Ecuador, and we shall vote against the amendment
introduced today by the delegation of Spain.

14'
ha
Stl

142. There was strenuous objection to that idea, and
many States of the developing world which wanted
to be represented had to settle for a committee of only
42 members, with Latin America allowed seven seats ..
143. The result of that was that a number of us who
wanted to be members and who were keenly interested,
for geographical and economic reasons, would not.have
been able to participate in the work of the CommIttee:
144. Because Latin America was allowed only seven
seats, Ecuador had to be sacrificed. Ecuador, whiCh
was a member oftheAd Hoc Committee, was pushed
aside because we could not get a large enough represe,n...-.. ,'"__", ,',,~
tation.
145. Now it is proposed that the Committee be
increased by 39 members, and in the negotiations t~at
took place over the past weeks there was a suggestIon.
2 See Official Re~ords ofthe General Assembly, Twenty-third Session, agenda item 26, docum~nt A{7230.
'

pat

.(

14~

wh
me
imI
are
OWl

me]
preJ
mOl

had
149
sho
dev
of t
affa
havl
askf
role.
shol
we r
150..
the 1
that:
ame
ofthi
us
agen(
thing
if we
of thl

ha

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970
madeby many of us that the increase should be only
29. It was some Western European States that, to suit
their 'own purposes, asked that the increase should
be 39, not 29. Therefore, in the amendment contained
in document A/C.1/L.554, submitted by Australia,
Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand and the United
Kingdom, it was proposed that the Committee be
increased by 39 members. Therefore, when we are
now asked by the Western European States and others
to change that figure, it is not because they are dissatisfied with the figure of 39, but because they have
not got the representation they had hoped to get as
a result of having 39 additional members.
14'6. What is the present position? Others ·before me
have mentioned it, but I think it would bear repetition.
Out of a total membership of 41 States, Africa, with
the increased representation, will now have 24; Asia,
with 29 States, will have 16 seats on the Committee;
Latin America, with 24 States, will have 15 seats; Western Europe and others, with 21 States, will hav~ 17
and Eastern Europe, with 11 States, will have 9 seats.
Therefore, Western Europe and Eastern Europe will
have the largest proportional representation of all the
groups, 17 out of 21 and 9 out of 11; in each case,
more than 80 per cent of the membership will participate in the sea-bed Committee.
147. Latin America, which comprises 24 States, will
have only 15 seats, and Western Europe, with 21
States, will have two more than that: 17.
.
i48. Why is there this rush to enlarge the Committee,
when .at the very outset we were told by those very
members that it was impossible, inadvisable and
impractical to have an open-ended committee? They
are doing this simply because they cannot solve their
own internal problems. They need a seat for one more
member and iri order to achieve that purpose they are
prepared to throw the whole thing wide open once
more and inject confusion into a matter which we hoped
had been settled after weeks of patient negotiations.
149. There is no reason why the developing countries
should be called upon to solve the problems of the
developed countries. History is replete with examples
of the big Powers unwarrantably interfering in the
affairs of the small Powers. We have resented it, but
have not been able to prevent it. Now we are being
asked to reverse this. role. We do riot relish such a
role, and we reject it. I think that by our vote we
'should show quite clearly that we do not want it, that
we refuse it.

i

Ln

150. We have heard statements this morning about
the sovereign equality of States. Well, let us accept
that fact and start with the Security Council, and have
a membership of the whole. Let us have a membership
of the whole in the Economic and Social Council. Let
us have a membership of the whole in all the important
agencies of the United Nations, and reduce the whole
thing to the kind of chaos which obviously would result
if we enlarged the sea-bed Committee to a committee
:of the whole.

13

151. We had long and patient negotiations, and after
weeks and even months we arrived at what we thought
was an acceptable compromise. Those representatives
who wanted a membership of only 29 agreed to expand
it to 39, and now there is a request to expand the
Committee to include the whole membership of the
Assembly. We cannot see any reason-other than a
personal domestic reason-for this change, and, as I
indicated, we are not prepared to accept the work that
should be performed by the members of the Western
European group. They have not yet managed to settle
their internal problems; they do not have to settle them
today. Surely between now and March 1971 -they can
settle such a simple matter without coming to us for
assistance.
152. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on the remaining speakers I should like to make one small announcement, and a suggestion.
153. My attention had been drawn by certain delegations to the need for certain corrigenda in connexion
. with paragraphs 25, 26 and 27 ofthe First Committee's <
report contained in documentA/8097. The necessary
corrigendaa will be issued by the Secretariat on the
basis of the- verbatim record of the 1800th meeting of
the First Committee, which has not yet been issued
in all languages.
154. We have now heard rather full statements on
the amendment contained in document A/L.625 and
Add.l. Two other representatives wish to speak on
it. I would suggest that after we have heard them we
should proceed to the explanations of vote before the
voting. Of course it is understood that the representative of Spain may wish to announce whether he has
accepted the Indian sub-amendment [A/L.626].
155. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to that procedure.
It was so decided.

156. <Mr. IDZUMBUIR (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (interpretation fr.om French): My delegation
wishes to indicate at the outset that we will beunable
to support the draft amendment which has just been
submitted by Spain and which is supported by a number
of other delegations from Western Europe, or others.
The reasons are as follows.
157. It is an open secret what the problem before
us is. <The truth is that the Western countries are unable
to reach agreement, not so much on the number of
members-which has been the subject of consultations
and an agreement, as indicated in paragraph 34 of the
report-but on their own candidates, that is to say,
on the six candidates which their group'has to provide.
158. True, we are told, and the problem is presented
to us rather skilfully, "Why exclude one third of the
United Nations membership from that Committee?"
We might reversethe question and ask why only one
, Subsequently circulated as document A/8097/Corr.2.

<£l

14

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

Committee, and the description of "many" Memb;
~Illdoubtedly ~pplies to the 84 ~ho were ?ot particip~~ .
mg; so that III accordance wIth operative paragraph
159. The agreement reached was the subject of
5 of the· present draft resolution, which calls for the
lengthy and serious negotiations. Ifhowever, the Westenlargement of the sea-bed Committee by 39 members
ern European group is not now able to reach agreement
we would have to consider that there would still b~
on its six candidates, we would propose to it that its
46 Members who would not be participating. In the
members submit their candidacies and that the Assem- . opinion of my delegation, those 46 members can also
bly vote by secret ballot on the six candidates. 'rhis . be described as "many" of the present States
is a procedure which has been adopted by the General
Members.
Assembly in other circumstances, for other organs.
165. As our third remark, we should like to expre~s
our concern over the consequences that would flow
160. As for the sub-amendment of India, my delegafrom a situation in which resolutions, observations
tion is unable to support it, because we do not believe
proposals, etc., were agreed to by the Committee-by .
it would be fait to give an additiomtl seat to the Western
being composed of 81 members, they would be proEuropean group merely to try to accommodate it, as
posals, observations or agreements on which this lofty
it had already agreed to six candidates in that case
Assembly would have no choice but to adopt every- .
four other groups would also be entitled to ask for
thing previouslyagreed upon by the Committee, since
additional seats to accommodate some of their mem81 members is not only a large majority, but is almost
bers who also wish to be on the Committee.
two thirds of our Assembly.
161. These, then, are the reasons why my delegation
166. On express mstructions of our Government,and
is unable to accept the amendment proposed by Spain.
with the clear intention of co-operating with mankind
162. Mr. CASTILLO VALDES (Guatemala)
in the development of the vast abundance of wealth
which will no doubt solve the larger problems of the
(interpretation from Spanish): I should like to start
this brief statement by expressing highly deserved con- . world, we categorically support the draft amendment
which we have sponsored, together with Australia, Fin- .
gratu1ations to all the representatives who participated
land, Greece, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain
for so many nights and days,and so actively, in the
and Turkey. We appeal to all Members of this exalted
preparation of draft resolution II C recommended by
Assembly, to the former members of the Committee,
the First Committee: In expressing the satisfaction of
to the probable new members and to the representamy delegation, in principle, with what was achieved
tives of those countries which do not consider that
in the text of that draft resolution, we wish to inform
their Governments wholeheartedly intend to parthis Assembly that our delegation considers it necesticipate, to support the proposal of Spain, to the effect
sary for all Member States of the United Nations to
that all United Nations Members should be able to
be represented in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
participate in such an important Committee.
of the Sea-Bed. In this connexion we should like to
make some remarks.
167. the PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those rep163. Under operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution
resentatives who wish to explain their votes before
II C the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Sea-Bed
the vote.
would be composed of 81 Members of the United
168. Mr. ENGO (Cameroon): My delegation wishes
Nations as· members entitled to speak and vote. In
to take the floor in explanation of vote in respect of
accordance with what is stated in operative paragraph
draft resolution II B contained in partly to e~press
10 of the draft resolution, there would also be 46 other
its solidarity with the land-locked countries among the
Member States of the United Nations which would
developing countries with whom we share many idenbe invited to participate as observers. Accordingly,
tical concerns, mutual interests ,common problems and
all Members of this lofty General Assembly would,
unity of mind on aspirations, and partly to express
if they so desired, be represented in the Committee.
a regret that it has not been possible to reflect in the
However, we wish to mention expressly the great difpresent draft resolution that fullness of mutuality.
ference which would exist between the 81 members
which would have full parliamentary rights of speaking
169. My delegation's position on the land-locked
and voting, and the 46 other members which would
countries, on'the international community as a whole
only be allowed to speak.
and, in particular, on the arrangements that have been
worked out with regard to the exploration and exploita164. We should like to draw the attention of this
Assembly to the contents of the sixth paragraph at: tion of the sea-bed and the ocean floor are well known.
In very forum we have joined in the advocacy of their
the preamble, which reads:
full and equal participation in these endeavours and
,'Having regard to the fact that many of the prein the benefIts to be derived from them.
sent States Members of the United Nations did not
170. We consider the question of the uniform
take part in previous United Nations conferences
development and realistic co-operation in achieving it
on the law of the sea".
to be indispensable as an element of peace. We would·
We should like to point out that, out of the then 126
make it clear that our position on this has neither fal-.
Members of the United Nations, 42 participated in the
tered nor changed. It is in that frame of mind that

Wl
th
de

group should impose its solution on the other four
groups.

17
sil
pr
pr
w]

ex
er
tic
SI
ne
d~

ca
th
CC

in
b~

w
l'i
fr:
re
th
tb
01

tb
tb
ar

i

.1'i
d!
a
cc
re
w
as
17
tic
b)
ta
Le
m
l'i
c~

th
er
0
frl
al
Sl

of
FI
N
tic

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970
we welcome any study of the peculiar problems of
the land-locked countries in general and those of the
developing world in particular.

./l'~

',.;

I..

.,

.'
1

t
:l

15

Further, paragraph 9 provides for "the equitable sharing by States in the benefits derived therefrom, taking
into particular consideration the interests and needs
of the developing countries, whether land-locked or
coastal" .

171. Our regret comes, however, from an act of omission rather than one of commission. We would 'have
preferred to see a draft resolution calling for a com- . 176. Bearing in mind these provisions, my delegation
felt that the last paragraph of the preamble and paraprehensive study of the interests, needs and problems
gr.?lPh 1 of draft resolution II B sought to convey the
which are undoubtedly going to be relevant, or for
impression that countries that are land-locked should
example, in the process of establishing the equitable
for that reason alone be earmarked for special favours
criteria for sharing benefits emerging from the exploitawhenever we c.onsider matters relating to the sea-bed
tion and exploration of the sea-bed and ocean floor.
and the ocean floor. However, my delegation has since
.Such a comprehensive study would inevitably cover
been reassured by some of the original sponsors of
not only problems inherent in the state of underthe draft resolution that no such special favours are
development but also those positively relating to the
intended and, with that understanding, my delegation
capacity of young States to particIpate effectively in
the fullness of international activities in the area under· will vote in favour of the draft resolution.
consideration. Among these, and of no inconsiderable
177. Mr. BEESLEY (Canada): I wish to speak in
importance, are problems rendered peculiar by States
explanation of vote on draft resolution II C. I should
being land-locked, a fact caused by accidents of history
make clear, however, that I am speaking not merely
which have resulted in the present boundaries ofStates.
for the Canadian delegation in this explanation of vote,
but also for all the countries that sponsored that draft
172. We wish merely to communicate to some of our
resolution in the First Committee, namely, Canada,
frie~ds, whose statements in the First Committee
Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
reveal some misunderstanding, the message of our
Salvador, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Iceland, Indonesia,
thoughts in this matter. Ifthere are any who still doubt
Jamaica, Kenya, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Senegal,
the faith of my nation in anything that I have said
Sierra Leone, Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
or that our delegation has stated in the past, I invite
the United States of America, Yugoslavia, the Philipthem to come to Central Africa and there to observe
pines and the United Republic of Tanzania, with
the finest demonstration of co-operation among coastal
respect to certain understandings that I shall read into
and land-locked States.
the record.
'
173. As evidence of our solidarity we shall vote for
178. The positions and votes of a number of delegadraft resolution II B to demonstrate our support for
tions which supported that draft resolution in the First
a study on the peculiar problems of the land-locked
Committee were based on a number ofunders~andings
countries. We hope, however, that our vote will be
placed on record by the sponsors, in explanation of
read in the light of the comments which I have made
their vote. I have been asked to repeat those underwith regard to the problems of the developing world
standings in explanation of vote of the sponsors prior
as a whole.
to our vote today. I will confine my comments to those
issues on which those understandings have been
174. Mr. ADENIJI (Nigeria): During the considerareached.
tion iri the First Committee of draft resolutionII B,
179. First, it will be noted that paragraph 2 decides
by delegation explained briefly its reservation on certo
convene a conference on the law of the sea in 1973.
tain formulations contained in that draft resolution.
It decides that that conference shall be convened in
Le·st· there be any misunderstanding I should like to
accordance with the provisions of the succeeding
make the following remarks.
paragraph, namely, paragraph 3, and it sets out the
range of the questions to be dealt with at the proposed
175. My delegation is in full sympathy with the conconference. I might say that in reaching the agreed
cern being shown by land-locked countries to ensure
text on this draft resolution the sponsors ofthree differ~
that their interests are adequately protected in consideration of the whole guestion of the law of the sea.
ent draft resolutions met together in lengthynegotiations in order to reach a common text. Two points
Our sympathy has been adequately shown both by the
in particular should be noted. First, the draft resolution
free access to the sea which we have given and will
proposes a conference which is broad in scope, and
always give to our land-locked neighbours, and by our
it also draws attention to particular issues requiring
support for draft resolution I, the draft Declaration
consideration. It was the view of the sponsors that
of Principles Governing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
those questions to which significant numbers of delegaFloor and the Subsoil thereof beyond the Limits of
tions attach importance should be included in the
National Jurisdiction. Paragraph 7 of the draft declaraagenda and that a more restrictive approach to the
tion stipulates:
agenda could give rise to serious difficulties for many
"The exploration of the area and the exploitation
delegations. I shall return to this point in a minute.
of its resources shall be carried out for the benefit
of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geographi180. Secondly, paragraph 2 attempts to take a balcal "location of States, whether land-locked or
anced approach to the questions set out for consideracoastal, and taking into particular consideration the
tion at a conference, in adopting a neutral formulation
interests and needs of the developing countries".
on the relationship of the various issues, without

16 .

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

attempting to prejudge the relationship between issues.
The draft resolution does not attempt to predetermine,
for example, which issues shall be considered together
at the conference or in the preparatory committee. I
might say that this formulation was also the result of
long and extensive negotiation and it reflects a genuine
spirit of compromise on the paIt of the supporters of
all of the three draft resolutions in question.
181. I should now like to state on behalf ofthe sponsors that the general formulations used in paragraphs
2 and 6 of this draft resolution in no way prejudice
the position of any delegation as regards any proposal
for the inclusion of any particular topic on the law
of the sea in the preparatory work of the sea-bed Committee, bearing in mind that paragraph 2 does not determine the precise agenda of the conference on the law
of the sea, which remains to be determined by the
General Assembly in future sessions, in accordance
with paragraph 3.
182. I should like to. draw. attention to the seventh
paragraph of the preamble and paragraphs 2 and 6 with
respect to the question of priorities. Those paragraphs
taken together imply a certain priority for the regime
in the sense in which the term is used by the International Law Commission. I wish to make clear, how. ever, on behalf of the sponsors, that the intention
behind paragraph 6 was not to imply that detailed preparatory work would not eommence on other topics,
such as the precise delimitation of the sea-bed area
or other law-of-the-sea subjects, until work had been
completed·on the drafting of the sea-bed regime. With
respect to other law-of-the-sea subjects, it is the clear
intention of the sponsors that all urgent questions on
the law of the sea should receive attention commensurate with their urgency in the preparatory work
undertaken by the Committee, and the votes of the
co-sponsors should be understood in this sense.
183. On another matter, the draft resclution is also
intended to make clear-and in the view of the cosponsors it so does-that with respect to all subjects
listed for consideration at the conference, the draft
resolution does not prejudge the substance on any
issue. Certain drafting changes were introduced in
paragraph 2 in order to make that intention abundantly
clear.
184. One final point: I should like to draw attention
to paragraph 6 of draft resolution II C, recommended
by the First Committee, on the two sessions to be
held in Geneva by the sea-bed Committee. The text
as it stands refers to sessions in March-April and August 1971. It is our understanding that there is no fixed
position on this question on the part of delegations,
but, after consulting with other sponsors of this proposal, which was then recommended to the General
Assembly in this draft resolution, I did,indicate in the
First Committee [1799th meeting) on behalfof the sponsors that we envisaged a four-week session in March
1971 and six-week session in July and August. It should
be noted that it was on that basis that the financial
implications of the First Committee's decision in this
respect' were brought to that Committee's attention

by the Secretariat. Since this approach appears to ,1;
generally satisfactory, the General Assembly may now
wish to formalize this point in the draft resolution by
having it refer to March instead of March-April, and
to July-August instead of August alone.
185. Mr. ZEGERS (Chile) (interpretation from;
Spanish): I should like to explain the vote ofthe delegation of Chile in connexion with the draft resolutions
on the sea-bed items, as they appear in paragraph 35
of the report of the First Committe'e.
186. Draft resolution II A, which corresponds to an
initiative taken by Kuwait, Chile and other delegations
requests the Secretary-General to prepare an indis~
pensable study. In fact, with the onset of pr.oduction
of minerals from the sea-bed 1;>eyond national jurisdiction, the nodules of mangan~se which contain copper,
cobalt and nickel, and the new oil deposits, the world
market in those commodities will inevitably be .upset.
187. This alteration could affect the prices of raw,
materials on which the developing countries depend'
for their livelihood. As the Under-Secretary-General
for Economic and Social Affairs, Mr. Philippe de
Seynes, has eloquently explained the effect might be
that many developing countries would lose more than
they would gain from the onset of production of these
resources w~ich are the common heritage of mankind.
188. Therefore, regulation of these markets is
essential, and the study requested of the SecretaryGeneral is urgent. We hope that this draft resolution
will command unanimous approval in this General
Assembly.
189. With regard to draft resolutionII B, Chile will
in general vote in favour of it, of the understanding
we expressed at the appropriate time in the First Committee [ibid.J when this draft resolution was votect'mi,
and we consider that the statement we made is
reproduced herein full.
190. Now I should like to go on to draft resolution
II C. Tttis draft resolution, starting with the main points
of agreement stated in the replies to the SecretaryGeneral [A /7925 and Add. 1-3), has endeavoured to seek
general acceptance, ideally a consensus, which would
represent the best possible point of departure for the
preparatory work of the conference.· These points of
general acceptance, expressed in General Assembly
resolutions, at meetings such as those held in Lusaka
and Lima, in the replies to the inquiries of the
Secretary-General and in our debates, have been the
following and, we believe, are stated in the draft
resolution.
191. First, there must be a single committee enlarging ,
the one on the sea-bed, to draft an international regime'
for the sea-bed beyond the limits of nationaljurisdiction '
and to prepare a conference.
.
192. Second, that conference should be broad and
open to the consideration of all the closely interrelated
problems of the law of the sea, as were the conferences
of 1958 and 1960. Operative paragraph 2 adequately
states that mandate. Clearly, this does not mean that

, all
do
kh
ti6
thl
th~

to
19:

19,
sui
wc
co
19.
wc
. Oil

rel
19

Sp
thl
Gc
to
fel
a<;l.
the

to
sal
ah

19
.sp
to
un
flf
o't]
ml
in1

co
inl

in
it i
da
ml

su
to
sb
pr
ml

of
of

19

tic

na
aJ"'

la1
th,

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970
all the imaginable problems should be considered. Nor
do we think that anyone had in mind opening up a
kind of Pandora's box, or ignoring the value of international and regional practice in matters connected with
the law of the sea. Operative paragraph 6 clearly states
that the Committee should prepare a list of the issues
to be taken up at the conference.
193. Third, a certain priority must be given to the.
new item, of the international regime for the sea-bed
and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction, as is stated in the
. seventh preambular paragraph and in operative para. graphs 2 and 6, among others.
194. Fourth, the Conference is scheduled for 1973,
subject to the progress and results in the preparatory
work, which it is hoped will have come to a satisfactory
conclusion by that year.
195. General acceptance of this draft resolution
would mean a happy start for the important process
on which the international communitywill embark in
regard to a new conference on the law of the sea.
196. Mr. DE SOTO (Peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): The delegation of Peru has stated fully in
the First Committee [1777th meeting] the views of its
Government on the questions of the law of the sea,
to be dealt with at a forthcoming international conference, and has given its determined support to the
adoption of a draft resolution which would establish
the conditions under which the preparatory work is
to be started. Accordingly, we do not believe it necessary to dwell here on the considerations which have
already been the subject of a lengthy debate.
197. We now wish to place on record. that, in co~
sponsoring draft resolution II C, it was our purpose
to facilitate the adoption of a consensus text, it being
. understood that the latter explicitly or implicitly reaffIrms the three following fundamental ideas, among
others: fIrst, that the problems of the law of the sea
must be dealt with as a whole, because of their close
. interrelationship; second, that the agenda of the next
conference must be a broad one, for the reason
indicated and because many States did not participate
in the previous conferences; and, third, that, while
it is desirable that the conference be held in 1973-the
date set in principle in the draft resolution-what is
more important than setting the date is ensuring the
success of the conference, and therefore this is subject
to a decision by the General Assembly at its twentysixth and twenty-seventh session:,>, depending on the
progress reached in the preparatory work of the committee, that is to say, subject to its achieving closeness
of views and sufficient studies to warrant confIdence
of success, but above all, to prevent another failure.
198. As we see it, the consideration of the international regime for the sea-bed beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction must precede the preparation of
articles covering the other questions concerning the
law of the sea, in accordance with past decisions of
the General Assembly and particularly resolution 2574

17

A (XXIV). But at the present stage-in accordance
with the recommendation of the First Committee,
which was adopted by 100 votes in favour-we must
adopt draft resolution II C, which is neutral, encourages a consensus and is not detrimental to the position
of any. delegation.
.
199. It is our understanding that the question of
priorities has not in any way been prejudged in the
draft resolution before us, and that the defInition has
been held in abeyance for the enlarged Committee on
the sea-bed itself, which is to serve as the preparatory
committee for the conference.
200. Nor does the draft resolution expressly resolve
another point which my delegation has consistently
maintained. That is, we consider that the limits of
the international area of the sea-bed must be established in relation to the limits of the other sea areas,
such as the continental shelf, the territorial seas, the
contiguous zone and so on, taking into account the
rights of. coastal States.
201. Mr. DRISS (Tunisia) (interpretation from
French): The Tunisian delegation will vote against the
draft amendment contained in document A/L.625 and
Add. 1.
202. We think it is impossible to consider sU,ch an
amendment at this stage. Expanding the Committee's
membership to include all members of the 'Assembly
would be like drowning a fIsh in too much water-to
use an apposite simile. The European group has problems. We understand them, but we do not share its
view of how to solve them.
203. A suggestion has been made by the representative of the Congo. My delegation is prepared to agree
to that suggestion if other proposals are not adopted.
204. I want to speak especially of the draft subamendmen.t proposed by India [A/L.626] which would
increase the number of European members by one.
That is not a very delicate way of solving the problem,
but if it were adopted I think it should apply to all
groups. The Committee of 81.members would become
a committee of86. I think that is a possible compromise
If so, we could reach anagreement among all groups,
and adopt draft tesolution II C of which Tunisia is
a sponsor.
205. Mr. KHANACHET (Kuwait) (interpretation
from French): At this meeting, at the eleventh hour,
my delegation would like very briefly to explain its
position on the documents before us, in particular the
amendment presented this morning by the representative of Spain [A /L. 625 and Add.]] on behalf ofa number
of delegations and the sub-amendment presented by
the representa.tive ofIndia, as also the draft resolutions
contained in the report of the First Committee.
206. My delegation has from the bery beginning had
some reservations on the expansion of the sea-bed
Committee. However, is a spirit of solidarity with other
Members of the United.Nations, we agreed to the solutions proposed in draft resolution II C.

18

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

207. After the amendments, and in view of my delegation's desire and hope to see this problem solved in
the interests of all, and to see the draft resolution
adopted unanimously, my delegation would like to
address and appeal to the sponsors of the amendment
to accept the proposal just made by the representative
of India. If another solution based on a membership
enlarged by five-which would, in fact, not satisfy my
delegation, but which we would accept-eould
facilitate a solution I would appeal to all the partieS
concerned to dei everything possible to accept it.
208. I hope that the geographical groups will take
advantage of the luncheon recess-if there is one-to
cometo an agreement and settle their respective problems within each group.
209. My nature is such that I never fall prey to pessimism. I continue to believe that common sense and
the desire to fInd a solution will prevail in the end.
210. I now turn to draft resolution II B. My delegation
voted in favour of that draft resolution in the First
Committee and we shall unreservedly support it in the
Assembly.
211. Finally, I come to draft resolution II A and I
should like to make a few remarks concerning its last
preambularparagraph, which reads:

"Reaffirming that the development of the area and
its resources shall be undertaken in such a manner
. as to foster· healthy development of the world
economy and balanced growth ofinternational trade,
and to minimize any adverse economic effects
caused by the fluctuation of prices of raw materials
resulting from such activities".
212. When we submitted that draft resolution on
behalf of many delegations we had the substance of
that paragraph in mind. We did not improvise it. We
took it verbatim from the beclaration that has been
adopted. It may be found in the fInal preambular paragrapQ of the Declaration contained in draft resolution
I, in the same document, which contains exactly the
same text as the one we adopted in our draft resolution
which has become the draft of the First Committee
and is now recommended to the Assembly for adoption.
213. Twice-in tWl;> resolutions-the General Assembly has recognized the valid~ty of that concept, and
we hope that when the regime is established that concept will be considered as basic and will be duly taken
into consideration so that justice may be done to all
countries whose economies are to ·a very great extent
predicated upon the rational or extreme exploitation
of the sea-bed.
214. The PRESIDENT: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate and the last speaker in explanation of vote. We shall now hear. the explanation of
Pakistan regarding his sub-amendment and I hope that
immediately after that we can proceed to the vote.

215. Mr. SHAHI (pakistan): We have had furti;
consultations, and pursuant to. them I now wish to
make the following statement on behalf of the Pakistan
delegation.
216. My delegation voted in favour of draft resolution
II C in the First Committee because we were under
the impression that its paragraph 5, deciding to enlarge
the sea-bed Committee by 39 members, was based 0 0 - - '
an inter-group consensus. We now fInd that. this is
not so, and the group of Western European and other
countries and Guatemala have submitted amendment
A/L. 625 and Add. 1 to paragraph 5 which would enlarge
the membership so as to include all States Members
of the United Nations.
217. The representative ofIndia has proposed a subamendment [A/L.626) to this amendment to enlarge
the sea-bed Committee and this SUb-amendment is that
it should consist of 40 members, that is, adding one
more to' the 39 laid down in the resolution adopted
by the First Committee. The representative of India ,r
also stated that the additional seats should be allocated
to the Western European and others group to help
it to overcome its internal difficulties.
218~ My delegation believes that an additional seat
to the Western European and others group, which
would increase. the representation of that group to 17
out of a total of 21 Member States, would accentuate
the already existing disproportinate representation of
the Western European and others group as compared
with that ofthe other regional groups. We do not believe
this to be justifIed. If the Western European group
is to be given one more seat, there is no reason why
an additional seat should not be given to each of the
otehr four regional groups.

219.' Accordingly, my delegation would like to amend
further the Indian sub-amendment .in document
A/L.626 to the amendment in document A/L.625 and
Add.l so that, the Indian sub-amendment would read
in its relevant part: " ...by forty-four memb~rs
appointed in consultation with the regional groups".
Our intent behind this sub-amendment is that each of
the geographical groups should gain one additional.
~eat.
.
220. At the 1801st meeting of the First Committee
on 16 December, the Chairman of the First Committee
announced the number of seats that were to be
allocated to the various regional groups under the
authority given to him. The Chairman,'- Ambassador
Aguilar, also announced the names of 13 Mric!in
countries, 8 Latin American countries, 9 Asian
countries and 3 eastern European countries as mem- ,
bers of the enlarged sea-bed Committee. Nothing in .
the Pakistan sub-amendment would affect in any way
. .
. the composition of the enlarged sea-bed Committee~ ..as already announced by the Chairman of the First
.
Committee.
221. The Chairman also stated at that meeting that
he' was not able to announce the six new members
from West European and other countries, and added

tha
tiOl
its
adj
As:

222
adj,
and

is 3
11
con

Am
reg

223
Sp~

224
SPl

wh
to i
led
haf
tivt
rep

225
we
has
sho
hav
but
the
But
In 1
is' t.
sub
ofa
Ass
ing!
the
. Pak
amt
226
as t
mee
and
mar
of t
Con

be j
We!
the
becl
227.
Indi
228.
ame
the]
tion:
that

1

1933rd meeting, -'- 17 December 1970
that there seemed to be no legal obstacle to the designation taking place after the Committee has concluded
its consideration of agenda item 25, or even after the
adjournment of the present session of the General
Assembly.
222. Happily, we do not have to wait until after the
adjournment of the present session of the Assembly
, and I would hope that the remaining members, that
is 33, have already been designated, and there remain
11 more to be appointed by you, Mr. President, in
consultation with the Chairman of the First Committee,
Ambassador Aguilar, and in consultation with the
regional groups.
.
223. The PRESIDENT: Does the representative of
Spain accept this amendment?
Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): On behalf of the sponsors of the amendment

224.

which we have submitted and which I had the honour
to introduce, with an explanation of the reasons that
led us to introduce it in the General Assembly, I am
happy to accept the sub-amendment ofthe representative of Pakistan to the amendment introduced by the
representative of India.
225. My delegation has been pleased with the debate
we have had in this Assembly, which in my opinion
has made perfectly clear many aspects which I think
should be in its records. At times perhaps one's friends
have gone a little further than one might have expected,
but in any case, my delegation understands that in'
the heat of debate some minor clash is to be expected.
But we do not wish to attach any importance to.this.
In my opinion what is of great importance to us all
is that we reach an agreement, and in accepting the
sub-amendment of Pakistan, on behalf of the sponsors
of our amendment, my delegation hopes that the entire
Assembly will accept this amendment and that, accordingly, we shall finally adopt the draft resolution with
the distribution provided in the sub-amendment of·
Pakistan. On this understanding I accept that subamendment.
226. Asfor the designation of the members, as soon
as the General Assembly decides it, our group will
meet tomorrow when this will have been approved,
and we shall immediately get in touch with the C\1airman of the First Committee so that in the discharge
of the duties entrusted to him yesterday by the First
Committee [see draft resolution II C, para. 5], will
be able to complete the list of the members of the
Western European and other States group and include
the additional names which will have to be added
because of this enlargement of the Committee.
227. The PRESIDENT: Does the representative of
India accept the sub-amendment?
228. Mr. SEN (India): Of course we accept it. The
amendment to sub-amendment A/L.626 introduced by
the representative of Pakistan is the result of negotiations, and when I first took the floor my intention was
that this problem on the last day should be settled

19

as' quickly as possible. We did not for a moment say
that an additional seat should be allocated to Europe
as a proper 'geographical distribution. I made it quite
clear the the Eu~opeans are already over-represented,
but as a conceSSlOn- a concession to be kept in mind
for future use not only by them, but by us as well~we
shall agree to one more seat for the Europeans.
. 229. However, even if there is no demand or no difficulty from other groups over the increased representation, if the extra seat for other groups will solve this
problem, then I on my part will certainly accept this
sub-amendment.
.

V230. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now pro-

ceed to vote on the draft resolution appearing in paragraph 35 of the report of the First Committee [A/B097
c.md Corr.2]. I put to the vote first draft resolution
1.
Draft resolution I was adopted by lOB votes to none,
with 14 abstentions (resolution 2749 (XXV»

231.

We shall now vote on draft resolution II A.

Draft resolution II A was adopted by 104 votes to
none, with 16 abstentions (resolution 2750 A (XXV».

232.

We shall now vote on draft resolution II B.

Draft resolution II B was adopted by 111 votes to
none, with 11 abstentions (resolution 2750 B (XXV».

233. We turn now to the hist draft resolution recommended by the First Committee-draft resolution II
C-and the amendment. .
.
234. In this connexion the Secretary-General has
estimated the cost of the Fifth Committee's recommendation at $272,900. As the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the Fifth
Commitee were notable at this stage to review these
requirements, I have been advised that it has been
agreed to deal with .any requirements arising in this
regard under .the provisions of the resolution on
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses for the financial year 1971. In accordance with the provisions of
the latter resolution,the Secretary-Generalwould seek
the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions before entering into commitments to meet the necessary expenditure, and would submit to the General Assembly at
its twenty-sixth session supple1nentary estimates to the
extent -necessary.
235. I understand from the Secretariat that the period
indicated in paragraph 6 of draft resolution II C should
read "in Match and in July-August 1971".
236. There remains only one draft amendment, tha~
is, the common amendment of the various sponsors
whose effect would be to have paragraph 5 read:
"Decides to enlarge the Committee by forty-four
members,"-the change is 44 instead of 39-"ap-

1

'.1

.il

20

General Assembly -

Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

pojnted by the Chairmari of the First Committee in
consultation, with regional groups and taking into
account equitable geographical representation
thereon".
237. A recorded vote has been requested on the
amendment to substitute "forty-four" for "thirtynine" in paragraph 5.

A 'recorded vote was taken.
Infavour: Mgha'nistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia,Brazil, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Ceylon, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dahomey, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon",
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japart, Jordan, Kuwait,
Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, People's Republic of the
Congo, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Som~
alia, Southern Yemen, Spain,' Sudan, Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic; United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia.
Against: Kenya.
Abstaining: Algeria, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, China, Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Ivory Coast,
Mali, Mongolia, Poland, South Mrica, Swaziland,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Republic o(Tanzania.
The amendment was adopted by 102 votes to 1, with
17 abstentions.
238. The PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to
vote on draft resolution 11 C, as amended. A recorded
vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.

Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand',
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Panama
Paraguay, People's Republic of the Congo, .Peru:
Philippines, Portugal, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Southern Yemen,
Spain, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic '
of Tanzania, United States of America, Upper Volta,
Uruguay, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia.

Against: Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Abstaining: Burma, Cuba, Mongolia, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Venezuela.
Draft resolution II C, as amended, was adopted by
108 votes to 7, with 6 abstentions (resolution 2750 C
(XXV)). 4

239. The PRESIDENT: Before I call on those delegations which wish to explain their votes and with the
Assembly's permission, I should like to call on the
Chairman of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floof beyond the Limits
of National Jurisdiction, who wishes to m3.ke a statement. I think that, in view of his particular position
in this respect, the Assembly will, nbt refuse me the
privilege of calling on Ambassador Amerasinghe.

240. Mr. AMERASINGHE (Ceylon): Chairman of
the Committee on ~he Peaceful Uses of the Sea Bed
and the Ocean Floor beyond the limits of National
Jurisdiction: The General Assembly has just adopted,
on the First Committee's recommendation, the Declaration of Principles Governing the Sea-Bed and the'
Ocean Floor, and the Subsoil thereof, beyond the
Limits of National Jurisdiction, appearing as draft
resolution I in.its report..
241. You, Mr. President, :with the concurrence of the
Assembly, have very kindly extended to me the indulgence of permitting me, in my capacity as Chairman
of the sea-bed Committee, to make a short statement
, on this very memorable occasion. I appreciate that
in doing so you have relaxed the Assembly's rules
of procedure and risked yourjustifIably high reputation
for impeccable adherence to thos.e rules. I shall take
advantage of your indulgence. to 'repeat in substance
the thoughts to which I gave expression in the First
Committee ori 15 December [1799th meeting] after the
Declaration of principles was adopted.

Infavour: Mghanistan, Algeria; Argentina, Australia, Austria, Barbados, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canaqa, Ceylon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo (Democratic
Republic of), Costa Rica, Cyprus, Dahomey, Denmark, .
242. Tp.e decision we have taken today is one of the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
greatest signifJ.c~ce and moment. We have created.
Guinea, Ethiopia, .Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
the framework and foundation of the regime that will
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
some day, we hope in the not too distant future and
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Japan, . by the common consent of the peoples of the world,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho,
4 The representative of Pakistan subsequently stated that he
Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
wished to be recorded as having voted in favour of the draft resolution
Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
(see para. 285 below). ,
.

(

i
t
t

,
1:

2
o
C
b
e

h
b
t(

2'

tv
th
SI
PI
Rc
ac

[rE
plc
thl

Ju
co
af
ex
24:
ca
thl
eff
to

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970

t,

21

be applicable to the greater part of the earth's surface
and the immeasurable wealth that it shelters.

have earned our gratitude, and, as we are about to
disperse, we salute you.

243. With the caution that is customarily reserved
for· official pronouncements by sovereign States on
anything that rises above the level of the mundane,
we may assign varying degrees of significance and validity to the Declaration, but we can all agree that its
conspicuous merit is its daring originality and that its
real virtue is its moral force.
.

249. The PRESIDENT: I think that the General
Assembly will agree to express thanks with me to the
distinguished representative ofCeylon for the excellent
work he has done as the Chariman of a very important
and very difficult Committee. Thank you, Ambassador
, Amerasinghe.

244. Special attention must be drawn to the concept
of 'the common heritage of mankind which has, for
the first time to my knowledge, been enunciated in
an international document. The cause of world peace
and security and the aspiration of marikind towards
a genuine realization of the brotherhood of man could
best be promoted and advanced if we agreed to the
principle of treating this major portion of the earth's
surface and its resources as the property of the entire
human family, and if we resolved to protect it from
the threat of competitive exploitation and expropriation. Not so long ago such a concept and such an
objective would have been a chimerical dream, but
the Declaration has brought it within reach of
attainment.
245. The Declaration cannot claim the binding force
of a treaty internationally negotiated and accepted, but
it is a definite step in that direction and', no less than
the other two Declarations that have been,adopted at
this session, it has-if I may adapt the words of Wait
Whitman-that fervent element of moral authority that
is more binding than treaties.
246. Encouraged by the response of the Members
of the Organization to the Delcaration of Principles
GoVerning the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor, the seabed committee, as enlarged can confidently face the
even more responsible task that the General Assembly
has assigend to it under resolution II C, recommended
by the First Committee in its report· and adopted here
today [resolution 1750 C (XXV)).

250. May I be permitted also to have included in the
verbatim record the name of the distinguished Ambassador of Tunisia, as co-sponsor of the oral amendment
submitted by Pakistan to change "thirty-nine" to
"forty-four" because he really made that suggestion
immediately before the delegation of Pakistan did so
formally.
251. If there is no objection, Tunisia will appear as
'
a sponsor of that amendment.
It was so decided.

252, Five delegations have expressed the wish to
explain their votes after the voting, and I shall call
on them in turn.
253. Mr. EGUINO (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): It is my duty to explain the vote of the delegation of Bolivia in connexion with draft resolution I
andII C.
, .
:254. My delegation voted in favour of those two
resolutions, both in the First Committee and in the
plenary Assembly. Nevertheless, my delegation wishes
to state for the record the interpretation given by
Bolivia to those two resolutions.
255. In both cases, in the declaration of principles
as well as in the resolution on the conference ,on the
law of the sea, the delegation of Bolivia considers that
the treatment given to the problems of the land-locked
countries is inadequate. Indeed, any attempt to place
the land-locked and all the other developing countries
on an equal footing or to make them seem to be alike,
as is done in operative paragraphs 5, 7 and 9 of the
Declaration of Principles, ignores an evident reality.
The same applies to the eighth preambular paragraph
and to operative paragraph 6 of the resolution on the
conference on the law of the sea.

247. ,The trinity of Declarations adopted at the
twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly, namely,
the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security [resolution 2734 (XXV)), the Declaration of
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with. the Charter of the United Nations
[resolution 2625 (XXV)] and the Declaration of Principles Governing the Sea-Bed and the Ocean Floor, and
the Subsoil thereof beyond the Limits of National
Jurisdiction [resolution 2749 (XXV)] are an inestimable
contribution to international.co-operation. They are
a fitting finale to the first 25 years of the United Nations
existence and a ~rand overture to the next.

256. We reiterate once more, as we have maintained
in the First Committee, that it is not in accord with
, geographic, economic or political reality to place the
land-locked countries on an equal' footing with the
developing countries. These are two distinct realities
which must be dealt with differently, and we have no
doubt that this will be recognized by the international
community il) -due course.

248. In your pinnacled position, Mr. President, you
can, I am sure, feel a strong sense of exhilaration at
the great measure of success which has attended our
efforts at this session and which has been largely due
to your firm, benevolent and skilful leadership. You

257. Mr. PARDO (Malta): In adopting draft resolution I, recommended by the First Committee, the
General Assembly has adopted an important document
which opens the way to serious work on the elaboration
of an international institutional regime for the sea-bed
beyond a precisely defined area of nationaIjurisdiction.

i

, ;!

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session "7" Plenary Meetings
258. For the last three years the elaboration of a set
of balanced principles has been the subject of study,
fIrst by theAd Hoc Committee created by the General
Assembly in 1967 and later by the permanent Committee established in 1968. The obstacles to the adoption
by mere consensus of a balanced set of principles
appeared at times insuperable. Yet, they have been
overcome thanks to the general willingness to co. operate in a great endeavour.

265. Finally, we voted in favour of draft resoluti-;
11 C, because we are anxious to see convened a com~
prehensive conference on the law of the sea at the
earliest possible date, and because most of our dOUbts
were, if not dispelled, at least attenuated by the statement of the represent~tive o~ Can8;da, in the name of
all the sponsors, at thIS meetmg thIS morning.

- 266. As may be known, we agreed not to present
an amendment to draft resolutio,n 11 C, on the basis
259. My delegation, and all others I think, have not
,of the understandings enunciated so precisely by the
representative of Canada again, I say understandings '
so much compromised as we have listened to others,
learned from others and weighed the consequences of
expressly made on behalf of all the sponsors. Accordingly, we do not accord authoritative status to nuances
the inexorable advance of science and technology
added thereto by two delegations. In any case, in the
which is making the elaboration of an international
instutional regime for, the sea-bed beyond pJ;"ecisely
enlarged Committee we shall if necessary recall the
statement made by the representative of Canada.
defined national jurisdiction objectively necessary and
historically inevitable. Indeed, a broad but orderly revi267. We hope to participate actively and construcsion of international law applicable to the other parts
tively in the work of the enlarged committee with good-,
of 'ocean space is also becoming inevitable.
will towards all a.nd malice towards none.
260. But the desire of all of us to co-operate to move
consciously towards the construction of a new equit268. The PRESIDENT: I should like to congratulate
able legal order would have been unavailing had the
the representative of Malta on this enormously impordistinguished and deeply respected Chairman of the
tant step in the work which was started by his very
sea-bed Committee not given direction and focus to
interesting and important initiative some time ago. He
our efforts, and had he not been assisted by the distdeserves our congratulations.
inguished Chairmen of the two Sub-Committees,
Ambassador Galindo Pohl of El Salvador, and Ambas269. Mr. JAMIESON (United Kingdom): I wish to
sador Roger Denorme of Belgium, whose absence
record that the United Kingdom delegation's vote in
today we regret.
favour of draft resolution I, which we were very happy
to cast, is subject to the statement of reservation and
261. We have also been singularly fortunate in having
interpretation made by my delegation during the 1799th
had all officers of both the main sea-bed Committee
meeting of the First Committee.
and its sub-committees of unusual high quality and
dedication.
270. I wish also to record that the United Kingdom
delegation's vote in favour of resolution 11 C, which
262. To all I would express the sincere gratitude of again we were very happy to cast, is subject to the
my delegation for their valuable work and for the m'any statement of interpretation made by the Canadian
apparently unrewarding hours they put in patiently and delegation on behalf of all the sponsors of the ,draft
constructively assisting the development of negotia- resolution during the 1800th meeting of the First Comtions which at times appeared to have reached a hope- mittee and during the present plenary meeting of the
General Assembly, and to the statement of interpretaless impasse. The world, I hope, will one day recognize
tion made by my delegation at the 1801st meeting of
their efforts.
'
the First Committee.

263. With regard to draft resolution 11, we were happy
to vote in favour of draft resolution 11 B. We are
engaged in a world-wide co-operative effort, and the
particular problems of land-locked and self-locked
- countries, whether developed or developing, must, we
believe, receive adequate consideration on the same
basIs as the problems of other groups of countries.
264. My delegation also voted in favour of draftresolution 11 A, because we agreed with its purpose.
I must stress, however, that we have considerable
doubt whether the Secretariat can reach useful conclu- sions until we have some idea of the area of the sea-bed
which is likely to reamin beyond national jurisdiction.
Thus, we would have preferred it had the study
requested of the Secretariat been postponed until we
had not necessarily a defInition of but' at least some
idea of the area which is likely to be subject to resource
exploitation under international auspices.

271. Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): The basic position
of my delegation on the item now under consideration
has been made clear on several occasions when we
have discussed the item in the First Committee. I wish '
to reiterate that this basic position of ours remains
essentially the same. When exa.mined in the light of
the basic position of my delegation, it is clear tlIat
resolution 11 C, which was recommended by the First
Committee and has now been adopted by the General
Assembly, contains elements which could still be
improved upon and leaves much to be desired.
,
.\
272. Nevertheless, my delegation has now voted 1ll\
favour of this resolution, in a spirit of co-operation ",
and as a token of the determnation of my delegation ,,'_
to work together constructively with all the members)"
of this Assembly in our common effort for the stabiliza- '
tion of the law of the sea.

2'
tl
11
h:
ti
i;

n

tc
2~

th
vi
cc
th
m
21
Fl

er
f1(
M
m,
de
27
by

AI
co
tn

2?
le~

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970
273. At the same time, my delegation wishes to place
on record that it voted in favour of this draft resolution
on the understanding that the contents ofthe statement
made here by the representative of Canada on behalf
of all the sponsors of the original draft resolution before
the First Committee represents the common position
of the members of this Assembly with regard to the
points covered by the statement.
'274. My delegation takes note in particular of the
following:
.
" ... the general formulations used in paragraphs
2 and 6 of this draft resolution in no way prejudice
the position ofany delegation as regards any proposal
for the inclusion of any particular topic on the law
of the sea in the preparatory work of the sea-bed
Committee, bearing in mind that paragraph 2 does
not determine the precise agenda of the conference·
on the lawof the sea, which remains to be determined
by the Geperal Assembly in future sessions, in
accordance with paragraph 3. " [S ee para. 181 above.]
Again, the representative of Ca~ada said:
".. . the draft resolution is also intended to make
clear. . . that with respect to all subjects listed for
consideration at the conference, the drirl't resolution
does not prejudge the substance on any issue. Certain
drafting changes were introduced in paragraph 2 in
order to make that intention abundantly clear. " [See
para. 183 above).
275. Thus, my delegation understands, that, .although
the resolution contains language which is controversial,
the joint statement made on behalf of the sponsors
has made it clear that nothing in the present draft resolu.tion
prejudice the position of any· delegation with
regard to the substance to be discussed in the preparatory body.

will

276. Also, my delegation wishes to state its position
that it is highly desirable, from the practical point of
view, for the success of the conference that the forthcoming conference on the law of the sea should limit
the. scope of the problems to be dealt with to the
minimum necessary.
277.. Mr. DEBERGH (Bdgium) (interpretation from
French): In adopting the declaration of principles governing the exploitation of the sea-bed and the ocean
floor beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, the
Members of the Assembly have agreed as a commitment under the Charter to negotiate a treaty on a regime
dealing with this public international domain.

23

of the Geneva Conventions of 1958, particularly if we
make the solution of certain items depend upon the
soluti<:m of other items to which they do not relate.
280. However, the text of paragraph 2 of draft resolution II C somewhat reassures us and we recognize-as'
we already had occasion to do in the First Committee-that in the present wording, priority is no longer
given to any particular question to be dealt with in
the conference. Therefore, we concede that this para.graph now uses more neutral language in this respect.
281: Furthermore, we take note of the statement of
the representative of Canada, who spoke categorically
and unambiguously on behalf of the sponsors of the
draft resolution II C. We take note ofthat part of his
statement dealing with paragraph 6 of the draft. We
note particularly that that paragraph does not prevent
the preparatory committee from examining and
negotiating any urgent item concerning the law of the
sea which may arise, including tnose related to defining
the limits of the extra-jurisdictional area, which is an
integral part of the sea-bed regime itself, as we see
it.
282. In the light of the statement made by the representative of Canada-who, as I said, spoke unambiguously on behalf of the sponsors-I can say that my
'delegation, which abstained in that vote in the First
Committee, is now in a position to vote in favour of
draft resolution II C. We feel that that interesting statement made by the representative of Canada is simply
a more precise amplification of a similar statement
made in the First Committee and, at the same time,
of statements made by several sponsors. For example,
.1 can quote a single extract from it:
"It is not simply a matter of studying the regime
to be adopted, because this necessarily includes all
of the provisions of the treaty, including the limits
of the zone."

283. My delegation would like to make the following
observation: in adopting draft resolution II C we have
decided to undertake comprehensive negotiations on
all matters dealing with the law of the sea. This means
that we agree to settle all these problems by means
of international negotiation and international·
agreement. In the view of my delegation this means
that we all accept as a social obligation for all countries
having signed the Charter the submission of unilateral
claims to multilateral negotiations, the only procedure'
in harmony with the purposes and principles of the
Charter.
284. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative
ofPakistan, who, I understand, wants to make a remark
about the actual voting.

278. By a majority in the First Committee, and now
by a majority in this plenary meeting of the General
285. Mr. SHAHI (Pakistan): I should like to point
Assembly, we have suggested that these should be
comprehensive negotiations, involving all matters of
out that the electronic system of voting seems to have
. deprived my delegation of its sovereign right to vote.
traditional law.
According to the recorded vote as distributed to us,
279. My delegation feels that this approach might well
my delegation is shown not to have voted on draft
resolution II C as amended, and I have come to this
lead to a total revision of traditional law, especially

24

General Assembly - Twenty-frfth Session - Plenary Meetings

rostrum to state solemnly that I did press the green
,button, and voted affirmatively. I would therefore
request that my vote be counted among the affirmative
votes.
286. The PRESIDENT: Since the machine is far too
polite to contradict the representative of Pakistan, his
statement will be put on record.

AGENDA ITEM 22
The situation in the'"Middle East (concluded)*
287. Mr. EL-F~A (Jordan): It may be recalled
that on 4 November 1970 this Assembly adopted resolution 2628 (XXV) on this item. That resolution requested
the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
within a period of two months, and to the Assembly,
as appropriate, on the efforts ofthe Special Representative and on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967).
288. Since this item has not been concluded, we
request that the same practice adopted on this matter
last year and the year before be followed: namely,
that the item be included in, the provisional agenda
of the twenty-sixth pession and that, as in the past,
it be given priority. This request was made earlier,
and, on behalf ofthe United Arab Republic and Jordan,
I now make it formally.
289. The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection to
that request, which is usually made, I shall take it
that the Assembly agrees to that formal proposal.

It was so decided.
Statement by the Secretary-General
290. The PRESIDENT: We have thus exhausted all
the' items dn our agenda for the twenty-fifth session,
and I now have the honour to call upon the SecretaryGeneral, who wishes to make a statement.
291. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Now that the
twenty-frfth session of the General Assembly is about
to conclude, I wish to make a brief statement on ,a
matter which I believe is relevant to the business transacted by this Assembly in the past three months.
292. Members of the Assembly will be aware of the
concern I have repeatedly expressed since assuming
office nine years ~go, over the Organization's mounting
financial difficulties. It is not my intention to review
these difficulties at this late hour. The facts are already
on record-:-most recently in the introduction to my
report on the work of the Organization aI'.d in my statement of 5 October to the First Committee [1357th
meeting]. I expressed the hope' on the latter occasion
that arrangements could be agreed upon with a view
to resolving these difficulties in this twenty-fIfth
anniversary year or immediately following it. I said
that I had specifically in mind the circumstances that

* Resumed from the 1897th meeting.

have resulted in the witholding of contributions to th;
regular budget; the unfunded arrears which remain on
the books of the Organization; the problem of the
appropriate handling and disposition of certain socalled surplus accounts; and, not least, the, obligation
owed to Governments for which no source of funding
is currently available, with the result that the Organization's credit, or even more importantly its integrity
isindanger of being seriously compromised.
''
293., As I see the situation, the first essential step
is to secure additional voluntary contributions in an
amount sufficient to restore the solvency of the United
Nations, and, that task having been accomplished, to
then work out such accommodation as will ensure a
sound financial basis for the Organization thereafter.
I must admit, in all frankness, that the experience of
the past provides little ground for optimism: Yet I see
no reason for despair, and still less for resigning ourselves to a policy of drift and deterioration. I am conVinced, on'the contrary, that there is a commOIl interest
in liquidating the past so that, a new and generally
acceptable course-if one can be found-may be
charted for the future. In that connexion and in the
absence of other initiatives, I therefore intend, with
the technical help of my principal aides on budgetary
and financial matters, to give special attention as a
matter of priority during coming months to the Organization's financial situation and the means by which
the difficulties that have plagued us for so long might
best be overcome. Since such an. endeavour, if it is
to yield positive results, will call for much quiet diplomacy through contacts and consultations with Member
Governments-in particular, prospective contributors
-I have also sought the assistance and advice of the
President of the twenty-frfth session of the General
Assembly, Ambassador Hambro, who has graciously
consented to join his good offices with those of the
Secretary-General.
294. I hope that as a resrilt of the joint efforts of
the Pn~side:rlt and the Secretary-General a more hopeful
and encouraging report on United Nations finances
will be presented to the twenty-sixth session.

"

i

295. Let me conclude my statement, Mr. President,
with a reference to your outstanding qualities which
are widely recognized and appreciated by the entire
Assembly. Your compet~nce, your skill and your keen
sensitivity to the wish of representatives and above
all your objectivity, have deservedly won universal
appreciation and gratitude. On behalf of the Secretariat
allow me to extend best wishes to the President, to
the Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen and Rapporteurs of
all the Committees formd in the course of this session
and aU the Committees formed for the purposes of
this session, and of course to all the representatives
at the twenty-frfth session of the General AssemblY,
for a merry holiday season and a very happy Christmas.
296. The PRESJDENT: I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his kind words addressed to me personally,
and I ask the Assembly to take note of the other parts
of his statement.

~.

t

i

I,
i'"
.~
i
l

1933rd meeting -

17 December 1970

Completion ofthe work ofthe twenty-fifth session

297. The PRESIDENT: I now call on representatives
who have expressed a wish to address the Assembly
at this stage, and I warn you that, in accordance with
past practice, the President will make a statement afterwards.
298. Mr. NKUNDABAGENZI (Rwanda) (inter7
pretation from French): On behalf of the delegations

- - -:or-the-AfricanStates-andon-behalLoLmYQ~e:gation
I should like to express to you, Mr. President~our
high esteem and our inestimable appreciation for the
outstanding manner in which you have acquitted yourself of the heavy.responsibilities entrusted to you by
the General Assembly on unanimously electing you
President.
'
299. To the scrupulous respect for the rules of law
which is typical of ajurist, you have added the qualities
of discerning diplomat, your sense of decorum and
compromise, your respect for diverse opinions, your
courtesy, your tact and your dynamism, which together
with your thorough knowledge of the rules of procedure
of the Assembly, have made of this twenty-fifth session
a complete success. We are grateful to you, and through
you to your country, Norway, which we wish to salute,
a country whose determined adherence to the objectives of the Charter is so well known to us.
300. Those who would wish to explain the personality
of individuals by the influence of the environment in
which they were born, would be tempted to force the
analogy of the Nordic position of your country in rela- .
tion to the rest of the world and your far-reaching views
.on the realities of our times and your just assessment
of their significance; but by the same token they would
have to acc.ord the greatest importance to your family,
whose name is already registered in the a:nnals of the
history of international organizations, since your
father, who was President of the Norwegian Parliament
. for many years, presided over the last session of the
League of Nations.
301. Mr. President, we are very happy because our
Organization, during this session which coincides with
the celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of its
existence, .has been able to benefit from your talents
and your outstanding qualities.
302. But the occasion of an anniversary such as this
i~ is fitting to draw up .a sincere balance sheet of this
quarter of a' century, the better to establish a programme for the future, while nevertheless not allowing
the pomp and circumstance of outward appearances
fromcorrect}y establishing the just measure of the distance which separates the definition of noble objectives, which often remai'n as pious hopes and no more
from the anguishing realities of the world we live in
today.
303. Under your enlightened guidance all the major
questions which concern the fate of mankind have been
discussed and numerous resolutions have been
adopted, particularly within the framework of the

. ,-"

25

Second United Nations Development Decade, in the
field of decolonization and still many more.
304. Although manifest progress has been achieved
in the field of decolonization, Africa nevertheless
regrets that in the twentieth century a part of its people
is still bound by the chains of colonialism and
apartheid. Mankind must b~ar the shame, and future
generations which, according to the provisions of the
Preamble of the Charter, we should preserve from the
scourge of war, will not forgive us when they learn
-ofthesituationwhichprevailsin southern Afri(;~ v,rhich
constitutes a constant threat to world peace and security.
305. It is fitting to say, as did Meng-tz,U, a disciple
of Tzu Ssu, who himselfwas a grandson of Confucius,
that to wage war against the territories of others on
the pretext of deriving some benefit therefrom "is like
climbing a tree to find a fish", because, as is written
in the Holy Scriptures, "all they that take the sword
shall perish with the sword". .
306. The Unitl~d Nations knows full well thatthe Africans who are still under the yoke of colonialism and
the law of apartheid do not want war for its own sake.
They but claim their just rights instead of the rights
of the strongest. According to the teachings of the great
apostle Gandhi, they know that "strength does not
come from physical means but from an indomitable
will, and that non-violence opposes all the force of
the soul to the will of the tyrant".
307. ,We could not end without associating with the
tribute you deserve, Mr. President, all the officers of
the Assembly in whom you have found such valuable
support. Furthermore, we are pleased to express our
most heartfelt gratitude to the Secretary-General, U
Thant, indefatigable apostle of peace, and to all his
assistants in the Secretariat, at whatever level they
may be, among whom we have at all times found
unflaggingdevotion and complete co-operation. We
should like also to thank very particularly all the
interpreters, those discreet and patient witnesses of
our determined efforts to seek peace, international security and the well-being of-nations.
308. And since the year 1970 is coming to an end,
on this ol;casion the group of African States wishes
to express its best wishes to you, Mr. President, as
well as to all members of this world Organization.
309. Mr. ALATTAR (Yemen) (interpretationjrom
French): It is my very pleasant task and an honour
for me to express' to you, Mr. President, as well as
to the Vice-Presidents, the Secretary-General and the
members of the Secretariat, on behalf of the Asian
delegations, indlucing my own, our gratitude and our
most friendly greetings and wishes.
310. We are about to conclude the twenty-fIfth
anniversary session of the General Assembly. It is premature to express an opinion on all the work that has
been done here or even to draw up· a balance-sheet
of the results of this historic session.

26

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

311. . However, we can say at this time that this ses-

to you, Sir, our highest appreciation and gratitude for
sion has been different from preceding sessions.
the way you have guided us and conducted the proceedIndeed, there have been two sessions. First, there was
ings of the twenty-fifth anniversary session of the
the solemn session celebrating the twenty-fifth anniverGeneral Assembly. Your impartiality, your dedication
and, above all, your faithfulness to the cause of peace
sary of the Organization, during which a number of
Heads of State and Governments and many Prime
among nations, have contributed in a most significant
Ministers have participated and we made statements
manner to the happy conclusion ofthis regular session.
concerning the policies of their respective governYou deserve all this praise, Sir, in spite of your reluc--IIl.ents.JJj~ a pleasure for us to note in this connexion
tance to let us be either too late or too talkative. I
that all those stat.esnien have expressed their faith in .-hopethat, to reassure YQU, we shall close our proceedour Organization. Secondly, there was the session
ings in time-although not in time for lunch-and in
which began on 15 September, and was conducted consilencej I mean with the traditional minute of silence.,
currently with the first one, and which is stillcontinuing
which is always welcome to you.
its remarkable work. We consider it useful to stress
particularly the resolutions dealing with the Second
318. It has been in many ways a very important sesUnited Nations Development Decade and with the
sion, a landmark and a milestone in the life of our
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to ColoOrganization. It has been a time of rededication to
nial Countires and Peoples, the resolution concerning
the purposes and principles of the Charter and a plea
the inalienable rights of all peoples .to selffor the survival of the United Nations as an Organizadetermination the Declaration on the strengthening of
tion dedicated to the pursuance of the great themes
international security; and, finally, the Declaration on
of peace, development and security, and not only to
the principles governing the sea-bed and the ocean
the new, ancillary tasks of science and technology.
floor, as well as all resolutions related to this promising
This General Assembly reasserted its competence and
subject.
its constitutional role in matters of international peace
and security; in other words, it reasserted its will to
312. It is, therefore, by no means presumptuous to
be alive as a political body, something more than a
say that this session, thanks to your wise and active
foundation which holds a yearly seminar on internaguidance and your competent leadership, Sir-as well
tional matters in the autumn days in Manhattan. Any
as to your punctuality, which could be described as
trend towards depoliticizing the United Nations is a
chronometric-has made great progress in internablow to its very existence and its relevance in the world
·tional co-operation and has been a truly fruitul one.
of today. Our efforts should be aimed at preserving
the peace of the world not the peace of the United
313. You have certainly left your imprint on the sesNations.
sion. You have proved that the humanism, wisdom,
spirit of realism and dynamism, so typical of the Scandi319. Some significant progress had already been
navian people-are not mere empty words. As we see
achieved at the twenty-fourth session ofthe Assembly,
it, you have fulfilled your task in a remarkable manner,
which we ventured to characterize as the Assembly
with tact, intelligence and efficiency-and patience,
of the smaller nations, inasmuch as it reasserted the
which has now become a criterion in the selection of
political will of nations which share a common purpose
a President. Exhibiting all these attributes you have
of strengthening their security, preserving their
·directed our debates in the Assembly, and organized
sovereignty and promoting their economic developthe negotiations with various regional groups. I can
ment. It is gratifying to see that this year we have
bear witness to this since, when I consulted you in
not regressed; rather, we have been able to advance
December your door was always open to me, and every
in many fields and in many areas-mostly in the field
time I wished to express the views of our group to
of international security. Yesterday, in this very hall,
you, you were receptive, courteous and kind. For this
a new right was recognized and proclaimed by the
I wish to thank you publicly.
United Nations, the right to security. And a new law
is being established, the law of international security.
314. I also wish to pay a tribute to our SecretaryGeneral, for whom we have the highest esteem.
. 320. Furthermore, we have been able to pose the inescapable question of the revision of the Charter of the
315. Finally, may I extend to you, Mr. President,
United Nations. Althocgh political realities make this
to the Secretary-General, to the members of the Secrevision doubtful in the immediate future; this problem
retariat and to all delegations my best wishes for the
of revision can no longer be eluded; and this year,
New Year and the holiday season.
we have at least no longer eluded it. We have said
on many occasions that we cannot live forever in the
316. Mr. ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): Sir, your taste
1945, and we are convinced that an irreversible
year
for brevity and conciseness is so well known that to
trend has at long last been established.
please you entirely, this statement might well read as
follows: "Mr. President, I thank you, Sir." As it is,
321. We hope thatthis session will mark the beginning. . !
it will not be that short, but I hope that it will not
of a diplomatic reactivation of the United Nations. We·'·~~-':'., ;
sound much longer when registered on your
hope that action"will be no longer delayed and that 'if: ;
chronometer.
.
there will no longer be procrastination on the' vital and . . . '.'. :::
crucial issues of economic development, which shoul~_':[i
317. 'On behalf of the 23 delegations of the Latin
be aimed ~t eliminating the gap between the developing ~\}i!~
American group, it is incumbent upon me to convey

ntiOl
only
that
undt
will'
sed
-in
will
322,
ses~

for'
fnil
see]
tow
tod:
As
t,

e
t

an(
of
32:
Spl
pr<

I s
32·

an
to
gn
se:
gu
pI:
be
be
ch
M
be
32

co
an
tal

Bc
WI

h~

in
er
te
it
ID

3

c
it
tl
fl
3
f

1~33rd meet10g -

ntions and the developed countries,and not directed
only at securing a state of tolerable poverty. We hope
that through the establishment of subsidiary organs
under the authority of the Security Council, a process
will be initiated whereby matters which are now discussed and settled-or rather, discussed and not settled
-in the ever· dwindling circles of the major Powers
will be directed to the framework of our Organization.
322. In any case, the decisions taken dllring this
session of the General Assembly give us some hope
. . _. for!.he f.!1ture. Much has been achieved at this twentyfIfth anniversary session and-weare-happy-to--have
seen you, Sir, associated with this noble endeavour
towards peace, justice and progress. Let us disperse
today with hope and, above all, with determination.
As we read in Ecclesiastes:
"To every thing t1)ere is a season, and a time
to every purpose under the heaven. . . a time to
cast away stones, and a time to gather stones
together"
and this is clearly the time to gather stones, the stones
of our house, together.
323. Mr. MESSIA (Spain) (interpretation from
Spanish): If silence is golden-according to a Spanish
proverb-particularly at three 0' clock in the afternoon
I shall do my best to be extremely brief.
'
324. On behalf of the group of Western European
and other States, I have the signal honour ·to express
to you, Mr. President, our feelings of admiration and
gratitude in these closing minutes of the twenty-fIfth
session of the General Assembly, which has been
gui~ed by your fIne hand. The hopes which we all
placed in you when we elected you our President have
been amply fulfilled. As President you have at all times
been able to reconcile authority with the most engaging
charm. Our work here was not always easy, but you,
Mr. President, managed to guide us throughout with
both tact and clairvoyance.
.
.
325. Today, we are actually·ending two sessions: the
commemorative session ofthe twenty-fIfth anniversary
and. the twenty-fIfth session itself, leaving us an important balance sheet of achievements and endeavours.
Both events required an exceptional President, and
we must- say to your honour, Mr. President that we
have found him in you. Your Presidency will remain
in the annals of our Organization as· a model of great
erudition, masterful guidance and irreproachable courtesy-which some delegations, such as mine, have had
the satisfaction of being able to savour in their own
mother tongue.
.
326. Mr. President, to the solidNordic virtues of punctuality, we f10d added today-I do not dare to call
it .the vi:tue, but rather the Spanish hab~t of ending
thIS seSSIOn of the Assembly when, in Spain, it is time
for lunch. I hope no one will reproach me for this.
3~7. I ~ould also wish to pay a tribute of respect,
fnendshIp and gratitude to the offIcers of the General

1"1 December l~/U

'1:/

Assembly, to our illustrious Secretary-General, U
Thant, and to all the personnel of the Secretariat for
the effectiveness and indefatigable dedication with·
which they have at all times assisted us.
328. Mr. KHANACHET (Kuwait) (interpretation
from French): The representative of Spain referred to
the Spanish lunch-hour. Earlier, I myself referred to
the lunch-hour. But you, Mr. President, in your lofty
wisdom, asked us to continue our labours under your
aegis until the work of this session had been completed .
~_Naturall)', w~l:>.~ec:l t()your wish since you have so
far been an infallible guide for-us and younavealwa)is
shown us the right road.
329. On behalf ofthe group of Arab countries, I wish
to express our thanks, our gratitude and our admiration
for the remarkable manner in which you have presided
ove~ the work of the General Assembly during this
seSSIOn of the twenty-fIfth anniversary of the United
Nations.
330. Even at the risk of imposing on your discretion
and modesty, allow me to say how very impressed
we have been with your personal, intellectual and professional qualities as a diplomat, but above all by your
human qualities. The name of Ambassador Hambro
is known to everyone, both near and far, who ·has
had anything to do with the United Nations. To mention some of the many constructive contributions
to the life of this Organization, suffIce it, Sir, for me
to refer to your work,. which remains unique, on the
explanation and interpretation of the. United Nations
Charter. This is a family tradition for you, because
~ou come from a long line of great diplomats and partIcu~arlY of great internationalists. As such, you have
carned the torch and you have the right, Mr. President,
to be proud of what you have acc·omplished.
331. Under your Presidency the General Assembly
has adopted, during this twenty-fIfth anniversary session, three Dedarations, each representing a landmark
not only in the history of the Organization but above
all in the history of international relations. The fIrst
is the Declaration on friendly relations among States.
Your contribution in that fIeld was outstanding even
~hough silent. It is true that you did not participate
m the work of the Sixth Committee this year, but every?ody knows that your presence, at least spiritual and
1Otellectual, was always felt and appreciated by all the
~~mbers .of that Commi~tee and by all those who partIcIpated m the preparatIOn of that document which
in ac~ordance with the hOp'es and aspiratio~s of all
mankind, and above all that humanity which has so
far been oppressed, could open up to everyone a better
future in which all States, all peoples could live
together, coexist in peace, justice and friendly rela.
tions.
332. The second declaration was the one we adopted
yesterday, on the strengthening of international security~

333. Lastly, the third declaration was the one we
adopted this morning on the principles governing the

28

General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

sea-bed and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof
beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.

adopted on this subject reflect~ great concern for th';
preservation of peace, optimistic confIdence in the victory of the just cause of the peoples and determination
to do everything possible to strengthen peace on earth~

334. These three documents are all intended to bring
about the well-being of mankind. Mr. President, cir341. The desire of the peoples to strengthen peace
cumstances have willed that these declarations be
adopted under your presidency, therefore I believe that
and international security was reflected in the Declarafate has done well, because no one would have better tion on the Occasion of the Twenty-fifth Anniversary .
--aeservecr the non6ur-ofpresidingover-m:e-adoptio!i -oftlie UiiitedNatiOIis, wnicn reaffJfmslnemoslimpor=---of these declarations, which are for. mankind a treasure
tant purposes and principles of the Organization'
chest of hope cif aspirations for a better life in peace
embodied in its Charter.
and justice.
342. The twenty-fIfth anniversary of the United .
Nations coincided with the tenth anniversary of the
335. Mr. President, in reiterating my gratitude, I
Declaration on decolonization. For that reason, it is
could not fail to ,express the appreciation of the group
very important that the commemorative session of the
of Arab States ·and of my own delegation to the
General Assembly approved a programme of action
Secreatary-General. We also wish to express our
in connexion with the tenth anniversary of the' Declaragratitude to all the members of the. Secretariat for the
tion on the Granting of Independence to Colonial'
'remarkable work they have done and the invaluable
Countries and Peoples.
assistance they have given us at all times in the discharge of our tasks.
343.. During the session, strong solidarity was dis336. Mr. SMIRNOV (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
played in the Security Council with the anti-imperialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): M;r.President,
struggle of the African peoples in connexion with the
I should like fIrst of all, on behalf of the socialist
aggression by the Portuguese colonialists against the
countries of Eastern Europe, to express gratitude to
Republic of Guinea.
you for the manner in which you have discharged your
duties. You presided over the very momentuous and
344. By adopting the Declaration on Principles of
important commemorative session of the United
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Nations General Assembly with great skill and tact.
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
I might add that it was most graciotisof you to use
Charter of the United Nations, the twenty-fIfth session
the Russian language when you invited me to speak.
of the General Assembly' made an important contribuIt is not easy to be President of the Assembly. One
tion to the codifIcation of those principles.
.
must find the golden mean-not be too weak, so as
not to allow speakers to overstep the bounds ofestab- ·345. An exceptionally important document was adoplished procedure and practice at times of heated arguted-the Treaty of the Prohibition of the Emplacement
ment, but at the same time not be too strict, so as
of Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons of Mass Desto stimulate the participation of delegations. In our
truction on the Sea-bed and the Ocean Floor and 'in
view, you succeeded in adopting this golden mean and
the Subsoil Thereof.
finding a way out of difficult situations.
346. Many other important decisions relating to vari337. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General
ous areas of United Nations activity were discussed
of the United Nations, U Thant, whose experience
and adopted.
and knowledge pervaded, visibly and invisibly, all the
Committees and the plenary meetings and were excep. tionally helpful in achieving the aims and purposes of 347. An active role in the preparation and approval
of these documents was played by the socialist
the Assembly.
countries, which displayed a sincere desire to co338. We are also grateful to the Under- operate with the delegations of all other States and
Secretary-General, Mr. Stavropoulos, his assistants, to enhance the authority and role ofthe United Nations
the interpreters and all the Secretariat staff, who helped in the strengthening ofinternational peace and security.
to ensure the success of the work of the Committees,
the plenary meetings and the General Assembly as a 348. We realize, however, that the adoption of decla. rations and resolutions is only a frist step towards the
whole.
solution ofinternational problems. The important thing
339. The twenty-fifth session of the United Nations is for Member States to adopt the necessary measures
General Assembly was exceptional not only because to implement these decisions and thus help the internait was a commemorative session but also because of tional community to move steadily in the direction of
the importance of the questions considered and the peace, progress and democracy.
decisions adopted.
349. A better tomorrow for all mankind is emerging
340. One of the most important Assembly items from the bitter struggle between the froces of peace
and progress and the forces of reaction, oppression
proved to be the consideration of measures for the
and aggression. This struggle is being waged on an
strengthening of international security, which was
proposed by the Soviet Union. The' Declaration
extraordinarily wide front.

-'I:

3:
ti
c:
a
e:
h

3:

____ . 0 _

0

a
E

,3
s
n
I

r,
~

D

F

b

ti

R
0

S
s

n

3
d

v

f

3
f
t

g

c
t
I

t

'3
~

r
j

a

t
t
r
I

i

3
c
t
r

n
n

t,

11

3

,c

1:

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970
350. , The Declaration on the Strengthening oflnterna,tional Security which was adopted is of special signifi'cance for the les,sening of tension in the world in general
and in Europe in particular. In this connexion,
encouraging events have recently been taking place
,here.
-351. The convening of an all-European conference
on questions of security !l.nd co-operation will be
another milestone in the effort to strengthen peace in
, EuroQe__

29
we shall continue to pursue a policy of peace, relaxation
of tension and broad international co-operation.
358. Mr. ROSENNE (Israel): Allow me first to
express my compliments and thanks to the UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Stavropoulos, and to our
Secretary-General, U Thant, and, through them, to
all the members of the staff, seen and unseen, heard
and unheard, for their indefatigable labours in this session of the General Assembly. We wish to thank them
all for their courtesy, for all they have done for us

,--during-the-Assembl'Y-and-throughouUh~year._

352. Many documents adopted at the twenty-fifth ses- ,
sion of the General Assembly strongly emphasize the
need to respect the principle of the universality of the
United Nations. In this context, the establishment of
,relations of equality between the German Democratic
Republic and other States, the start of the process of
normalizing relations between the German Democratic
. Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany on the
basis of the universally recognized rules of internationallawand the admission of the German Democratic
Republic to the United Nations and other international
organizations are particularly important and necessary.
Such action by the United Nations would made a substantialcontributionto the cause ofEuropean and international security.
353. Peace is indivisible. Any "local" war can
, develop into a military threat to all mankind. That is
why united action by freedom-loving, anti-imperialist
forces to repel aggression is essential.
354. In that connexion, we must note the encouraging
fact that an absolutely overwhelming number of delega, tions devote<;l very considerable attention, both in the
general debates and during the commemorative part
of the twenty-fIfth session of the General Assembly,
to the question of the strengthening of international
peace and security and vigorously condemned the con, tinuing aggression in Viet-Nam and the Middle East.
355. The substance of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security arid of the
resolution on the Middle East adopted by the General
Assembly is the demand for an immediate end to the
aggression in those two regions where peace is
threatened and for a just settlement without delay. For
that reason, one' must condemn in the most vigorous
manner the escalation of the war on the Indo-Chinese
peninsula and the deliberate procrastination in achieving a settlement' of the Middle East question.
'. 356. Much remaiI1s to be done to accelerate the rate
of economic growth of the developing countries. In
that connexion, we attach great importance to the documents ~dopted on the subject of the Second Develop, ment Decade and believe that, unless peace and international security are strengthened, it will be impossible
to deal successfully with many other problems, including those of economic development.
357. The delegations of the socialist countries will
'continue to work in the United Nations to promote
lasting security throughout the world. With that aim,

-I

359. Mr. President, the session over which you have
presided, which is now drawing to a close, marks an
important milestone in the evolution of the United
Nations, in the creation of which you played so important a rule.
360. The twenty-fIfth anniversary of the United'
Nations has brought it somewhat nearer to realities
and removed it one step further away from the
illusions-many of them self-willed-with which so
many persons who should be better informed regard
our Organization. That does not 'mean there is not a
very long road to be travelled before the United
Nations, an instrument created by Governments for
the use of Governments of nations" if I may be permitteda quotation that will be familiar to you, Mr.
President, becomes better adapted to discharge the
high burdens' which humanity has placed upon it and
continues to place upon it.
361. One may hope that before the frrst full jubilee-a
Hebrew term which signifies the release of slaves from
serfdom-of the United Nations is reached it will
become accepted by the enlightenend world that the
mere pushing through of resolutions by automatic
majorities without due regard for other pQints of view,
in lieu of the patient and time-consuming process of
the search after unanimity and consensus is not democratic and is hardly the best way to achieve the high
diplomatic aims which the founders of the United
Nations have set for us.
362. Some 3,000 years ago a wise king of Israel,
whose brooding spirit contrasts markedly with your
own ebullient Nordic idealism, Mr. President, wrote
a book that appears' in the Bible under the name
Ecclesiastes, which has already !Jeen cited in part by
the representative of BraziL King Solomon had this
to say:
"What profit hath a man of all his labour which
he taketh under the SU11-? One generation passeth
away, and another generation cometh: but the earth
abideth for ever." .
And the wise king ended his soliloquy:
"The thing that hath been, it is that which shall
be; and that which is done is that which shall be
done: and there is no new thing under the sun."
363. Sometimes when debates become excessively
repetitious those sentences run through my head, and

30

General Assembly - Twenty-fifth Session - Plenary Meetings

us, the praise is due in so small measure to your own
splendid leadership. By your skill both as a parliamentarian and as a conciliator, you have helped us again
and again to find a path through difficulty to agreement.
"And further, by these, my son, be admonished:
By the example of your own deep concern for the
of making many books there is no end; and much
purposes of the United Nations, you have taught us
study is a weariness of the flesh"
to subordinate lesser concerns and to be conscious
of the needs of the human family of which we are
~-siUinglongn(jursin-conference-rooms-and-in-this--_alLthe~presentatives. Your Presidency has added
General Assembly hall, should· not one also cry out
another chapter fo-youifemarIUiole-lifetimeof-serviceforthe wise king-and President-to say, "Of making
to the United Nations and to the international community.
many speeches there is no end, and much sitting is
a weariness of the flesh"? But perhaps ~ am adding
370. Our thanks and admiration go also at this time
to the weariness, without the sublimity of Ecclesiastes,
to a great international servant, our illustrious friend
and for that I crave indulgence.
and Secretary-General, U Thant; to his very able lieute364. Mr. President, you have guided our deliberations
nants, in particular our good friend the Under-at time delicate and momentous---:with a firm touch,
Secretary-General for General Assembly Affairs, Mr.
Stavropoulos; and to all those loyal international serexceptional punctuality, exemplary modesty, all the
learning and scholarship we have come to respect and vants of the Secretariat, seen and unseen, heard and
unheard, without whom our work could not be done.
to expect, and your inimitable good humoilr and selfpossession. It is my privilege, and that of all my col·leagues to have been members of a delegation that 371. Let me also record our gratitude 1.0 the VicePresidents of the General Assembly and to the Chairhas served here under your presidency, which has
men of our Committees, all of whom have rendered
added new lustre to an alreadi lustrous name.
distinguished and indispensable service.
365. Your presence on the presidential seat reminded
372. Finally, as representative of the host country
us of your beautiful Scandinavia, and of Norway, the
let me extend cordial good wishes to all the representaland of freedom, poetry, music and art, of the dignity
tives and other officials who have come to our shores
of man-the 1a.'1d of heroes.
for this session. We wish them a very happy holiday
season and a safe journey home.
.
366. May I end with words spoken at Geneva some
twenty-five years ago:
373. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): When one has
an empty stomach one is hungry more for food than
"We part as we have met, delegates ·of governfor words. But hunger or no hunger I wish to say a
m~nts, servants of a great idea."
few words.
367. Mr. PHILLIPS (United States of America): Mr.
374. Mr. President, you were just wonderful throughPresident, I think the greatest tribute I could pay to
you at this late hour would be to offer you that golden
out the twenty-fIfth session. We thank you for a job
moment of silence the representative of Spain indicated
well done. My fervent prayer is that you may still be
was desirable. I am afraid, however, that you may
around to celebrate with the youth of the world the
be doomed to drown in a sea of praise because of fIftieth anniversary of the United Nations, when, let
us hope, universal peace will prevail.
the very distinguished service you have rendered as
President of this twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.·
375.
And to you, our beloved Secretary-General,
and our good friend Mr. Stavropoulos, as well as to
368. It is my privilege to express on behalf of the
all the members of the Secratariat, I wish to express
our gratitude for your devotion and excellent perforUnited States-very briefly, I assure you-the sentiments of appreciation my delegation feels as this
mance.
twenty-fifth session of the General Assembly draws
376. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from
to a close. I refrain from calling it a historic session
Spanish): I had hesitated pefore coming to the rostrum
since that word is somewhat overworked and it is better
to let history decide what is historic. But there can
because I am aware that this tribute-which will
be no question that this session has produced some
perhaps be the last tribute paid to you at this session-is
documents and some decisions which promise to be
the most modest one since it comes merely from one
delegation.
.
of substantial value to the COmmon interest of the family of nations.
377. Nevertheless, I was inspired by the precept of
the father of our: independence Jose Marti, who told
369. Last September on your election to be our President, you called upon us to "work,honestly and with
us that in paying tribute no voice is weak. Mr. President, I have come to this rostrum to express to you
humility to concentrate our efforts on all that we have
on behalf of my delegation our gratitude for the effecin common, and all that unites us" [1839th meeting,
tive manner in which you have conducted the debates .
para. 59]. If during this session we have at times come
somewhere near that high standard which you set for
of this important session of the General Assembly.
I have during this sessIon been wondering· whether
they might not also have been running through yours,
When I think of King Solomon's conclusion-

You
diali
. our
COlf

for
to t
as \
artll

--and
Sta
378
yOl
-2

cia
wh
we
I 2

lea
to
da
37
gr
w]

pe
3l
0:

I
d

"I
n
tl

v

. \::

v
a

1933rd meeting - 17 December 1970
Your sense of fairness, your objectivity and your cordiality .which is always with you, compel us to join
our voice to those of other delegations which have
come here. And then, too, Mr. President, your zeal
for precision and accuracy has inspired us to come
to this rostrum to pay tIjbute to you, and to do so
as briefly as possible, perhaps with the effect of an
amendment: to place on record that the twenty-fourth
--.-·---and_histilrically most ancient of the Llitin American
States also pays itsmostsincetetribute-to-you.-·378. The PRESIDENT: Let me first thank those of
you who have spoken kind words-far too kind words
-about me. I should like to say that I am especially grateful for the charming and eloquent way in
which these thoughts were expressed. Indeed they
were expressed with such eloquence and charm that
I am sorely tempted to believe that some of you at
least might have meant what you said. I am not going
to yield to that temptation because it would be a great
. danger to my modesty in the futUre.
379. Before we leave here I must say that our
gratitude goes to our Secretary-General, U Thant,
whose steadfastness,· courage and devotion to world
peace and to the world Organization are beyond praise.
380.. Our thanks also go to the Chairman and the other
officers of the Committees, to the Vice-Presidents and,
I may add, to every single member of every single
delegation for :their loy·alty .and collaboration. And I
want to say here how much all of us-and particularly
I personally-owe to myoId friend and colleague for
more than 2~ years, Mr. Constantin Stavropoulos, and
to his excellent staff. I should like to say that they
worked not only with intelligence, skill and devotion,
but also with a never-failing courtesy and friendliness
which made every day a pleasure. These thanks go
also to all the members of the Secretariat, along with
all our greetings and good wishes.
381. We have celebrated the silver jubilee of our
Organization. Leading statesmen have tried to sum up
the achievements of the past 25 years. We have looked
ahead and tried to discern what the· next quarter of
a: century may hold in store for our Organization and
for our troubled world, where men and women watch
what we do and listen tQ what we say, always with
hope and sometimes with confidence. When the
rhetoric has been discounted and the echoes of our
debates have died away, I think we will still be able
to say that the commemorative session brought a message of hope and of commitment to the ideals of the
United Nations from all geographical groups, across
political, philosophical and ideological boundaries.
382. Documents of great importance have been painstakingly elaborated and solemnly adopted. And I think
~hat we all agree that the most important of them for
the future is the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade.
We know that hunger, misery and despair are the lot
. of hundreds of millions of persons in Asia, Africa and
Latin America. By adopting this Strategy, Governments have pledged greater efforts to help them.

5

Specific political commitments have been set down
in concrete terms. The international development
strategy is a mile-stone on the road to a more integrated
community based on human solidarity, and its execution during the 1970s wiU most certainly make for a
better world. But let us remember that the decisions
Governments will take day by day and year by year
in their legislatures and other organs is a matter of
crucial importance.
383. The commemorative session was-also able-to - - agree on an anniversary statement and on a declaration
of principles 'of international law concerning friendly
relations, and-only this last week-an additional Declaration on the strengthening of international security
was adopted. Let us remember that such documents
may be much more important thall' we realize today,
because they cast a light forward along the. road which
we must follow towards a peaceful and well-organized
community of nations, and they provide a source of
inspiration and guidance for the United Nations and
for the international community as a whole. .
384. Let us also mention that a large number of
Member States will regard the anniversary programme
. for completing the process of decolonization as a major
result of our efforts, even though it was not possible
to reach full agreell,1ent because of the controversial
nature of some of its provisions.
385. I think it is also right to say that it is widely
accepted that the simple majority that was achieved
for the first time on the proposal to seat Peking is
of major importance. Th~ principle of- universality
involved applies to other countries as well. For the
United Nations-I think we will all agree on this-must
be a truly universal Organization in order to deal
adequately with the great issues of war and peace and
if we are to save the human environment and make
our planet a home fit for human beings to live in.
386. Today We ad()pted a very important declaration
on the sea-bed and the ocean floor. The sea-bed is
being decolonized before it is colonized. We have also
agreed that its benefits shall go to· all mankind, that
its riches shall be the common heritage of mankind.
387. I think you will agree with me that that Declaration is a most happy c'orollary to the treaty banning
weapons of mass destruction from the ocean floor,
which we have just agreed is an important step to get
away from the crushing burden of armaments.
388. The importance of these decisions which we
have taken on what we might call the sixth continent
will be increasingly evident in the years to come. Some
feel they are the major achievement of this session,
and there is much to be said for such an idea.
389. In the course of this session, the Assembly
departed from the practice of the last two years and
held a full-fledged debate on the Middle East. Some
delegations, we know, had serious misgivings about
this. But I think that we were wise to uphold the principle of free discussion of great international issues .

---------

.-,J..

31

32

, General Assembly - Twenty-fIfth Session - Plenary Meetings

390. In any event, we' can all join in hoping for an
early resumption of talks under Ambassador Jarring.
Certainly no season could be more appropriate than
the present one to rise above tangled enmities and
injustices and seek peace afresh for that ancient region
so dear to many of us.
-391. But of course, when we talk about our achievements we realize that we have also had our disappoint~
ments .. A number of Members regret that the Assembly
was not able to decide that the United Nations should
hold a more effective watching brief on human rights
throughout the world. But let us remember that the
Assembly was at least able to launch new efforts to
safeguard the rights of non-combatants in times of
armed conflict and to lessen the horrors of war.
392. I do not want to draw up a full list of the debit
side of our ledger;. but let us note that no progress
has been registered on the important issue of peacekeeping operations, that the United Nations fInances,
as stated by our Secretary-General, are still most
unsatisfactory, and also that the humanitarian work
,.ofUNWRA is threatened by the critical shortage of
funds with which we are all ffimiliar.
393. Our greatest sorrow, however, is that no progress has been recorded in the effort to lift the burden
of repression and intolerance from southern Africa.
It is easily understood by all of us that this leads to
frustration for our African colleagues.
394. Lastly, let us say thatt,be Assembly has made
clear its resolve to improve our procedures and to put
our house in order in all ways. More than mere procedure is at stake. ,A tighter, self-imposed discipline will
improve the whole quality of our work. And let me
mention, even in brackets, that this may also be very
important for all the ladies and gentlemen of the Press
and the mass media, because without their help what
happens here might not be heard or read about except
in our Foreign Offices and among ourselves.
395. ' In the United Nations, as in any human
endeavour, ilchievements do not measure up to aims.

Litho in United Nations, New York

If we strive to work too hard, the gap between words

and action will be too apparent, but if we do not always
seek more than we can achieve at the moment, we
shall make no progress at all. So-called realism must
never be allowed to be the last refuge of a barren mind.
3~6.

We must arm ourselves with boundless patience
and deep humility to face our great tasK.S:-Bhu;-.:t=;:c;;:;o::;u=r=-ag::-e:----~I---must always outweigh caution. Cruelty and intolerance'
in the world must be met with angry impatience, for
the General Assembly must not only take practical
action but also set standards for the international community.

397. We who have the honour to share the great
responsibilities of the United Nations. and to take part
in its work must realize that we do not represent solely
the often short-sighted and selfish interests of Governments. We are also acting on behalf of men, women
and children everywhere, who deserve a better future
and who cherish hopes for a peaceful world.
398. If we act in that spirit, the United Nations has
a great future. It is in that spirit, fellow representatives,
and with that hope that I wish you, one and all, health,
good cheer and happiness for the holidays, and a peaceful and prosperous New Year.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
399. The PRESIDENT: I now invite representatives
to stand and observe one minute's silence.
The representatives observed a minute ofsilence.

Closing of the session
400. The PRESIDENT: I thank you all and declare
closed the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.
The meeting rose at 3.20p.m.

77001-February 1973-2.200
