General Anembly-Twenty-third Senion

88

6. Notes that the Secretary-General has under study
the questions raised in paragraphs 98 ( b) and 98 ( c)
of the report of the International Law Commission ;
7. Reqitests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission the records of the
discussions on the Commission's report at the twentythird session of the General Assembly.
1738th plenary meeting,
11 December 1968.

2419 (:XXIO). Draft Convention on Special
Missions
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Draft Convention on Special Missions",
Noting that it has not been possible for the Gen•ral
Assembly, in the time available at its twenty-third
session, to complete the text of the Convention on
Special Missions,
1. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fourth session the item entitled "Draft Convention on Special Missions" with a view to the adoption of the Convention by the General Assembly at
that session ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for
the presence of the Spe~ial Rapporteur on Speci~l
Missions as an expert during the debates on the topic
at the twenty-fourth session of the General Assembly.
1746th plenary meeting,
18 Decemb.er 1968.

2420 (XXDI). Report of the Speelal Committee
on the Queation of Defining Aggreadon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression,•
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of defining agp-ession and on the draft definition, as
reflected m ,the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its consideration of the question
of defining aggression and of the draft definition before
the end of 1968,
Considering that in its resolution 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967 the General Assembly recognized
the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the
definition of aggression,
1. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
(XXII), as early as possible in 1969;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fourth session an item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
1746th plenary meeting,
18 Decemb.er 1968.
I Ibid.,

Tfllfflty-third Session, agenda item 86, document

A/7185/Rev.1.

2421 (XXIO). Report of the United Nation•
Commission on International Trade Law
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its first session,8
Recalling its resolution 2205 ( XXI) of 17 December 1966 by which it established the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law and defined
its object and terms of reference,
Noting the chapter of the report of the Trade and
Development Board on its seventh session• concerning
the report of the. United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its first session,
and noting further that the Board expressed its appreciation of the Commission's report and commended the
Commission for its programme of work,
Endorsing the statement in which the Trade and
Development BoardG emphasized that the needs of
developing countries should receive adequate attention
in the programme of work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and stressed the
importance of co-operation between the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the Commission at •the intergovernmental and secretariat levels,
Bearing in mind the wish expressed by many members of 'the Trade and Development Board at its
seventh session that the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law should add international
shipping legislation to its list of priority topics8 and
also bearing in mind the activities of other agencies
active in this field,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law intends to
carry out its work in co-operation with organs and
organizations concerned with the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law and that
such co-operation has already been initiated,
Convinced that the harmonization and unification of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal
obstacles to the flow of international trade, would significantly contribute to economic co-operation between
countries and, thereby, to their well-being,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the financial and administrative implications
of the establishment of a register of organizations and
a register of texts in the field of international trade
law, 7
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Tr,ade
Law on the work of its first session ;
2. Notes with approval the programme of work
established by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to establish a
register of organizations in accordance with directives
laid down by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ;
4. Approves in principle the proposal to establish a
register of the international instruments and other
documents referred to in chapter V of the report of
8 Ibid., Twenty-third Session, Suppltmtnt No. 16 (A/7216).
4 Ibid., Supp/tmtnt No.14

11 Ibid., para. 16S.

(A/7214), part two, chapter VII.

6 [bid., para. 74.
7 lbid.,Twtnty-third Session,

Annexes, agenda item 88, document A/C.6/L.648; A/C.6/L.648/ Add.I.
