VD.

8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the freely elected authorities and representatives of the people of American Samoa, to safeguard
the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the
enjoyment of their natural resources by taking effective
measures which guarantee the right of the people to own
and dispose of those natural resources and to establish
and maintain control of their future development;
9. Urges the administering Power to continue to
foster close relations and co-operation between the
people of the Territory and the neighbouring island
communities;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to American Samoa, including the dispatch of a visiting mission to the Territory
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/36.

103

Resolutlom adopted on tbe reports of the Fourth Committee

Question of the United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,1 7
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and all
other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the United States Virgin Islands, and reaffirming the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the Declaration,
Noting the active co-operation given by the administering Power, both through its participation in the work
of the Special Committee and through its willingness to
receive visiting missions to small Territories under its
administration,
Having heard the . statement of the administering
Power, 18
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the United States Virgin Islands; 19
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right' of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands to self-determination
and independence in accordance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territory;
17 Ibid., chaps. IV; VI, annex III; and XXVI.
18 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meet-

ing, paras. 17-21.

19 lbid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.l), chap. XXVI.

4. Requests the Government of the United States of
America, as the administering Power, to continue to take
all necessary measures, in consultation with the freely
elected authorities and representatives of the people of
the United States Virgin Islands, to enable the people of
the Territory to exercise fully their right to selfdetermination in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
5. Requests the administering Power to encourage
further and meaningful discussion regarding the political
and constitutional status of the Territory and to take
such additional measures as would ensure preservation
of the identity and cultural heritage of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands;
6. Urges the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives
of the people of the United States Virgin Islands, to
safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the right of the
people to own and dispose of those natural resources and
to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
7. Expresses the view that measures to promote the
economic development of the United States Virgin
Islands are an important element in the process of selfdetermination and, to this end, calls upon the administering Power, together with the freely elected authorities
and representatives of the people of the Territory, to
take all measures necessary to achieve a viable and stable
economy in the Territory;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the
United States Virgin Islands;
9. Expresses the view that the presence of a United
States naval facility in the Territory should not impede
the progress of the people towards self-determination;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/37.

Question of Western Sahara

The General Assembly,
Having considered in depth the question of Western
Sahara,
Recalling the inalienable right of all peoples to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 20
20 Ibid.,

chap. X.
