Resolutions adopted without reterence to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind the increasingly impc,rtant role being
played in the widespread dissemination of relevant
information by a number of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization,
Expressing its appreciation of the continued efforts
of the Special Committee in the field of the dissemination of information on decolonization,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the question of publicity for the work of the United
Nations in the field of deoolonization;
2. Reaffirms the importance of effecting the widest
possible dissemination of information on the evils and
dangers of colonialism, on the determined efforts of
the colonial peoples to achieve self-determination, freedom and independence and on the assistance being
provided by the international community towards the
elimination of the remaining vestiges of colonialism
in all its forms;
-.
3. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard to
the suggestions of the Special Committee, to continue
to take concrete measures through all the media at his
disposal, including publications, radio and television,
to give widespread and continuous publicity to the work
of the United Nations in the field of decolonization and,
inter alia:
(a) To continue, in consultation with the Special
Committee, to collect, prepare and disseminate basic
material, studies and articles relating to the problems of
decolonization through the Office of Public Information
of the Secretariat and the unit on information relating to decolonization established in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 3164 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973 and, in particular, to continue to publish the
peri-odical Objective: Justice and other publications,
special articles and studies of the Office of Public Information and to select from among them appropriate
material for wider dissemination by means of reprints
in various languages;
( b) To seek the full co-operation of the administering Powers concerned in the discharge of the tasks
referred to above;
( c) To intensify the activities of all information
centres, particularly those located in western Europe;
(d) To maintain a close working relationship with
the Organization of African Unity by holding periodic
consultations and by systematically exchanging relevant
information with that organization;
( e) To enlist the support of non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of
decolonization in the dissemination of the relevant
information;
(f) To report to the Special Committee on the
measures taken in the implementation of the present
resolution;
4. Invites all States, the specialized arencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations having a special
interest in the field of decolonization to undertake or
intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the information referred
to in paragraph 2 above;

5. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-first session.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

3483 (XXX).

Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973 and 3334 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Noting the letter dated 19 May 1975 from the President of the Third United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea •to the President of the General Assembly30 regarding the decisions reached at the third session of the Conference, heild at Geneva from 17 March
to 9 May 1975,
Having considered the decision of the Conference,
as conveyed in the letter from its President, that its
next session should be held in New York from 29 March
to 21 May 1976 and that a decision regarding a fifth
session in 1976 should be left to its fourth session.,
Noting further that the Committee on Conferences
has recommended to the General Assembly that the
fourth session of the Conference should be held in
New York from 15 March to 7 May 1976,31
1. Approves the convening of the fourth session of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the
Sea for the period from 15 March to 7 May 1976 in
New York and the convening of a fifth session in 1976
if such decision is taken by the Conference;
2 .. Decides to accord priority to the Conference in
relation to other United Nations activities, except those
.A org&,1s established :.,y the Charte1 of .he Unite..i
Nations;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue to
make the necessary arrangements onginaHy provided
under paragraph 9 of General Assembly resolution
3067 (XXVIII) for the efficient and oontinuous servicing of the Conference in 1976 and of subsequent activities as may be decided upon by the Conference;
4. Recalls, in this connexion, that it noted in paragraph 4 of its resolution 3334 (XXIX) the decision
of the Conference to accept the invitation of the Gove1:1ment of Venezuela to meet _at _Caracas at an appropnate date for the purpose of s1grung the Final Act and
related instruments adopted by the Conference and
authorized the Secretary-General to make the necessary
arrangements to that end.
·
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975

3530 (XXX).

Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council
coverin 5 the period f10m 16 June 1:174 10 15 June
1975. 32
2442nd plenary meeting
16 December 1975
30
Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 30, document A/10121.
81 /bid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/10032 and
Corr.1), para. 34.
32 Ibid., Supplement No. 2 (A/10002).
