S/PV.7990

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7990th meeting

Thursday, 29 June 2017, 3.55 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Shutenko
Mr. Wilson
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 13 June 2017 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/495)
Third report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515)
Letter dated 22 June 2017 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/537)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18854 (E)
*1718854*

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 13 June 2017 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
(S/2017/495)
Third report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515)
Letter dated 22 June 2017 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/537)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Germany to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: a letter dated 13 June
2017 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/495);
the third report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2017/515); and a letter dated 22 June 2017 from
the Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/537).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Mr. João Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, and Mr. Sebastiano Cardi, Permanent
Representative of Italy, in his capacity as a Security
2/20

29/06/2017

Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: Two years after the conclusion
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
the Secretary-General is immensely encouraged by
the continued commitment by all participants to the
agreement. The JCPOA — reached by the E3/EU+3 and
Iran on 14 July 2015 — is the embodiment of successful
multilateral diplomacy, political will and perseverance.
This diplomatic achievement reflects the spirit and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and gives us all hope that even the most difficult
issues among States can be addressed through dialogue,
understanding and reciprocity. As noted by the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
this agreement belongs to the entire international
community. Hence, it is imperative that all JCPOA
participants, the United Nations and the international
community at large, continue to support the full and
effective implementation of this historic agreement.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) is taking
place against the backdrop of steady implementation,
cooperation and progress. Since implementation
day, on 16 January 2016, the International Atomic
Energy Agency has issued seven reports documenting
continued implementation by Iran of its nuclearrelated commitments. The recent 25 April meeting of
the Joint Commission of the JCPOA in Vienna — the
fifth meeting since implementation day — noted the
continued adherence to JCPOA commitments by all its
participants, and stressed the need to ensure its full and
effective implementation.
The Secretary-General believes that the comprehensive
and sustained implementation of the JCPOA will
guarantee that Iran’s nuclear programme remains
exclusively peaceful, while allowing for transparency,
monitoring and verification. It will also provide Iran
with an opportunity for greater engagement with the
international community and assist in increasing Iran’s
trade and economic relations. It will also bring forth
to a satisfactory conclusion the consideration of the
Iranian nuclear issue by the Security Council.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the third report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

2231 (2015) (S/2017/515). The report was submitted to
the Council on 16 June pursuant to annex B to resolution
2231 (2015) and paragraph 7 of the note by the President
of the Council issued on 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44).
As guided by the Security Council, the report of the
Secretary-General focuses on the implementation
of the provisions contained in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). Let me turn to the main findings of the
third report.
First, the Secretary-General has not received any
report, nor is he aware of any open source information,
regarding the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of nuclearrelated items undertaken contrary to the provisions of
the resolution. I also welcome the fact that Member
States are making greater use of the procurement
channel. Since 30 December 2016, 10 new nuclearrelated proposals were submitted to the Security
Council for approval, bringing to 16 the total number
of proposals submitted since implementation day. Of
the 16 proposals, 10 were approved by the Council, two
were withdrawn by the proposing States and four are
currently under review. The proposals were processed
in accordance with the timelines established by
resolution 2231 (2015), with due regard for information
security and confidentiality. The operational linkages
established between the Security Council and the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
are both effective and efficient. In that regard, I wish
to take this opportunity to acknowledge the excellent
cooperation we have with the European External Action
Service, especially its Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission.
Secondly, regarding the implementation of ballistic
missile-related provisions, the report notes that, on
29 January, Iran launched a medium-range ballistic
missile. Letters were submitted to the SecretaryGeneral by Iran and Israel, and jointly by France,
Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States,
concerning the launch. The letters presented a range
of views and interpretations. As in the case of the
ballistic missile launches by Iran in March 2016, there
was no consensus in the Security Council on how this
particular launch related to resolution 2231 (2015). In
that regard, I would like to quote exactly from the third
report of the Secretary-General:
“I call upon the Islamic Republic of Iran to avoid
such ballistic missile launches, which have the
potential to increase tensions. I appeal to all
Member States to redouble their efforts to promote

S/PV.7990

peace and stability in the region.” (S/2017/515,
para. 9)
Thirdly, in terms of restrictions on arms-related
transfers, the report includes additional information on
the seizure of an arms shipment by the French navy in
the northern Indian Ocean in March 2016. In January
2017, France invited the Secretariat to examine the
seized arms. After examination of the weapons and
analysis of information provided, the Secretariat is
confident that the weapons seized are of Iranian origin
and were shipped from Iran.
Fourthly, the report also highlights the participation,
for the second year in a row, of the Defence Industries
Organisation (DIO) in the Iraq defence exhibition held
in March, which may again have implications regarding
the implementation of the assets freeze. Since the
DIO is an entity on the list maintained pursuant to
resolution 2231 (2015), its funds, other financial assets
and economic resources on the Iraqi territory should
have been frozen by the Iraqi authorities. The issue was
raised again with the Permanent Mission of Iraq, and
the Secretary-General intends to report to the Council
in due course. The Secretary-General’s report also
provides information on additional travels by Major
General Qasem Soleimani since the second report
(S/2016/1136). The travels were reported by Iranian and
Arab media outlets.
In addition to the findings I have just mentioned,
the report also reflects official information provided
by Member States to the Secretary-General, including
from Israel, Lebanon, South Africa, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, the United States of
America and Yemen. The Secretariat has not been
able to independently corroborate those reports and
will provide further updates, as appropriate, should
additional information become available.
As we are about to enter into the third year of the
implementation of the JCPOA, the Secretary-General
would like to once again reaffirm the particular
responsibilities of JCPOA participants in carrying
forward the full and effective implementation of this
agreement. The Secretary-General is hopeful that all
participants will continue to make progress in the
implementation of the agreement and, in the process,
secure its durability.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of His Excellency Ambassador Sebastiano
Cardi of Italy in his role as Facilitator for the

17-188543/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I would
also like to convey our fullest support to him, as well
as to the Security Council, in the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. João
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the floor. I am honoured again to address
the Security Council today on behalf of the European
Union (EU) High Representative for Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy, in her capacity as the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission established by the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
First, I would like to thank Secretary-General, as
well as our colleague the Ambassador of Italy, who
is serving as the Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for the excellent cooperation. Let
me also express our gratitude to our colleagues in the
Security Council Affairs Division for their unwavering
support, in particular regarding the running of the
procurement channel. I would also like to note our
appreciation for their work in the preparation of the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515), as well as the
Under-Secretary-General for his intervention in the
Council today.
Almost two years ago, on 20 July 2015, the
Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed and operationalized the
JCPOA. This unanimous endorsement has ensured
that the JCPOA, which was born of the efforts of the
E3+3 and Iran, coordinated by the European Union
High Representative, now belongs to the whole United
Nations membership and the wider international
community. It is worth recalling that the Iranian nuclear
programme was one the most contentious issues on the
international agenda, and yet it was possible — through
diplomacy and a multilateral approach — to come to
a negotiated solution. In a moment where the world
is again faced with the threat of unchecked nuclear
capabilities, the JCPOA is a pillar of the international
non-proliferation agenda. It needs to be preserved and
fully implemented.
4/20

29/06/2017

One of the keys to the success of the deal is that
it exclusively focuses on one particular issue — Iran’s
nuclear programme This is not to say that other issues
are less relevant. They are all an integral part of
resolution 2231 (2015), and we expect full compliance.
However, we would not be in a better position to address
all the other non-nuclear matters without the JCPOA
in place. We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that it is in the interests of the international
community, writ large, that this achievement of
multilateral diplomacy endure transitions and
implementation challenges, thereby cementing our
collective commitment to diplomacy and dialogue.
Almost two years after its conclusion, and one
and a half years after implementation day, we can say
that the JCPOA is being properly implemented and is
delivering on its objectives. The initial results are clear
and speak for themselves: Iran’s nuclear programme
has been rolled back and placed under tight inspections;
and the International Atomic Energy Agency has
repeatedly confirmed — in six reports — that Iran
is abiding by its commitments. At the same time,
and as a consequence of the lifting of nuclear-related
sanctions, we are witnessing improvements in Iran’s
macroeconomic performance. That is a result of strong
growth in trade and foreign direct investment. Oil
production has returned to pre-sanctions days. Tourism
has been revived, and key infrastructure and investment
deals have been agreed, including, for instance, with
Airbus and Boeing. Those are only some of the positive
indicators pointing to a growing revival of trade and
business with Iran.
The multilateral nature of the JCPOA and its
important role as a cornerstone of the international
non-proliferation architecture were recalled by the
Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union, most
recently in November, and also on many occasions by
the EU High Representative — for example, when we
celebrated the first anniversary of implementation day
on 16 January, in her contacts with many world leaders
and in her address to the Security Council this spring
(see S/PV.7935).
However, JCPOA implementation is an ongoing
task, and we expect full and effective implementation
by all sides throughout the lifetime of the agreement.
Taking a look at the JCPOA, in particular its five
annexes, we realize the complexity and the wide scope
of the agreement, as well as the challenges ahead for us
in the coming years. The quality of the deal will also
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

be tested by its implementation, and, as coordinators
of the process, we will not settle for anything less than
strict adherence to what was agreed by all sides.
The EU High Representative, as the Coordinator
of the Joint Commission, which is responsible for
overseeing the implementation of the deal, remains fully
committed to the JCPOA. Since implementation day,
we have already chaired five JCPOA Joint Commission
meetings, which have monitored implementation and
provided guidance on a number of implementation
issues. The rigorous implementation of commitments
by all sides continues to be the best way to build trust,
strengthen the JCPOA and overcome the hurdles that
are part of all comprehensive and far-reaching deals.
In order to ensure transparency, the Joint Commission
has published a number of important interpretative
guidance documents.
A lot of the debate about the merits of the deal has
been focused on Iran’s nuclear obligations, which are
laid out in annex I of the JCPOA, and on the lifting of
sanctions, which is the subject of annex II. However, let
me today briefly touch upon annex III of the JCPOA,
which deals with civil nuclear cooperation.
Annex III is key in the overall balance of the
agreement and essential for our overall objective of
ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. The EU is already engaging with
Iran on a number of concrete projects, which are mostly
focused on nuclear safety — something we are all
interested in. That cooperation is outlined in the joint
EU-Iran statement on civil nuclear cooperation, which
was adopted in April last year. For example, it means that
we are inviting Iranian nuclear experts and scientists
to participate in civil nuclear-research activities and
in conferences of nuclear-safety regulators. A few
months ago, we held a high-level seminar on civil
nuclear cooperation and governance, which was well
attended by Iranian officials and parliamentarians. It
led to the important joint conclusion that civil nuclear
cooperation and the adherence to international norms
on nuclear governance have to go hand in hand.
I will now focus on the work of the Procurement
Working Group, responsible for reviewing proposals
by States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that
are for nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end-uses. Since
implementation day, the Procurement Working Group,
which is made up of representatives of the E3+3 and
Iran and coordinated by a delegated coordinator of the

S/PV.7990

EU High Representative, has been in full operation.
Setting up a new authorization mechanism, which
entered into force after a long prohibition period, was
not an easy task. The first proposals received through
the procurement channel have been reviewed and
approved. It is worth noting that not only is the number
of proposals steadily increasing, but so is the number
of countries submitting proposals to the procurement
channel. That is a demonstration that the established
procurement mechanism works.
Transparency was one of our guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the
JCPOA. According to para 6.10 of annex IV of the
agreement, the Joint Commission shall report to the
Security Council every six months on the status of
the Procurement Working Group’s decisions and on
any implementation issues. In that context, on 12 June
2017, the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group submitted to the Facilitator, on behalf of the
Joint Commission, its third biannual report. The report
aims at providing the Facilitator and Security Council
members with an overview of the work undertaken by
the Procurement Working Group from 23 December
2016 to 12 June 2017. The report has been circulated as
a document of the Security Council (S/2017/495).
During this period, the Procurement Working
Group continued to work intensively to further develop
the Group’s operational modalities. It also made
great efforts to be as transparent as possible, without
compromising confidentiality, by reaching out to
States Members of the United Nations and promoting
a better understanding of its aims, objectives and
review process.
I would like to conclude by reiterating once more
the European Union’s resolute willingness to preserve
and protect the JCPOA and to work for its successful
implementation throughout its lifetime. The world
would not be a safer place without the JCPOA. We
therefore call on all other parties to remain committed
to the full implementation of the JCPOA in good faith,
as well as of resolution 2231 (2015) in all its dimensions.
This is essential to continuing to build trust, strengthen
multilateral diplomacy, reinforce non-proliferation and
promote regional peace and stability.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Vale
de Almeida for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Cardi.

17-188545/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank you
in particular, Mr. President, for calling today’s
meeting. I also offer my thanks to Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/515), and to Ambassador
Vale de Almeida for his briefing on behalf of
Ms. Federica Mogherini.
Today I will touch on three aspects of my report for
the period from 16 January 2017 through 15 June 2017:
first, the activities of the Security Council in the “2231
format”; secondly, monitoring of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015); and, thirdly, developments in the
procurement channel and other requests for approval.
The full version of the report has been circulated to
Council members and has been issued under the symbol
S/2017/537.
First, with regard to the 2231 format, following
the Security Council’s informal consultations on
the 29 January 2017 ballistic-missile launch by the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Council held a meeting
on 2 March in the 2231 format to further consider the
launch. I will summarize our discussion in the second
part of my briefing.
On 17 March, the Security Council held a meeting in
the 2231 format to hear a briefing from the Coordinator
of the Procurement Working Group of the Joint
Commission established in the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). In his briefing, the Coordinator
gave an overview of the procurement channel and of
the Procurement Working Group’s functions, activities,
processing of proposals and various benchmarks.
During the same meeting, the Council also agreed to
shift the reporting schedule on resolution 2231 (2015)
implementation from July-January to June-December,
thereby allowing the Facilitators to brief the Council
after six months into and at the end of their terms.
In line with paragraph 4 of the resolution, in February
and June 2017, the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency submitted two quarterly reports
on verification and monitoring activities. The February
report recalled that on 15 January 2017, the Agency
verified that Iran had taken the actions specified in
annex V of the JCPOA, namely, the removal of all
excess centrifuges and infrastructure from the Fordow
Fuel Enrichment Plant and their transfer to storage at
the Natanz Fuel Enrichment Plant under continuous
Agency monitoring. In addition, the Agency indicated
that, on 21 January, the Islamic Republic of Iran, under
6/20

29/06/2017

Agency verification and monitoring, began feeding
natural UF6 into a single IR-8 centrifuge for the
first time.
In both quarterly reports, the Agency affirmed
that the Islamic Republic of Iran had not pursued the
construction of the existing Arak heavy water research
reactor based on its original design; had no more than
130 metric tonnes of heavy water; had no more than
5,060 centrifuges that have remained installed in 30
cascades at Natanz; had not enriched uranium above
3.67 per cent U-235; had not conducted any uranium
enrichment or related research and development
activities at Fordow; and that there had not been any
nuclear material at the plant.
On 2 March 2017, at the 2231 format meeting, the
experts of one Member State observed that the mediumrange ballistic missile, a Khorramshahr, tested by the
Islamic Republic of Iran on 29 January was designed to
carry a payload greater than 500 kilograms to a range
over 1,000 kilometres (km). The experts noted that
“500 kg has been the approximate mass required
to carry a first-generation nuclear weapon and
300 km is an internationally accepted range of
strategic significance”.
They concluded that the test constituted an activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons.
Following the briefing, the issue of the particular
sensitivity of the launch, with regard to its regional
implications and its relation to resolution 2231 (2015),
raised by some representatives, was discussed. A
representative emphasized that resolution 2231
(2015) does not provide a definition as to which
types of missiles are constructed in such a manner
as to be capable of delivering nuclear weapons. Other
delegations said that resolution 2231 (2015) concerns
intrinsic capability rather than intent. Since the launch
involved a system that was, by design, capable of
delivering a nuclear warhead, its use was therefore
inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
In the light of the views expressed by delegations,
I noted that there was no consensus on how this
particular launch relates to resolution 2231 (2015). I
stressed that it was essential for the Security Council
to act in a unified manner in this area, so as to help
foster the effective implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). I also proposed that, in the framework of my
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

regular contacts with interested parties, including the
Permanent Representative of Iran, I would underline the
importance, for all parties, of continuing to maintain an
attitude conducive to building trust and to implement
the terms of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
With respect to procurement channel developments
and other requests of approval, since implementation
day a total of 16 proposals to participate in or permit
the activities set forth in paragraph 2 of annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) have been submitted to the
Security Council by four Member States from three
different regional groups, including States that are not
participants in the JCPOA. That reflects the growing
confidence of Member States in the procurement
channel. I am also pleased to note that, on average,
the proposals were processed through the procurement
channel in less than 46 calendar days.
A proposal to participate in and permit the
activities set forth in paragraph 5 of annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) was submitted on 23 November
2016 by a Member State that, on 24 February, provided
additional information. On 28 February, I informed that
Member State that the Security Council had reached no
agreement and returned its request.
In conclusion, 18 months after implementation day,
transparency, practical guidance and outreach remain
a priority. In that regard, I plan to engage in new
outreach activities on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) during the second part of my tenure. In
the short term, on 14 July, I intend to convene an open
briefing for States Member of the United Nations to
raise awareness and understanding of the resolution
and its implementation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Cardi for his briefings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary Feltman for his briefing today, and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his comments.
The topic of compliance by the Iranian regime with
its international obligations reminds me of the fable of
the scorpion and the frog. The scorpion asks the frog
for a ride across the river. The frog, quite rationally,
asks: “how do I know you will not sting me?” And the
scorpion replies: “because it would kill both of us. We
would both drown.” So the frog is convinced. He lets

S/PV.7990

the Scorpion get on his back and starts across the river.
But, sure enough, midway through, the scorpion stings
him. With his last breath, the frog asks: “why?” And
the scorpion replies: “because it is in my nature.”
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/515) is filled
with devastating evidence of the nature of the Iranian
regime. In paragraph after paragraph it documents the
Iranian Government’s actions in defiance of resolution
to 2231 (2015): repeated ballistic missile launches;
proven arms smuggling; illicit procurement of ballisticmissile-related technology. Iran’s destructive and
destabilizing role in the Middle East goes far beyond
its illicit missile launches.
From Syria to Yemen and Iraq to Lebanon, Iran’s
support for terrorist groups continues unabated. Iran’s
weapons, military advisers and arms smugglers stoke
regional conflicts and make them harder to solve.
Iran’s leaders abuse their own people. The Iranian
people deserve better. The Iranian people know the
horror of chemical-weapon attacks, and so it is sad and
horrifying — the irony that the Iranian regime now
supports a dictator in Syria who uses the same evil
weapons against his own people.
But, just as alarming as the actions of the scorpion,
is the gullibility of the frog. It has been almost two
years since the Council unanimously adopted resolution
2231 (2015), a resolution that this report confirms has
been repeatedly and deliberately violated by the Iranian
regime. And yet the Security Council has failed to even
take minimal steps to respond to the violations. What is
more, these violations are not occurring in secret; they
are being covered in the media, and yet the Council has
done nothing. Let me give an example.
Resolution 2231 (2015) banned Iranian Major
General Soleimani from travelling outside of Iran.
It gave all Member States a clear and unambiguous
obligation to deny him entry. Nonetheless, the
Secretary-General’s report cites multiple press photos
and reports of the General travelling to Syria and Iraq.
And that is not the first time he has openly travelled
to other countries. This is a violation of the Security
Council’s authority, plain and simple. Furthermore, it
is one that is occurring out in the open for the entire
world to see.
The Secretary-General’s report makes clear that
Iran is in violation of resolution 2231 (2015). And so the
question becomes: what is the Security Council going
to do about it? What will we do to make Iran understand

17-188547/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

that resolution 2231 (2015) means something? We as the
Security Council must stand behind the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015). We must strictly enforce them
and show Iran that we will not tolerate its egregious
flouting of United Nations resolutions. Those measures
are there for a reason, and the Council should be able
to enforce them. For its part, the United States will not
continue to turn a blind eye to the Iranian regime’s
behaviour. In its national capacity, the United States
will do its part to enforce resolution 2231 (2015). We
will work with our global partners to interdict cargo
that it prohibits, and we will continue to impose our
own sanctions on those who abet violations of it.
With regard to the parts of the resolution that
address the nuclear deal, as we have said previously,
the United States is now undertaking a comprehensive
review of that policy. Until the review is completed,
we will comply with our commitments under the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, and we expect Iran to
do the same. A continuance of the Iranian regime’s
destructive, destabilizing behaviour will prevent
it from ever having a normal relationship with the
United States or the rest of the world, and its continued
oppression of its own people speaks volumes about its
true nature. At a military parade last September, the
Iranian Government first displayed the missile that
it fired into Syria last week. The new missiles were
accompanied by a banner that read “If the leaders of the
Zionist regime make a mistake, the Islamic Republic
will turn Tel Aviv and Haifa to dust”. Those are not the
words of a peace-loving regime or a responsible member
of the international community. They are the words of
a scorpion. The Security Council must recognize that
and act accordingly.

29/06/2017

a solid, enduring system of collective security, at the
heart of which is the current non-proliferation regime
that we have painstakingly constructed. It is based on
robust international instruments that we all value and
of which the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons is the cornerstone. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), concluded on 14 July 2015
in Vienna between the E3+3 and Iran, has been in
force for almost 18 months now. It has become part
of the framework defined by these instruments and is
designed to reinforce them.
By its endorsement of the agreement through its
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), the Council was
able to respond robustly to a major proliferation crisis.
It puts in place a 10-year guarantee that Iran will not
develop a military nuclear programme. That represents
a key step both for our international non-proliferation
efforts and for international peace and security as well
as a historic achievement for the Security Council.
France has already emphasized that we have a duty
and a responsibility to ensure that it lasts. This is an
issue linked to the stability of the Middle East, which is
already in the throes of numerous crises. Mr. Le Drian,
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France,
brought it up just today during his talks with Mr. Zarif,
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iran.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for yesterday’s
debate on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (see S/PV.7985). I would like to thank
today’s briefers, particularly Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/515). France welcomes this solid, balanced
report and presentation. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Vale de Almeida of the European Union
and Ambassador Cardi of Italy, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).

Consolidating the Vienna agreement and
ensuring its durability requires a robust and balanced
implementation of all the commitments made by the
parties to the agreement, carried out with the necessary
transparency and effectiveness. France would like
to highlight the fact that on 2 June, the International
Atomic Energy Agency noted that Iran had not failed
to meet any of its nuclear commitments during the
verification period. We welcome the reports that the
procurement channel is functioning well, based on the
reviews of the proposals for transfers that have been
submitted. We reiterate that all the requests submitted
under the established procedure will be carefully and
rigorously reviewed. Incidentally, France’s bilateral
cooperation with Iran has significantly increased in
value since January 2016 and the JCPOA’s entry into
force. Our purchases of Iranian crude oil have reached
€2 billion since then, and our two countries have begun
discussions on the launch of bilateral cooperation in
various specifically civil nuclear areas strictly within
the framework outlined by the JCPOA.

Over the years, the international community,
whose voice the Security Council should echo, has built

However, we should make it clear that the
commitments made almost two years ago do not

8/20

17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

end with the JCPOA, as a framework, nor with the
substance of its nuclear aspects. The establishment of an
atmosphere of lasting trust entails full and total respect
for the commitments undertaken in their entirety and
outlined in resolution 2231 (2015). The specifics in
the Secretary-General’s report regarding Iran’s failure
to respect several of its important provisions can only
raise serious concerns, the first being the missile launch
that took place this winter and that France condemned.
This kind of action contradicts resolution 2231 (2015),
which clearly calls on Iran not to proceed with ballisticmissile activities capable of carrying nuclear weapons,
including launching such missiles. Furthermore, those
actions are being undertaken in a fragile regional
context and runs counter to the process of restoration
of trust established by the Vienna agreement. It is
vital to regional stability and international security to
ensure that Iran ends any activity that could result in an
escalation of the situation.
We are also concerned about the implications of
weapons that have been seized and that are suspected
of or known to be either originating in or destined for
Iran, including by my own country, and that have been
reported or confirmed by the Secretariat. Such transfers
are violations of resolution 2231 (2015) and fuel
animosity in a fragile regional context. Lastly, we are
also worried about the information concerning foreign
travel by Major General Soleimani, who is still under
a travel ban. We urge all States Members of the United
Nations to comply with their obligations, especially
where assets freezes and travel bans are concerned.
Maintaining a firm collective commitment to the
flexible but rigorous implementation of provisions that
we ourselves have agreed on is of course essential, as
the Secretary-General emphasizes in his report. But it
should also be clear that this commitment should be
maintained in the same spirit of cooperation that led to
the agreement, through a demanding and comprehensive
dialogue between all the parties concerned. To be
precise, what I mean is that ensuring the continued
success of this diplomatic effort requires strict and
consistent respect for the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) in their entirety and for the JCPOA. France will
be vigilant and will work to ensure that the Security
Council, with the firm and constant support of the
Secretariat, will also monitor the entire process.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General
Feltman,
Ambassador
Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the

S/PV.7990

European Union, and Ambassador Cardi, Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.
My country fully supports and strictly implements
resolution 2231 (2015), as it is crucial for ensuring the
proper implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA). Kazakhstan attaches great
importance to that historic agreement, which is
reckoned as the most momentous achievement of
multilateral diplomacy in recent decades. We are
pleased that Kazakhstan had direct involvement in that
process and had an impact on its success.
As part of our initiative, we organized two rounds
of talks in 2003 in Almaty, which paved the way for that
agreement. As part of it, in 2015, Kazakhstan supplied
Iran with natural uranium on commercial terms as
compensation for the removal of low-enriched uranium
from that country, as specified in the JCPOA. We are
ready, should there be any further need, to continue
our supply, in accordance with the requirements of
resolution 2231 (2015) and other documents related to
the uranium-related nuclear programme.
As noted in the third report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515), the International
Atomic Energy Agency continues to verify and monitor
the Islamic Republic of Iran’s implementation of its
nuclear-related obligations. In that regard, we commend
the commitment of Iran to comply with resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA. We would also appreciate more
comprehensive reports dealing with all relevant parts of
resolution 2231 (2015).
As for the allegations in the report relating to the
violations of some of the provisions of annex B of the
resolution, we will expect more detailed information,
as promised in that text. We therefore call for the
transparent and impartial investigation of those
cases. That process requires more active interaction
among the Secretariat, Iran and all interested parties.
Implementing the JCPOA has had a significant impact
on normalizing the situation in the region and beyond.
The Plan of Action will also have a positive effect on
the revitalization of economic activities in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Kazakhstan will continue to support and strictly
implement resolution 2231 (2015). Moreover, it affirms
its right to cooperate with Iran within the framework
of the implementation of the JCPOA. We believe that

17-188549/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

the implementation of the JCPOA and strict observance
with its obligations by all parties are crucial for
strengthening non-proliferation and regional security.
We stand ready with others to contribute to its further
practical realization. Finally, we believe that the Security
Council, as a guarantor of international peace and
security, should always insist on full compliance, and
Kazakhstan will play its part in that collective action.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs; Mr. Vale de
Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Cardi, Permanent
Representative of Italy to the United Nations, for their
comprehensive and detailed briefings regarding the
follow-up on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
We are of the view that the Security Council
should always be credible and earnest when addressing
the risks of nuclear proliferation, without selectivity
or politicization. We have always underscored that
principled position in all international forums. In that
same vein, Egypt’s efforts to promote the universality
of the non-proliferation and disarmament regime bear
witness to our firm national position.
Egypt has on previous occasions welcomed the
nuclear agreement with Iran enshrined in the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). We view
that agreement as a step towards the consolidation of
security and stability in all the countries of the Middle
East. Nevertheless, resolution 2231 (2015) goes beyond
the provisions of that agreement, as it forges clear
technical and legal regulations governing the transfer of
conventional weapons and related technologies by Iran.
We stress the significance of the accurate and
succinct implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
in accordance with its purpose, namely, addressing
the risks of nuclear proliferation. Similarly, Iranian
nuclear activities should be subjected to the necessary
international controls in order to ensure Iran’s
compliance with its international obligations. That
should eventually be integrated into the wider context
of the implementation of international resolutions
relating to the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of
mass destruction.
We consider the accurate, succinct, comprehensive
and effective implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
10/20

29/06/2017

to be an important element for stability in the Middle
East, which will also prevent the launch of a regional
arms race. It presents a rather significant opportunity
to limit turbulence in the region, which is further
exacerbated by Iran’s regional behaviour, in particular
the following subversive acts.
First, Iran has been fuelling conflicts in hotspots of
armed conflict in the Middle East, especially in Yemen
and Syria. Secondly, it has participated in the illicit
smuggling of arms and weapons for militias and armed
groups, which runs counter to resolutions of the Security
Council and the provisions of international law. Thirdly,
Iran has continued to intervene in the internal affairs
of Arab States and has, in that connection, exported
destructive and chaotic ideas that incite sectarianism,
violence, extremism and terrorism.
In that vein, the previous Secretary-General spotted
several instances of Iran violating its obligations.
Mr. Feltman mentioned them in his briefing, and I will
not reiterate them. However, I would like to highlight
certain points. First, there was an arms shipment seized
by France in March 2016. In fact, the report proved
that that shipment was of Iranian origin and had been
shipped from Iran with Somalia as its destination.
Secondly, the continued ballistic missile tests will
eventually exacerbate regional tensions. Thirdly, we
look forward to the completion of the investigation of
the Iranian shipment seized by Australia in early 2016.
We call upon the Secretariat to inform us as soon as
possible of the relevant technical conclusions.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
resolution 2231 (2015) and compliance with it by all
parties should be comprehensive and integrated. The
Security Council shall be held accountable by the
international community and international public
opinion to verify how earnest and serious that compliance
is. Any failure or omission in that regard will eventually
undermine the value and credibility of Security Council
resolutions. In that connection, we would like to pay
tribute to the Permanent Representative of Italy and
his delegation as the Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). We stress the centrality of
that role in following up and briefing member States
of the Security Council on any developments, whether
they be irregularities, violations or contraventions, in
a timely manner in order to allow the Procurement
Working Group, and thereby the Security Council,
to undertake the appropriate measures. In that regard
we welcome Ambassador Cardi’s intention to hold
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7990

informative meetings open to all States Members of the
United Nations.

the statement from Pretoria and would like to read it
out loud.

Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for preparing the latest
biannual report (S/2017/515) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We note the professional work
of Mr. Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and his team. For us, one thing
is clear. The arrangements concluded two years ago on
the Iranian nuclear programme must serve as a basis for
cooperation and not a source of confrontation. In that
regard, we note that, compared with the two previous
reports, we see a serious attempt by the SecretaryGeneral to give the text a more calibrated nature.

“[T]he assistance provided to the Bushehr related to
emergency repairs undertaken in accordance with
South Africa’s international obligations to assist a
vessel in distress”. (S/2017/515, para. 28)

At the same time, we would like to flag some
specific provisions of the report, so as to avoid
repetition of such mistakes in the future. For example,
the calls upon Iran to avoid ballistic missile launches
carry far-reaching political ramifications that could
potentially increase tensions in the region. Such
statements have no place in that kind of report, which is
devoted exclusively to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). The resolution includes a call that allows
no misinterpretation, namely, a call upon Iran to refrain
from launching ballistic missiles that are built in such a
way as to carry a nuclear warhead.
We also find it dubious that the weapons found on
the vessel seized in the summer of 2016 were of Iranian
origin or were being transported from Iran. Nor is there
proof of other cases quoted in the report. In the cases of
some of the incidents a number of States have carried
out investigations in accordance with their respective
legislation without reaching any result. Unproven,
unsubstantiated facts have no place in the report. It
is unacceptable to use in the report information that
is unsubstantiated by concrete information, even if
such information comes from a Member State. Such
information must first be conveyed to the Security
Council, which is authorized to take decisions on followup steps, including the carrying out of professional,
objective and impartial investigations.
We do not understand the allegation that the
Iranian vessel Bushehr, which stopped for repairs in
a South African port, could have been in violation of
any obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). We note

All of the actions undertaken were in line with South
Africa’s international commitments, since the ship was
forced to stop owing to an emergency.
I wish to devote further attention to the following
circumstance. With regard to the leaks that appeared
in the media some time ago from parts of the then still
unpublished report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), we would
stress the fact that such actions are unacceptable. The
Secretariat must hold the report closely under review,
and members of the Security Council must not resort
to such irresponsible actions. It is our belief that such
publications are aimed at exerting pressure on the
Secretary-General.
We see that even the slightest attempt to give the
text a more balanced nature tends to incur the wrath of
some of our colleagues. We trust that in this matter a
due level of integrity will prevail. It is unacceptable to
turn the report into a political document. That defeats
the whole purpose and thrust of resolution 2231 (2015)
and will inevitably lead to the undermining of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. In accordance with
the note of the President of the Security Council dated
16 January 2016 (S/2016/57), the Secretary-General’s
report should relate exclusively to implementation of the
resolution, without any kind of political connotations.
In conclusion, I would like to note Russia’s
commitment
to
categorical,
comprehensive
implementation of the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
which represent outstanding achievements in the world
of diplomacy that have allowed us to tackle one of the
most complex issues. The importance of this nuclear
deal is recognized by the vast majority of the members
of the international community. That arrangement
can serve as a template when tackling other pressing
problems. The agreement showed that, in the presence
of political will, agreements of that kind can serve as
a fundamental pillar for forging inclusive international
and regional cooperation, which will open the window
of possibility for sustainably addressing the numerous
conflicts in the Middle East.

17-1885411/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

It is within our power to achieve the successful
implementation of the agreement. It will require
refraining from the language of threats and sanctions
and focusing on scrupulous implementation of the
commitments voluntarily undertaken by all parties — bar
none — in line with the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
Ambassador Cardi and Ambassador Vale de Almeida
for their briefings, and I commend the parties for the
work they have done. Since its start, over one year
ago, the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) has been steady, leading to
gradually increasing, positive effects. The conclusion
of the JCPOA represents a firm step towards a political
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. It did not come
easily. Now it is imperative to continue to promote
follow-up implementation and the steady and long-term
progress of the JCPOA. China would therefore propose
the following.
First, the important significance of JCPOA
implementation must be fully understood. The JCPOA
is a successful example of addressing international and
regional hotspot issues through political and diplomatic
means. It means a lot in terms of strengthening the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the maintenance of international and regional peace
and security. Certain difficulties and challenges are
unavoidable in the implementation of the JCPOA. The
parties must proceed from the bigger picture, consolidate
political will, avoid external influences and build
confidence regarding the prospects of implementation.
Secondly, parties should earnestly implement their
respective obligations and commitments. As indicated
by the reports of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, Iran has implemented its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA. China appreciates
Iran’s efforts to implement the agreement and calls
on the parties to continue to be guided by the JCPOA,
stick to the step-by-step approach and the principles of
reciprocity, equity and balance, honour their respective
commitments and build mutual trust.
Thirdly, existing mechanism must be well-utilized.
China has taken note of the report (S/2017/495) on
the activities of the Procurement Working Group
submitted by the Joint Commission to the Council.
12/20

29/06/2017

We welcome the briefing by the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group to the implementation
mechanism of resolution 2231 (2015). We will continue
our active participation in the activities of the Joint
Commission and the Procurement Working Group.
It is China’s hope that the working mechanisms can
work within their mandates, yet form a synergy to
jointly promote the implementation of the JCPOA.
The parties should demonstrate mutual understanding
and accommodation, and resolve their differences
properly within the existing framework in an effort to
seek consensus.
The Secretary-General’s reports must be
well balanced. China has taken note of the report
(S/2017/515) submitted by Secretary-General Guterres.
The Secretary-General’s reports are an important part
of the process of implementing the resolution and
the JCPOA. Parties should bear in mind the larger
picture and consider the Secretary-General’s reports in
conjunction with the overarching goal of implementing
the resolution and the JCPOA. It is vital for the reports
of the Secretary-General to reflect the efforts of the
parties to fully implement the resolution in an objective
and balanced way.
The reports should send a positive message,
namely, that the parties are committed to implementing
the resolution and the JCPOA. China notes that the
Secretary-General has, in his report, underscored
the significance of the conclusion of the JCPOA, and
China has encouraged parties to support that historic
agreement by fully and effectively implementing
the agreement, so as to ensure that all participants
can benefit.
With regard to Iran’s missile launches, the parties
should accurately interpret the relevant Council
resolutions and handle that issue with great care so
as to avoid undermining the implementation of the
JCPOA. The Secretary-General’s reports should benefit
the maintenance of regional peace and stability, while
relevant information should be accurate and credible.
China has taken note of some legitimate concerns
of Iran about the content of the report, and hopes that
those concerns can be reflected in the document in
the future.
China has always maintained that the Iranian
nuclear issue should be resolved through political and
diplomatic means. We are committed to the consolidation
of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

and the maintenance of international regional peace
and stability. China firmly supports and safeguards
the JCPOA, which is a historic achievement, and is
working actively to promote the renovation of the Arak
heavy-water reactor, thereby playing a constructive role
in promoting the implementation of the resolution and
the agreement.
China will continue its active participation in
the implementation process of the agreement, push
for continued materialization of the dividends of the
agreement to the benefit of the parties, so as to make
our contribution to the comprehensive, long-term and
proper settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman for the presentation of the third
report (S/2017/515) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I am also
grateful for the briefings provided by Ambassador
Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
by Mr. Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union. The information provided in the
briefings and the reports has some positive elements,
which deserve to be highlighted, as well as some
challenges and some elements of concern.
Uruguay is a country strongly committed to
non-proliferation and to strengthening the disarmament
regime. As Council members are aware, we do not have
nuclear weapons. We are members of the world’s first
nuclear-weapon-free zone through the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America,
which has just celebrated its fiftieth anniversary, and
the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The latter covers the
33 States of the region that are signatories to the Treaty.
We are also party to the Treaty for the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. For all of those reasons, Uruguay
welcomed, with satisfaction and optimism, the signing
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, signed on
14 July 2015, in Vienna between Iran, the five permanent
members of the Council and Germany on the Iranian
nuclear programme. That agreement represented a key
achievement for non-proliferation and a significant
contribution to international peace, security and
stability. It eliminated one of the main sources of tension
in the troubled Middle East region. The steps taken by
the parties to the agreement show that, with political
will and through the path of diplomacy, positive results

S/PV.7990

can be achieved, even in cases where such results seem,
a priori, out of reach.
As we did a few days ago in Vienna at the Board of
Governors meeting of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Uruguay expresses its full satisfaction
at the progress made in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and at the way in which
the verification and monitoring activities of the IAEA
in Iran are being carried out and the confirmation
by the IAEA that Iran has complied with all of the
provisions of the agreement. It is important for all the
parties to continue complying with the provisions of the
agreement and resolution 2231 (2015).
We note with concern the allegations contained in
the report on the possible violations by Iran of some of
the provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). All
missile activity by Iran has the potential to heighten
tensions in the region. We therefore call on the Iranian
authorities to act with restraint and caution in the future.
With regard to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, six months ago we expressed our interest in
the following, namely, that in addition to the detailed
analysis of Iran’s compliance with annex B of resolution
2231 (2015), future editions of the report should also
include the degree of compliance with other aspects of
the resolution, including annex A. Annex A is nothing
more nor less than the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action itself and the obligations arising from it for all
parties to the agreement. It is therefore essential for
us as Council members to receive reports about its
implementation. We hope that such information will
appear in future reports.
Uruguay continues to call upon all the parties to the
agreement to adopt all necessary measures stipulated in
resolution 2231 (2015) and to comply with its provisions
in order not to jeopardize the historic agreement
reached, which is the fruit of more than two years of
intense negotiations. In that regard, we urge the parties
to act with moderation and caution and to refrain from
any action that might endanger the agreement. The
Security Council, as a guarantor of international peace
and security, must ensure full compliance of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Shutenko (Ukraine): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman, Mr. Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union, and Ambassador
Cardi of Italy, in his capacity as Facilitator for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231

17-1885413/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

(2015), for providing factual and substantial reports on
the status of the implementation of both the resolution
and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
and for providing detailed presentations on the work
conducted in that area over the past six months.
We highly commend the concerted efforts of the
Secretariat, the European Commission, the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Facilitator’s
team to ensure the full and proper implementation of
those crucial instruments, which have contributed to the
strengthening of non-proliferation and export-control
regimes in general. In particular, Ukraine fully supports
the IAEA’s long-term mission of the verification and
monitoring of Iran’s nuclear-related commitments,
with the goal of reaching the overall conclusion of the
matter. During the past six months, we witnessed a
continuation of the smooth and effective functioning of
the procurement channel mechanism, with the approval
of several proposals to supply Iran with relevant goods
and technologies.
As a staunch supporter of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Ukraine
stresses the importance of diligent compliance with
the JCPOA, which aims at striking a balance between
the legitimate right to develop nuclear energy and the
need to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons. That
historic nuclear deal fully respects such a balance. With
its nuclear-weapons past, Ukraine remains committed
to the goals of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and fully
respects the restrictions and prohibitions introduced by
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Iran has been proving its intention to use nuclear
technologies exclusively for peaceful purposes. At
the same time, we also acknowledge the existence of
varying interpretations regarding the applicability
of resolution 2231 (2015) to its ballistic missile tests.
Referring further to the third report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2017/515) on the implementation of that
resolution, I wish to recall that the existing restrictions
on arms-related transfers as well as the assets-freeze
and the travel-ban provisions stipulated by annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015) should be fully adhered to.
While recognizing that report to be an informative
document that is based on public and open information
and States’ notifications, we consider that it is important
to ensure that any concern it contains does not provoke
further tensions but rather would be addressed and
resolved through negotiations.
14/20

29/06/2017

In that context, let me reiterate Ukraine’s openness
and readiness to continue constructive interactions with
the Secretariat, including with regard to the incident
that occurred in January in the airport in Kyiv, when
an attempt to smuggle components of military goods to
Iran was prevented by the Ukrainian law enforcement
authorities. As soon as the pre-trial investigation of
that case is finalized, all additional information will be
shared in due course. We fully support the intention of
the Secretary-General to continue examining all cases of
concern and obtaining additional verified information.
Having stressed the imperative of full compliance
with the relevant obligations, I would like to
re-emphasize the importance of further outreach on the
Iranian issue. The proper and diligent implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), with all of its annexes, will
be a key contribution to regional and global security
and stability.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank the three briefers for
their statements on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Japan fully supports the Secretary-General’s
call for all Member States to act in accordance with,
and in support of, the historic Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) and to avoid provocative actions and
statements. Japan is committed to working closely with
Council members, Iran and all other Member States to
enable the most effective possible implementation of
the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
Let me turn now to Iran’s ballistic missile launches.
In his recent report (S/2017/515), the Secretary-General
called upon Iran to avoid such ballistic missile launches
that have the potential to increase tensions. Japan
believes that such launches as conducted by Iran in
January are inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
As other delegations have already noted today, we
are concerned by the ballistic missile launches, which
can be destabilizing for the delicate situation in the
Middle East.
On that note, we should recall the JCPOA’s
enormous potential to contribute to peace and
security in the Middle East. In March, the Permanent
Representative of Iran circulated a letter to the Council
expressing Iran’s willingness to take effective measures
to end the crisis in Syria, including via humanitarian
assistance. Iran can and should play a constructive
role in peace and stability in the region, particularly in
Syria and Yemen, and in the international community
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

more generally. We hope that Iran will implement the
commitments outlined in its March letter.
Japan welcomes the steady implementation of
JCPOA parties’ nuclear-related commitments and
commends the critical role of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) critical role in verifying
and monitoring those commitments. We underscore
that Iran’s application of the additional protocol and
the transparency measures is key not only for full
implementation of the JCPOA, but also for regional
confidence-building. Japan will continue to support the
independent and objective work of the IAEA.
One and a half years after the adoption of the
JCPOA in January 2016, the uniqueness of the format
of resolution 2231 (2015) has become increasingly
clear. The format does not include a subsidiary body,
but requires extensive data collection, analysis and
reporting by the Secretariat. Given those challenges,
Japan commends the Secretariat’s efforts in preparing
six-month reports with a high degree of independence,
objectivity and expertise. In the recent report of the
Secretary-General, we see some pending issues on
which the Secretariat will need to update the Council in
future reports. Given the particular challenges of data
collection under resolution 2231 (2015), we encourage
the Secretariat to utilize such tools as the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) and the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009),
concerning Somalia and Eritrea, to obtain relevant
information. An objective and credible report will
allow the Council to fully understand the situation and
take appropriate action.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): First of all, I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Ambassador
Cardi and Ambassador Vale de Almeida for their
engagement and briefings this afternoon.
We see the agreement on the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as a milestone that represents
an important example of dispute resolution conflict
prevention. Its continued implementation benefits
international peace and security and stability in
the region.
There are encouraging developments and there
are issues of concern. We should be open about both.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/515), which shows that the implementation
of the JCPOA continues to be broadly in line with

S/PV.7990

expectations. That the procurement channel is working
according to plan is encouraging, as is Iran’s general
compliance with its nuclear-related obligations — as
evidenced by reports of the International Atomic Energy
Agency. It is important that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continue to provisionally apply the additional protocol
to its Safeguards Agreement. In addition, we look
forward to Iran’s early ratification of the additional
protocol. In spite of the general positive picture, I would
like to mention three areas that remain of concern.
First of all, we have previously expressed our
concern over ballistic missile test, which are inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015).
Secondly, the seizure of arms, apparently
originating in Iran, in contravention of the measures
in resolution 2231 (2015), is deeply disturbing. Unless
exempted, any transfer of arms to and from Iran
requires the authorization of the Council. We will
carefully future reports from the Secretary-General
relating to confiscated material as more information
becomes available.
Finally, like others, we reiterate our concern over
the continued contraventions of the travel ban. It is
important that Member States provide to the SecretaryGeneral all the information necessary to carry out the
reporting requirements set out in the resolution. We
call on the Government of Iran to formally respond
to allegations as identified in the Secretary-General’s
report. The July 2016 agreement of the JCPOA
underscored the power of dialogue to make progress in
non-proliferation. However, reaping the full benefits of
the agreement will require the long-term commitment
of all sides. We echo the call of the Secretary-General
for all States to act in accordance with and in support
of the agreement and to avoid provocative rhetoric
or action. Mutual trust is essential for this historic
agreement to succeed.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start
by thanking Under-Secretary-General Feltman; the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), Ambassador Cardi; and the observer of the
European Union, Ambassador Vale de Almeida, for
their briefings on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
We have noted from the reports before us today
(S/2017/495 and S/2017/537) that the International
Atomic Energy Agency continued verification and
monitoring of the implementation of the nuclear-

17-1885415/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

29/06/2017

related commitments. The continued implementation
by the Islamic Republic of Iran of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), as well as the fact that the SecretaryGeneral and his predecessor have not received any
reports on the supply, transfer or exports of nuclear
and dual-use items, materials, equipment, goods and
technology to Iran, is encouraging.

We therefore join the call by the Secretary-General
in his report on the Islamic Republic of Iran to avoid
ballistic-missile launches, as they have the potential to
increase tensions. We note with concern the findings in
the report of the Secretary-General in connection with
the arms shipment from the Islamic Republic of Iran
bound for Somalia and subsequently seized by France,
because such actions entail regional consequences.

We have noted that five out of the 10 additional
proposal submitted to the procurement channel were
approved, which indicates that the procurement channel
continued to work very well. In that regard, we welcome
reports on the growing confidence by Member States
and the procurement channel. We also welcomed the
smooth cooperation between the Security Council and
the Joint Commission as indicated in third six-month
report of the Facilitator on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). The planned
outreach activities concerning the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) by the Facilitator during the
second part of his mandate, as well as the continued
engagement by the Procurement Working Group, is
commendable. Such activities contribute to fostering
awareness, as well as the enhanced participation of
Member States in the activities set forth in paragraph 2
of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).

Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Bolivian presidency
for taking the initiative to convene this meeting
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
My thanks also go to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs; Mr. João Vale
de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador Cardi,
Permanent Representative of Italy and Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for their
respective briefings.

As we have stated in our previous meetings on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), the JCPOA
participating countries, including the Islamic Republic
of Iran, deserve to be commended for demonstrating
strong commitment under the Plan of Action.
Nevertheless, we also recognize that challenges and
difficulties, including the ones included in the report,
may be encountered in the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). It is therefore important that the JCPOA
participants continue to address those challenges and
contribute to the full implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) so as to bring the issue to
a satisfactory conclusion. In that regard, we join the
Secretary-General in welcoming the commitment
by the JCPOA participants to its full and effective
implementation in April.
With regard to the launching of ballistic missiles,
we reiterate our previous position that such launches
will impact the implementation of the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). We concur with the Facilitator
that all parties need to continue to maintain an attitude
conducive to building trust and continue to implement
the terms of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
16/20

In having adopted the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action through the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015)
on 20 July 2015, the Security Council sealed the nuclear
agreement with Iran, which was the culmination of
12 Years of historic diplomatic efforts on the part of
the United States of America, the Russian Federation,
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, the People’s
Republic of China, the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
The third report (S/2017/515) of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), which we are considering today and has been
submitted pursuant to the provisions of annex B of the
resolution, comprehensively sets forth the terms linked
to the nuclear issue, ballistic missiles, travel bans and
assets freezes, as well as those relating to fostering the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Concerning the provisions related to the nuclear
issue, the report clearly states that the Islamic
Republic of Iran continues to respect its commitments,
as underscored in the most recent reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency on its verification
and monitoring activities in that country, as well as Iran’s
follow-up of the implementation of its commitments
linked to the nuclear issue within the framework of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. Moreover, we
note with satisfaction that Iran will continue to permit
the International Atomic Energy Agency the use of
online enrichment measurement and electronic seals,
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

which communicate their status within nuclear sites to
Agency inspectors and facilitate automated collection
of Agency measurement recordings registered by
installed measurement devices.
With regard to the procurement channel, we
welcome the cooperation between the Security Council
and the Joint Commission, which was established
within the framework of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, as has been exemplified by the various forms
of notification in connection with provisions, sales or
transfers concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The interface thereby set up between the members
of the Security Council and the Joint Commission of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is functioning well,
thus ensuring visibility, inclusivity and transparency.
Furthermore, efforts by the Secretariat and the
Facilitator within the framework of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), in particular concerning
practical information provided through the procurement
channel, deserve our full support and cooperation.
Accordingly, thanks to a wealth of information and
outreach, Member States have access to the information
necessary not only to properly fulfil their commitments,
but also to ensure follow-up on violations of resolution
2231 (2015), the procurement channel, confidentiality
and notifications, as well as issues of transparency and
the dissemination of information.
The launch of a ballistic missile by Iran on
27 January was the subject of a number of Security
Council meetings, within the “2231 format”, without
our having been able reach an agreement as to whether
that action constituted a violation of the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015). Nevertheless, the Senegalese
delegation calls on the various parties to show the
necessary restraint so as to diffuse tensions in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to note that the
Senegalese delegation believes that the biannual
report on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
is overall positive and would like to encourage the
Facilitator, as well as all stakeholders concerned by Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and the States Members
of the United Nations, to persevere in that direction.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Jeffrey
Feltman and João Vale de Almeida for sharing their
analyses with the Security Council today.

S/PV.7990

I am glad that my last open meeting in the Council
is focusing on one of the most important diplomatic
achievements in recent memory.
As the third report (S/2017/515) of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) shows, at its core, this is a
diplomatic achievement that endures. Earlier this
month, the International Atomic Energy Agency
confirmed Iran’s continued full compliance with its
nuclear-related commitments. Iran’s total stockpile of
uranium remains within agreed limits, and Iran has
continued to permit and facilitate monitoring of its
nuclear sites.
I reiterate in this Chamber today the United
Kingdom’s commitment to the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) and our support for its full and
equitable implementation.
To ensure the deal’s continued success, all parties
must fully uphold their commitments and improve
mutual trust and cooperation across a full range of
issues. Sadly, the latest report of the Secretary-General
highlights some less than positive issues, which must
be addressed in relation to the provisions of annex B as
set out in resolution 2231 (2015).
The first of those relates to the 29 January launch by
Iran of a Khorramshahr medium-range ballistic missile.
Since we have already had several Council meetings
on this important issue and further consideration in the
“2231 format” of the Council, I will not dwell on it,
but just for the sake of clarity I want to reiterate our
position that this launch was inconsistent with the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). We reiterate, too,
the Secretary-General’s call on Iran to refrain from any
future launches that contribute to regional instability.
We are also concerned by the continued reported
violations of restrictions prohibiting conventional
arms transfers, as set out in the Secretary-General’s
latest report (S/2017/515), including new evidence of
an attempted arms shipment from Iran to Somalia.
Furthermore, the widespread reports of multiple
violations of travel-ban provisions, including new
infringements by Major General Qasem Soleimani, are
particularly worrying given the regional sensitivities.
So putting all these issues together, it is clear that these
activities are having a detrimental impact on regional
security. Yes, we agree with Iran that the biggest threat
to the region is a shared threat to us all. We all need

17-1885417/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

to combat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
defeat terrorism.
Yes, we want the international community to work
with Iran, to encourage it to play a more transparent
and constructive role in regional affairs. But we cannot
turn a blind eye to activities undertaken by Iran that
violate Security Council resolutions and sponsor proxy
forces in regional conflicts. This further complicates
efforts to reach peaceful settlements and undermines
Iran’s future prosperity and security.
Finally, it is important that we remember the
inherent reciprocity of the JCPOA, so we encourage all
Member States and parties to the agreement to uphold
their commitments, including ensuring that the Iranian
people gain further tangible benefits from sanctions
relief. We are encouraged by the progress being made
to promote trade and investment opportunities in Iran,
and we hope that the next six months will build on
these successes.
Full implementation of the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) by all parties is the only way to ensure the
continued success of this important deal.
As this is my last meeting in the open Chamber,
I also wanted to say a very brief word of thanks to
the interpreters for making me comprehensible in six
languages. It is not easy; my aunt used to do it. Secondly,
I thank all Council members for the cooperation that
they have shown me and for the work that they do in
what is a massively important institution that is very,
very important for the most vulnerable people on
this planet.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish the
representative of the United Kingdom all the best
in future.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): It is hard to be the next speaker
at this emotional moment.
Italy believes that the international community
should continue to take every action to ensure that the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) remains
a positive element in the global effort against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. At the
same time, we believe in the importance of the full and
thorough implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Good-faith implementation of both the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015) will benefit regional security.
18/20

29/06/2017

In this perspective, we appreciate the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/515) for both its reference to
the importance of the JCPOA and its compliance with
the relevant provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). We
agree with the assessment by the Secretary-General that
the JCPOA is an achievement of multilateral diplomacy
from which all participants should benefit. We also
share his view that the JCPOA provides an example of
the benefits of diplomacy leading to the reduction of
tension among States. I wish to reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for all Member States and other relevant
organizations to support the implementation of
this agreement.
The robust and comprehensive structure and
the solid verification mechanism of the JCPOA are
crucial to upholding mutual trust and the credibility
of the Plan. Therefore Italy will continue to support
the International Atomic Energy Agency in its work
relating to the JCPOA.
Italy commends the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy for her leadership in coordinating the Joint
Commission established by the JCPOA. We encourage
all stakeholders to continue to promptly address
and resolve any possible issues through dialogue by
exploring the relevant mechanism set up by the JCPOA.
The Security Council also plays a key role within its
competencies and responsibility, and my country will
continue to do its part, also in its capacity as Security
Council Facilitator, to foster the smooth implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Bolivia wishes at the outset to thank Mr. Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
Affairs;
Ambassador João Vale de Almeida, Head of the
European Union delegation to the United Nations;
and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi and his team, as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
Bolivia shares in the satisfaction expressed by
the Secretary-General in his third report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515)
at the efforts and commitments of the States involved in
the implementation of this historic agreement.
17-18854

29/06/2017

Non-proliferation

Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to the diplomatic
triumph represented by the adoption of the resolution,
which endorsed the Joint Competitive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) and highlighted the compulsory nature of
its implementation by the parties as well as their
commitments. We believe that the progress made
in this area represents an important milestone in
joint diplomatic actions in the quest for horizontal,
transparent dialogue in good faith and with reciprocity.
The International Atomic Energy Agency, on
15 January, verified that the Islamic Republic of Iran
had removed all excess centrifuges and infrastructure
from the Fordow Fuel Enrichment Plant and their
transfer to storage at the Natanz Fuel Enrichment Plant
under continuous Agency monitoring, in compliance
with the agreed timeline. My delegation sees this as a
clear sign of the commitment of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the fulfilment of the commitments made under
the JCPOA.
We also wish to highlight the efforts of the
procurement channel, in accordance with the JCPOA,
which processes the transfer by States of nuclear or
dual-use goods, technologies and/or related services
to the Islamic Republic of Iran. These activities, along
with periodic reporting, strengthen transparency as
regards the proper implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the activities set out in its annex B.
As on a previous occasion, my delegation expresses
its concern at the fact that the report contains no
reference to annex A. We believe that both annexes,
A and B, are integral and complementary parts that
are required for the comprehensive implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as a pacifist
State, reaffirms its commitments in the framework
of respect for the principles of non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States. In this particular case, I wish to
stress that politicization, provocative rhetoric and zerosum logic are completely contrary to and incompatible
with diplomatic means and purposes, multilateralism
and what has been agreed upon on the issue that brings
us together this afternoon.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Germany.

S/PV.7990

Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany thanks
Ambassador Peter Wilson for years of excellent
cooperation and wishes him Godspeed in his new
functions on the continent of Europe. Germany would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and UnderSecretary-General Feltman for the third report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2017/515).
Allow me to make three brief points.
First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015) is an
outstanding success of diplomacy in an extremely
volatile region. It is a well-thought-out agreement
that builds on and strengthens the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
One and a half years into JCPOA implementation,
there is no doubt the deal as such is working. All
participants are keeping their commitments and the
deal has clearly promoted security and stability in the
region. But all parties to the agreement must continue
adhering to the JCPOA for the full duration, if the deal
is to fulfil its long-term objectives. What matters most
is that all participants continue to strictly implement
the deal in all its aspects.
Secondly, to date the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has verified, in six reports, that Iran
is abiding by its nuclear-related commitment. Going
ahead, verification and monitoring by the IAEA will
remain essential to re-establishing trust and confidence
and to reassure the world that Iran’s nuclear programme
serves exclusively peaceful purposes. The easing of
sanctions resulted in economic consolidation and
growth in Iran’s gross domestic product. The full and
comprehensive implementation of the JCPOA provides
a basis for this trend to continue. Germany remains
committed to the goal of fully re-establishing economic
ties with Iran to the benefit of all parties concerned.
Thirdly, equally important for the building of
mutual trust and confidence is the full implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) itself. Germany remains
particularly concerned by Iran’s missile programme.
While the ballistic missile test conducted by Iran in
January did not violate the JCPOA, we regard such tests
as inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015). We call
upon Iran to refrain from any activities that exacerbate
tensions and deepen mistrust. We urge Iran to play
a constructive role in the region and to contribute to
lasting political solutions.

17-1885419/20

S/PV.7990

Non-proliferation

In conclusion, the Vienna agreement and resolution
2231 (2015) are a victory for the principles of the United
Nations. The JCPOA negotiations showed the power
of persistent multilateral diplomacy in addressing

20/20

29/06/2017

major international challenges. Germany is proud
of its involvement in the JCPOA and remains firmly
committed to its continued and full implementation.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

17-18854
