UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1900‘:

MEETING:

.’

26 MARCH

-.

1976

JJN/sA
cxJEL-FON

NEW YORK

‘CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1900)

. .. ... .. .. ... . ... .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. ..

1

. .. .. ... .. .. . ... ... .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. ... .. .. .

1

Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1900

:,,

.

-,

i..

I’
..a

( ;,
,.i .

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters ‘com;;,‘t . _ -bined .%ith tigui$. i Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a Uni,ted
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1900th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 26 March 1976, at 5 p.m.
I therefore request you to grant him the necessary
facilities for the performance of his mission and to
accept the expression of my highest regard.*’

President: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panamg, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

2. May I draw the attention of Council members
to the provisions of Article 32 of the Charter, which
states that:
any state which is not a Member of the United
Nations, if it is a party to a dispute under consideration by the Security Council, shall be invited to participate, without vote, in the ‘discussion relating
to the dispute. The Security Council shall lay down
such conditions as it deems just for the participation of a state which is not a Member of the
United Nations.”
“

. . .

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1900)

Adoption of the agenda.
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African
Group of States at the United Nations, concerning
the act of aggression committed by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12007).
The meeting

3. In view of the nature of the matter which is on
the agenda, and in view of the contents of the letter
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola,
I propose to invite the representative of Angola to
participate in the Council’s debate.

was called to order at 6.05 p.m.
Adoption

It was so decided.

of the agenda

4. Mr. SCRANTON (United States of America):
I wish to state for the record that my Government has
agreed to the participation in this debate of representatives of the Popular Movement for the Liberation
of Angola on the customary understanding that such
agreement in no way constitutes an act of recognition.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act
of aggression committed by South Africa against the
people’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12007)

At the invitation
of Ihe President, Mr. Luvualu,
representative
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the People’s Republic of Angola, took a place at the
Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
I wish to inform Council members that the SecretaryGeneral has received a letter from the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of Angola,
dated 24 March, which reads as follows:

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French):
I should also like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the Permanent Representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, Guinea, Kenya, Madgascar, Nigeria,
Sierra Leone, Somalia and Zambia in which they
request to be invited, in accordance with rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote. If there are no
objections, and with the consent of the Council,
I propose to invite those representatives, in accordance
with the usual practice of the Council and the relevant
provisions of the Charter, to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

“I have the honour to inform you that Pascal
Luvualu, member of the Central Committee of the
MFLA [Popular Movement for the Liberation of
Angola] and Ambassador-at-Large of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of the People’s RepubIic of
Angola, is the envoy of my Government and has
been instructed to take part in the discussions on
Angola to take place in the Security Council. May
1

6. There being no objection, I invite these representatives to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that they will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when it is their turn to speak.

14. While it was. still under the so-called govern-,
ment of transition, our country was the victim of the
most unjustified invasion. And even Portugal, which’
at that time was still claiming for itself the exercise of
sovereignty
in Angola, remained
strangely silent
about what was happening in Anglia,’ as did a good
portion of world pu,biic opinion.,
r
‘_
.

At the invitation
of. the President,
Mr. Ala&n
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mrs. Jeanne
Martin Cisse’ (Guinea), Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Rabetafika’
(Madagascar),
Mr.
Harriman
(Nigeria),
-Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone), Mr. Hussen (Somalia) and
Mr. Kamana (Zambia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

15. Imperialism,
having con&led
that it iwas not
enough to create and to arm puppet groups among
their lackeys, ,sent into our county’ not .oniy mircenaries of diverse nationalities,
but also the reguIar
South Af&an army. It is fitting here to stre$s that that
invasion took place? at the exact moment ,when the
puppet armies had been all but defeated and the MPLA,
the vanguard of the,Angoian people, alrkady cqntroiied
most of the country. The purpose was -then to offset
the failures of the ,intemal agents of imperialism,
$0
cut off the vanguard of the Afigoian pedple $nd to
prevent the declaration
of independence
scheduled
for 11 November 1975.
. ; ~ i .. 1. ‘:“..; .,

7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to draw the C&ncii’s
attention to the
following documents: S/12019 and Add. 1, S/i2023 and
S/12024.

8. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

of Angola,

16. We shall not ieLe1 any accusations’at
indi&ua~
countries nor endeairour to expose the various tiotives
which underlay that invasidn, but .we +shail’d&mtirid
that South African. forces withdraw immediateig ‘from
our country. We are demanding that because ai the
present time not only is our sovereignty being violated
‘on our southern boundary, but ,aiso there are, viol&
tions of principles
universally
recogiiized
by the
international
community.
.’

9. Mr. LUVUALU
(Angola) (interpretation
from
French): My delegation appreciates ihe decision of
the Security Council to allow us to address it on a
subject of great and urgent importance for Angola. We,
are particularly
pleased that on this occasion the
Council’s debate is taking place under your guidance,
Mr. President.
10. I wish to transmit to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
an expression of our gratitude
for the sustained interest that he has shown in Angola
and for his tireless efforts in the quest for world peace.

17. The People’s Republic of Angola is an indepen;
dent and sovereign country. The main features of our
foreign policy which should be made clear her& may be
found in the declaration of independence’and
in the
constitutional
law. The People’s Republic of Angola
respects the Charter of the United Nations and the
Charter of the Organization of African Uriity, and will
establish relations of friendship and co-operation with
ail States on the basis of the ‘principles of inutual
respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity,
of
equaiitjr, non-interference
in the internal affairs of all
countries and of mutual benefit. The People’s Republic
of Angola belongs to no international
miiita?y bldd
nor does it allow foreign military -bases td- be ,e:itapiished on its national t~rritoiy;, ’
I, : :. ,: ‘._ L,,
(~ _
18. Because we dkfend tl&e ‘pri‘ndipies,’ ‘&i’ have
been struck by the fact that cert,ain ‘ciicies in i&hationai politics have b&en concerned abqut Soviet and
Cuban support for our country. It is regrettable,&&
when the South African invasion. had apparently
succeeded, those same voices remained siierit, and
it was only later, after 11 November,
with- the independence of Angola, that we tier& accused. of using
the assistance of friendly countiies to ,drive out the
invader. In reality, we exercise our sove.r&gnty %$.
asking for assistance from those’ who -since. tlie
beginning have had a better under$tanding
of %ur
struggle. We must say that it ii iidicuious
td .speak
in terms of Soviet and Cuban interference in Angola,

11. On behalf of the Angoian people, the Central
Committee of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola and the Government
of the People’s
Republic of Angola, I greet the members of the Security
Council, and in so doing, I recall the time when our
country was still under colonial
domination
and
remember, the favorabie disposition
of the Council
in support and defence of the heroic struggle of the
Angoian people.
12. I wish also here and now to thank the African
countries for taking the initiative in calling this meeting
of the Council, in conformity with the recommendation expressed by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization
of African Unity (OAU) at its last
meeting.
13. In its decoionization
and indeed in its independence Angola has gone through and is still experiencing
a difficult period. After the first war of national iiberation, which lasted for about 15 years, when the
Angoian people were counting on achieving independence in a climate of peace, a plot was hatched
behind the scenes by the imperialists
the purpose of
which was to create in our country a neo-colonial
situation.

:

-2

.-,

.

,

‘;.:,‘,
.
,f ,’ ::
.,.
._ I,_...
-, - _ .,
: ,’

“,

..\
..I’
,:

because we know ‘that that assistance is not part of
any ‘expansionist policy, nor is it a violation of our
sovereignty,.
Such allegations
are ridiculous
also
because ‘we -know: that elsewhere in the word the
very countries that speak against us practise expansionism and neo-colonialism
and occupy certain
territories. And the very country that has invaded us
us&Namibia,
which it illegally occupies. Where is
the., consistency
of ’ those ’ who; ‘while proclaiming
peace, :support the oppression of -peoples by maintaining a state pf war7
.
i,
‘*
39. :We are an independent and sovereign country.
We have a right to appeal to any. country to help us
when we believe it, to be necessary. We should like
to, make it abundantly clear here that any concern of
this kind about our country is ‘unquestionably
an
unjustified
interference in the internal affairs of the
People’s Republic of Angola. We vigorously reject
that interfeience, just as our people’ have vigorously
rejected the enemies of our countryin their courageous
struggle, for freedom.
,,
I .’
20. In this connexion we cannot but thank those who
have ‘helped us in our tight against imperialism,
in
particular the African countries, the socialist countries; and other progressive forces. throughout
the
world.
,
21. Fortunately,
the Security Council is meeting
during a period when matters in southern Africa are
growing clearer tind coming to a head. After the
undeniable victory of the Angolan people over the
South African army, we now witness violations of the
same kind being perpetrated by the racist regime of
Rhodesia against the People’s Republic of Mozambique. :For that reason, the Council must take a fnm,
clear stand on the subject to ensure that such actions
are .not repeated, as they would endanger peace and
security in the southern part of the African continent
with all the consequences that could follow.
22.. , It is not the situation in .Angola which gives rise
to concern regarding peace; it is the situation in
Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe. Consequently
the Angolan people stand together with the peoples
of those countries in their struggle, and we are convinced that the hour of freedom is at hand.
23,. As far as we are concerned, if South Africa had
obeyed the recommendations
of the United Nations
and.,the Organization. of African Unity, the Namibian
question .would. be settled and nothing out of the
ordinary
would have occurred on our southern
boundary.
.’
24. During’ its invasion, South Africa used sophisticated matkriel the. origin of which is well known.
We intend to give examples to remove any ambiguity.
We might mention the f&lowing: 72 AML-90 tanks,
18 AML60 tanks;,140 mm guns, 88 and 105 mm shells,
106‘and 107 mm mortars, 106 and 90 mm guns, AD
!‘ENTAC”
installations,
and so on.

25. During those incursions, South African forces
suffered heavy losses, and many prisoners fell into the
hands of FAPLA [Popular Armed Forces for the
Liberation
of Angola]. ’ Those prisoners have been I
presented to the press on a number of occasions.
They are in Angola, and they have not been mistreated,
because the People’s Republic of Angola respects
international
conventions on the subject.
26. The South African invasion caused great loss to
the Angolan people and to the People’s Republic of
Angola. Aside from the barbaric massacres they
committed
among the civilian
population,
South
Africans carried off with them goods essential to our
economy, namely, a considerable part of our fleet,
small aircraft, trucks, thousands of prime quality
cattle, household and hotel furniture,
and money
from banks. They destroyed and damaged roads,
bridges,
airports,
industrial
units
and radiobroadcasting stations. They also took thousands of
individuals with them to the Namibian border.
27. Yet we have been accused of wanting to annex
Namibia, of’wanting to deprive the people of Namibia of water and electricity.
That isrtntirely
false.
Angola is a large country; it is suflicient for the
Angolan people and for the foreigners who wish to
live there. It is hardly our intention to .deprive the
people of Namibia of the electricity from the Cunene
or of the water they need. We stress that we have no
common boundary with South Africa but we have with
the people of Namibia, and when that people gains its
independence, the People’s Republic of Angola may
in due course discuss with it, on a mutually acceptable basis, the problem of the use of electricity and
water from the Cunene. That is our approach to the
problem now. We are not expansionist or selfish.
28. We therefore expect the international community,
the United Nations and its specialized agencies to
provide us with the necessary aid and assistance so
that our country may get down to the task of national
reconstruction.
29. Recent statements by the authorities in Pretoria
notwithstanding-they
have said that they will abandon
or have abandoned the Cunene-we
repeat here our
position, namely, that we demand the unconditional
withdrawal of the forces of the South African army,
and we express the hope that the Security Council
will take a decision so that that withdrawal may be
verified immediately.
30. We also hope that the Council will take action
to see to it that South Africa guarantees respect for
the independence
and territorial
integrity
of the
People’s Republic of Angola, that it stops using the
Territory of Namibia as a base for acts of aggression
against the People’s Republic of Angola and that it
returns material property to the People’s Republic
of Angola and compensates Angola for damages to its
economy and people.

31. Finally, we express the hope that we shall be
admitted to membership of the United Nations as soon
as possible so that we may make a contribution to the
consolidation of peace in the world by joining all those
progressive forces that are already part of the United
Nations.

causing statements to be made which one would have
liked to avoid.
37. On behalf of the African Group, I should like to
take this opportunity at the outset to appeal to all
friends of Africa to respect the People’s Republic of
Angola and the specific case and the issues that the
delegation of Angola has raised by restricting their
contribution to the debate to the specific questions
before the Council..

32. Ours is a sovereign, independent country. The
purpose of this meeting is to discuss South African
aggression, and it is our earnest hope that the entire
discussion will focus on that problem rather than on
anything unrelated to the interests of the Angolan
people.

38. I make this request now, because last week some
delegations, which I need not name, promised publicly
in the Council that they would take the opportunity
provided by this debate to raise questions which we
have reason to believe, judging by the experience of
the last few weeks, will have only remote relevance
to this debate and, if our appeal is not heeded, may
easily damage the cause which should be served by
this debate.
:

33. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The representative of Kenya has requested to be
allowed to take part in the debate in his capacity
as current Chairman of the African Group. I now
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
34. Mr. MAINA (Kenya): Mr. President, allow me to
thank you and the members of the Council for inviting
me to take part in the discussion of the question of
South Africa’s aggression in Angola. Before I proceed
any further I should like also to welcome among us the
Permanent Representative of the United States, this
being the first time I have spoken since he assumed
his duties. I am quite sure he will make a contribution
in the work of the Council and of the United Nations
as a whole.

39. The case of aggression by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola is well known and
has been the subject of numerous communications
which have been brought to the attention of this
Council. The People’s Republic of Angola raised the
question with the Organization of African Unity some
time ago. The OAU Council of Ministers discussed
the question in February and adopted a resolution
which, inter aliu, requested the African Group, which
I represent here now, to call for an emergency meeting
of the Security Council to consider the act of aggression committed by South Africa against the People’s
Republic of Angola. It is on the basis of that request.
that I wrote to you, Mr. President, to call for this
meeting.

35. Mr. President, when I wrote to you in my capacity
as Chairman of the African Group for the month of
March, requesting you to convene this meeting, it
was our intention that the debate should take place
as soon as possible. Various factors have combined
to delay this meeting, the most important of which
was that we were awaiting the arrival of the delegation of the People’s Republic of Angola. I should
like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the African
Group, to welcome here the delegation from Angola.
Mr. Luvualu arrived only yesterday, and I know how
busy he has been since his arrival preparing for this
meeting. The statement he made has clarified many
important questions that have been exercising our
minds for some time now. His statement has very ably
focused our attention on the issue before the Council,
and it is my belief that this will make our discussion
of the problem much easier. I congratulate him on the
able manner in which he has presented the case of the
People’s Republic of Angola against the Republic of
South Africa, which has perpetrated an unprovoked
aggression against Angola.

40.. In the meantime we have all seen the letter from
the representative of South Africa contained in
document S/12019, in which it is claimed by the highest
authorities in South Africa that in some way South
Africa had somejustification for its aggression. In order
to put these matters straight, to have the facts on
record and to show the type of authority we are dealing
with. I intend to read the statement made by the
Prime Minister of South Africa contained in annex I of
that document. It reads as follows:
“It will be recalled that on 9 August 1975 while
the Portuguese were still legally responsible for
and were in fact the governing power in Angola,
South Africa was, because of the complete breakdown of law and order, forced to occupy the
Calueque Dam site. We did this solely for the purpose of protecting the lives of the workers and of
safeguarding the installations.

36. Before I go any further, I should like to request
the Council through you, Mr. President, to recall the
number of occasions when, in the course of discussion
on problems unrelated to Angola, representatives in
this Council have taken the opportunity to raise the
question of Angola, thereby raising a very serious
issue in a completely wrong context and at times

“Immediately thereafter, the South ‘African
Government informed the Portuguese Government
of the steps taken and urged them to take over this.
task. The Portuguese Government could not do so
at the time and requested South Africa to continue
4

that his countrv’s troons nenetrated Angolan territory on 9 August 1975; with neither theimowledge
nor the advance authorization of the Portuguese
Government, which only became aware of that
aciton after it had already taken place.

its protective measures and to remaln.in situ until
such time as they could assume this- responsibility.
“The South African Government has on a number
of occasions stated its position clearly, namely that
it was there only for the protection of the workers
and the works and would withdraw from the area
as soon as assurances were received that no harm
would come to the workers, that the work would
continue and that the flow of water to Owambo
wouidbe assured. It will be recalled that the Minister
of Defence, . .. . the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
as well as myself, clearly stated South Africa’s
position. As recently as Sunday, 14 March, I outlined our position succinctly in an interview with
The,Sunday Telegraph of London. I stated that:

“As a matter of fact, on 12 August, the Ambassador of Portugal in Pretoria was called to the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
South Africa and informed that a South African
military force had been sent to Calueque. Later on
that occasion, the Portuguese Ambassador protested against that territorial violation.
“On 18 August, these protests were repeated in
Lisbon to the South African Ambassador, who had
been called for that purpose to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs. They were again reiterated in a note addressed to him on.3 September.

‘they asked us to hang on’until such time as
they could do it. They never came. So it is solely
for that reason and not for any ulterior motives
that we are still there.
.I
‘We will withdraw our troop&mediately
steps
are taken to safeguard lives ,and property; the
moment that is done we will get out.’

“Consequently, the affirmation that the Portuguese Government had asked South Africa to remain
in the Calueque area and to continue to assume the
safety of work in progress at the dam, is completely
without foundation.
“My Government gave no advance authorization
to the Goveriiment of South Africa to undertake
such action and did not fail to protest, once it
became aware of it.”

“We have during the past few days received,
through a third party, assurances which in general
terms appear to be acceptable to us. We are checking
whether we are interpreting these assurances
correctly, and if this is so, South Africa will withdraw its troops also from the Calueque area not
later than 27 March.”

42. By South Africa’s own admission it is guilty of
aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola,
and the attempt to justify that aggression has been
frustrated by the authoritative response of the representative of Portugal. A number of issues arise from
this situation. First, South Africa was guilty of aggression against the Portuguese oppressed colony of Angola
at the time when the Portuguese Government was
making arrangements for the transfer of power to
Angola. That must have contributed a great deal to the
troubles of the Republic of Angola, not to mention
those of the Portuguese authorities. That aggression
has continued for all this time without any justification.
We cannot do any less than to ask the Council to
condemn that aggression.

41. No better comment can be made on this false
claim than to read the response of the representative
of Portugal contained in document S/12023, from which
I quote:
1
“Annex I of the above-mentioned letter contains
a statement made by the Prime Minister of the
Republic of South Africa, Mr. B. J. Vorster, on
21 March, regarding the question of withdrawal of
South African troops from the area of the Calueque
dam, in Angola.

43. We have to remember that South Africa has no
common border with the People’s Republic of Angola.
South Africa moved many hundreds of miles from
its borders through Namibia, which it occupies
iliegalIy, before reaching Angolan territory. We have
been saying for a long time that South Africa’s illegal
presence in Namibia constitutes a threat to intemational peace and security. This has been demonstrated
in a shamelessway by South Africa. It has no business
to be in Namibia and, as though that is not bad
enough, has moved beyond to commit acts of aggression and destruction in the People’s Republic of
Angola. We can do no less than to ask the Council
to condemn the racist rigime of South Africa for using
Namibia for aggressive purposes against the People’s
Republic of Angola.

“In a portion of this statement, the Prime Minister
of South Africa affirms that his country’s troops
occupied the Calueque dam site as of August 1975,
with the alleged purpose ‘of protecting the lives of
the workers and of safeguarding the installations’,
having immediately informed the Portuguese
Government of that fact and urging them to take
over that task. Mr. Voerster adds. that ‘the Portuguese Government could not do so at the time and
requested South Africa to continue its protective
measures and to remain in situ until such time as
they could assume this responsibility’.
“It must not fail to be noted that, contrary to
what was stated by the Defence Minister of South
Africa, in November 1975, Mr. Vorster now admits
5

*

I

,‘.

‘/
:

i

:

_1

44. A long list of crimes committed by the Republic
of South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola has been given by the representative of Angola.
The destruction of human life, including the lives of
men, women and children not involved in war, cannot
be tolerated by the United Nations. The destruction
of property, as described by the representative of
Angola, is’also incompatible with the false grounds
given by South Africa for its aggression in the first
place. We urge this Council to demand that South
Africa compensate the People’s Republic of Angola
for all the destruction it has committed in Angola.
45. Regarding the assurances which South Africa
claims to need and to have obtained that the People’s
Republic of Angola will safeguard lives and property
in Angola, I am bound to comment that, were we not
engaged in discussing a serious .matter of aggression,
I would be tempted to laugh. Angola is a large territory with many people and a lot of resources and
property. The South African Government would
have the world believe that whatever claims it may
have somewhere in Angola are either more important
or valuable than everybody and. everything else in
Angola and that the Government of Angola, which has
the responsibility of safeguarding the lives and property
of millions of people, should give an assurance that it
will not destroy what is, truly, Angola’s property.
These claims should be treated with the contempt they
deserve.
46. As I stated earlier, it is a well-known-fact that
South Africzi has no .common’border with .Angola;‘and
Angola would have no grounds for giving an assurance
about boundaries to a Government that dominates
Namibia illegally. If the United Nations ‘wishes to
obtain some assurance ,regarding Namibian. borders
with Angola, the United Nations Council for Namibia
would be the right authority. It would be an absurd
situation were this Council to countenance a .situation in which South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia is given official notice through discussions
in the Council. The Council has a straightforward
duty to call once more upon South Africa to vacate
Namibia as soon as possible.
47. Although this debate should be confined to the
question of South Africa’s aggression in Angola, as
I said before, the Council has a duty to restate clearly
its position on the question of South Africa’s use of
Namibia’s territory as a base for committing aggression against Angola.
48. Looking at the whole situation, we see that the
issues before the Council are clear and straightforward,
and it is our earnest hope that the Council will see
them as such and make its position clear. To those who
have been engaged in debating outside this chamber
issues that have no relevance to the continent ‘of
Africa, we say that if you want to safeguard peace
and security in that part of the world you should change
the soiled glassesthrough which you look at the African

c

continent& Wear cledn’ones;.adjust your ,position so
that you can seethe continentthe way the’African sees
it. If you do not do this, you’are ‘,bound to continue
to base your assessment of, the$roblems facing the
African people on wrong premises,‘~and wrong decisions and actions are bound to follow,‘, . ;
:
.j. a, I’.
49. To’ us in Africa the issues are clear. ..We have
slated them many times’ and we have no~grounds for
repeating them here. Gince the,question of aggression
by South -Africa, against the People’s Republic -of
Angola is simple at&clear,, we ,appeal d the .:Couscil
to pronounce its ,position by .adopting a I suitable
resolution when the time comes; 1 I. ” :1’,,,i ’ :’ ;
..
:
50. The PRESII&
(interprerution from tire&h):
Before calling on the next .speake.r, I should like to
inform the Council *that I have just received a .letter
from the representative lof Yugoslavia in, which’ he
requests to be invited, pursuant,to Article ,31 of the
Charter, to participate without (he right to vote in the
discussion. If I hear;nd objection,1 propose, in adcdrdance with the usual practice of .the Council under
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite
him to participate ‘,without the right to vote in the
debate.
i .:.,: ,;
/
,, ,_.
.
51. There being no objection, ‘I invite the representative of Yugoslavia’to take the place ‘reserved for bim
at the side of the Council chamber on the under- .
standing that he will be invited- to take a place. at the
Council table when,it is -his-turn to. speak. c ‘, a i
ilt ihe invitatitiit
of tht President,
.kir. PerriC
(Yugoslavia) took ,k .-.$lace ht the ,side of ihe Council
(,‘.
chamber.
.’ :.
.I ‘..
:
..,
^

52. Mr. HUANG Hua ‘(Chind) (transla’tion from
Chinese): The Chinese delegation has listened attentively to the statements made by the previ,ous speakers.
53. ‘At ‘present the development of the Angolan situation has caused great concern and drawnclose attention from people ,a11over, the world. .The- Chinese
delegation .would’like to make so,meobservations on
I.
it.
,:.
:. j.‘,
54. The Angolan people, who cariied,on the’struggle
for national liberation, at long last solemnly proclaimed
their independence on- :I 1 November ,1975, This,’ is .a
great victory won by.the broad,masses ofthe,-Angolan
people, who .have persevered in protracted and
courageous struggles against Portuguese ‘colonialists,
p&ticularly. the’ armed struggle which was started. by
various Angolan liberation organiiations’in the 1,960’s
with the co-ordination and support of the’people. of
Africa and the rest of the world who are vigorously
carrying on struggles ‘against imperialism, colonialism
and hegemonism; On this the Chinese Government
has extended its warm congratulations- to the:Angolan
people and all the Angolan lrberation organ$ations.
55. However, when the victory of the national l&eration struggle in Angola was won, the Soviet social‘.
.,_./. ,._”
I,
6
‘,..
,I,-. . . t .. *’
.: .. .
‘.
.
._

/. (..

and isolated event. It is the continuation of its ceaseimperialists crossed ..the oc&ns; :committed naked
armed intervention and plunged the newly independent
less aggression and. expansion abroad over the last
decade and more. This constitutes a component part
young State of ‘Angola into painful division and civil
war. The South African racist regime, which has always
of its quest for South Atlantic and world hegemony
harboured wild ambitions of aggression and expansion,
in contention with the other super-Power, as well as
also ,openly carried out armed. aggression against an important disposition for realizing its global ofAngola and directly interfered in its internal affairs
fensive strategy. It wormed its way into the Middle
under the pretext of protecting its so-called interests East, invaded and occupied Czechoslovakia, stirred
in Angola. This is of course extremely absurd. It must up .contXcts in the South Asian subcontinent, subbe painted out that the serious situation in Angola
sequently thrust itself into Portugal and now has laid
hands on Angolain southern Africa.’
was created by the fierce conte#ion between the two
hegemonic Powers. The event in,.Angola is a serious
one which has never happened,in the history of the 59. Soviet social-imperialism supported one of the
African national liberation,movement since the Second three Angolan liberation organizations against the
World War. Its seriousness lies not only in the fact
other two, deliberately created division and time and
that., the South’ African racist &?gime attempts to
again undermined the joint agreements
and cease-fire
. organizations,
agreements among the three liberation
obstruct the victorious advance of .the national liberai
tion ‘movement in southern Africa,so, as continuously
and it alone wrecked the transitional government
to.‘maintain its ,reactionary ruie3*what merits further
which was ,a symbol of Angolan national unity. The
attention .is. that to contend with :the other superSoviet Union never extended any real support to the
Power for .worid hegemony;; thhclsuper-Power which
Angolan people during their protracted and courageous
flaunts the flag of: socialism pushes. feverishly its
struggle to free themselves from the Portuguese
colonial policy Jbf expansion and scrambles for
colonial rule, but right after the collapse of the old
strategically important (Iplaces in ‘=southern Africa.
colonial rule and the attainment of independence ‘by
Such a frenzied offensive by Soviet social-imperialism
the Angolan people, the Soviet Union became most
is bound to. bring extremely, serious consequences
generous by sending a great amount of such weapons
as tanks, rockets, armoured cars, fighter bombers of
to Angola, southern Africa and even the whole African
continent.
,.
the latest type etc., with a value of several hundred
.. :,,‘. ” ;
.. L”,. I_
million dollars, dispatching some 1,000 Soviet military
56. The ‘Chinese Government and people strongly
officers and shipping over 10,000 foreign mercenary
condemn the South African authorities for their crimes
troops to stir’up and directly join the civil war there.
of armed ,aggression and intervention-in Angola. We
As a result, 150,000 black brothers in Angola were
firmly support the ,people of Angola and the rest of
killed with the Soviet weapons and many towns and
Africa in opposing the aggression by South Africa in
vilIages were razed to the ground by the Soviet bombs.
Angola and demanding its immediate, and complete
Can a real socialist, country do a thing like this? The
withdrawal -therefrom. This position of the African
towering crimes committed by this super-Power in
people,is entirely just.,Meanwhile, the Chinese GovernAngola constitute ci big exposure, of the policy of
ment and ~people --strongly ‘-condemn Soviet, social-. expansionit pursues, as well as new evidence of the
, imperialism :for its aggression and .interirention in
ambitious new tsars’ feverish bid for world hegemony.
*
Angola ‘and firmly -hold that the Soviet military personnel and its’, ,foreign ,mercenary troops should
60. To cover up their true feature of aggression and
immediately ‘and: completely withdraw from Angola.
expansion the Soviet social-imperialists have boasted
This is also a just demand of just public opinion and
about their’ consistent “sincere and selfless support
the Governments of many countries in the world.
for the national liberation movement”, styled them:
,.
..j
selves “the natural ally” of the national liberation
57.:,. Now, because of the stem condemnation and
movement, and described their intervention, control
resolute, struggles ‘of the Angolan people, the African
and expansion as the fulfilment of “internationalist
peoples and ,the people throughout the world, the
duties”. However, the facts have proved all this to be
South African racist regime ‘was forced to declare the
sheer deception.
complete withdrawal of its aggressor troops in Angola
on 27 March. Whether this can become a reality still
61.’ As we may recall, when the Cambodian people
remains ,-to be seen.’ However, some 1,000 Soviet
carried on arduous struggles to punish the Lon No1
military ‘personnel and over 10,000 foreign mercenary
traitorous ,clique, the Soviet Union had all along
troops supported by the’soviet Union are still langing
refused to recognize the Royal Government of National
on. in :Angola -and. refuse to withdraw. Since Soviet
Union of Cambodia and instead maintained diplomatic
social-imperialism got the upper hand in Angola, it
relations with the Lon No1 traitorous clique.
hai been, hatching new ,schemes of aggression and
_
expansion. The Security Council cannot evade such a
62. To fight ,against the Israeli Zionist aggression
serious
still-less condone it.
”
the Egyptian people have been carrying on prolonged
I’ ’ state
< ;of affairs,
,’
and courageous struggles. But taking advantage of the
58. The-aggresgidn’and intervention by Soviet socialEgyptian people’s aspirations to resist aggression, the
imperialism in Angola is .by no means
an.accidental
Soviet
Union, through providing the so-called military
a:
. ,’
.
’/
7
,.“
.,,:
.’ ,, , ,:,
.:
-,
_ _I
I. ,- ,.I, 2
/

, >,

and economic “aid”, has carried’ out infiltration,
exacted military bases and various privileges and
fostered pro-Soviet forces in Egypt in an attempt to
make Egypt a Soviet dependency. Furthermore, the
Soviet Union withheld the shipment of munitions and
spare parts, ferociously pressed for payment of debts,
sowed discord among Arab countries and even went
so far as to conspire to subvert the Egyptian Govemment and undermine Egypt’s struggle against aggression. President Sadat therefore had to expel the
14,000 Soviet military personnel in 1972 and not long
ago firmly announced the termination of the “Treaty of
friendship and co-operation” with the Soviet Union.
The just action taken by President Sadat to safeguard
the national independence and State sovereignty of
Egypt has won the support and praise of the Egyptian
people, the other Arab peoples and justice-upholding
countries and peoples throughout the world.

certainly do away with super-Power aggression. and
interference, close their ranks, heighten theirvigilance,
distinguish the true from the false and friend from,.foe,
and push the struggle against imperialism, colonialism,
hegemonism, white racism and Zionism ahead to a new
victorious stage.
67. ,The PRESIDENT (interpreration from French):
Before calling on the next speaker I should. Iike to
make the following clarification. First, I wouId like to
read out the.agenda item again; “Complaint by Kenya,
on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed
by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola”. I should like to remind members of the Council of the wish of the representative of Angola that we
limit ourselves strictly to the item on the agenda.
I would recall also the request made.by the representative of Kenya. Having done. that, I would express the
desire that statements by members of the Council
not depart from the specific request of the African
Group of States. I solemnly appeal to all the members
of the Security Council to respect the wish of the
representatives of Angola and the African Group.

63. Have not the above-mentioned examples fully
revealed the true features of the Soviet Union as sham
socialism and real imperialism?
64. The Soviet social-imperialists have repeatedly
declared that they do not seek anything in Angola,
either economic, military or other gain. This is likewise sheer deception. For a long time the Soviet
propaganda machine has openly talked of the “enviable
natural resources in Angola” and Angola’s “extremely
important strategic position”. Their attempt is to seize
naval and air bases in Angola with a view to dominating
the southern Atlantic. They also intend to make
Angola a springboard for expansion in central and
southern Africa, and further undermine the national
liberation movements in all of southern Africa and grab
the region’s strategic resources. If one links their
activities in trying so hard to establish new bridgeheads in the regions of the Suez Canal and the mouth
of the Red Sea with their activities in seeking footholds
in the western Mediterranean, will one not be able to
see clearly the reason why they have been acting
undisguisedly and without counting costs?

68. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today the
Security Council is discussing the complaint by Kenya,
on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed
by South Africa against the People’s Republic of
Angola, I fully agree that we should limit ourselves to
that subject. Everything that I have just heard has been
so stupid that I do not intend to reply. I shall accede
to the. request.of the African countries and-adliere to
the subject for the discussion of which we are meeting.
But I do reserve my right to reply later on to all
this stupidity that we have just heard.
69. Mr. SALIM. (United Republic of Tanzania):
I have very reluctantly asked to speak. I have doneso
in exercise of my full responsibility as representative
of an African State member of the Council, an
African State whose Government and people maintain
the best of relations with the People’s Republic of
China and also with the Soviet Union.

65. What the Soviet social-imperialists have done in
Angola greatly widens one’s horizon and tells people
that the Soviet leading clique, which has honey on its
lips and murder in its heart, is not a natural ally at
all but is a group of vicious new tsars. It also tells
people that if the Soviet social-imperialists are allowed
to do evil in Angola and realize their designs, it is
hard to say that there will not be a second or even a
third Angola. Until the Soviet social-imperialists’
intervention is done away with, there can be no peace
or tranquillity in Angola and in the continent of Africa.

70. In the past-1 have beenhere foralmost six years,
and although that is not too long a time, it is. long
enough to know this-there have, been a good number
of exchanges in the Orgamzation between the deiegation of China and the delegation of the Soviet Union.
I have always, advisedly and I think wisely, remained
quiet. I-intend to do so in the future. For it would be
the height of naivete on my part to intervene in such
cases; those who indulge in these exchanges have their
‘own reasons for doing so.

66. Soviet social-imperialism has wild ambitions but
lacks strength, and its difficulties abound. Wherever
it commits aggression and expansion, it puts a new
noose around its neck. It can deceive people and run
amuck at a certain time, but it will certainly meet
with ignominious defeat. We are deeply convinced
that the great African people, who have stood up, will
8

71. But it so happens that. today we are discussing
an African problem, a request made by the African
Group at the specific direction, of the Council! of
Ministers of the Grganizationof African Unity. There-...-._

fore, the African members of this Council have a
particular responsibility
to defend Africa’s interests
and to project Africa’s position properly.

or any other support for the liberation movement in
Angola. Clearly, as the representative of Angola has
rightly pointed out, the South Africans have committed
aggression against Angola, and I think that if one takes
the trouble of going through the documents
and
following the chronology of events one would come to
the conclusion that the South Africans committed
aggression and, as rightly pointed out by our colleague
from Angola, the Government
of Angola requested
assistance.
I

72. I had intended to speak only to join in the appeal
made by the President of the Council, either in his
capacity as President or in his capacity as representative of an African State, that the Council confine the
scope of its discussion to the item on the agenda.
I want to assure you, Mr. President, that you have my
fullest understanding and sympathy; I know, from the
limited experience I have had in the Council that it is
not possible to prevent, or even to attempt to prevent,
any member of the Council from saying what he
desires or what he deems fit.

76. Now, one can have his own views on the merits
and demerits of the request made by Angola; one
can even question whether the Government of Angola
had the right to ask for any assistance. This is a
matter on which every Government and every representative has the right to make his own views known.
But I think it would not be fair to. accept the thesis
that the South Africans had any justification,
no
matter how disguised the justification,
for the aggression against Angola. We reject this for a number of
reasons, not merely in the interests of Angola, its
independence and its sovereignty; we who come, as
I do, from that part of the world, do so more for our
own survival. We do not accept, we shall not accept
-and I think we would be ndive to accept that the
South Africans can have any legitimate
or illegitimate-excuse
for intervening massively, as they did
in the case of Angola, simply because in their conception their interests had been threatened by the incursion or by the support of an extracontinental
Power.

73. But I think we have the right also to insist that
the rights of the African States and their conception of
the problem be taken seriously into account when
members of the Council address themselves to a
problem brought up by the African States. More
specifically,
I believe that since it is a privilege of
every member of the Council and, for that matter, of
any Member of the United Nations, to ask for the
consideration
of a given problem, it is only logical
that, when that problem is being considered, members
should address themselves to it. Therefore, in supporting the appeal made by the President of the Council, I should like to point out that if our colleagues
wish to discuss other matters apart from South Africa’s
aggression against Angola, they are, of course, free
and entitled to demand a consideration
of those
matters. But I think, to put it mildly, it would be
unfortunate and indeed sad for us if, when discussing
what to Africa is a very serious problem-the
problem
of South Africa’s aggression against Angola-we
were to hijack the debate from the consideration of the
real problem and divert it to other problems which in
the conception of other members of the Council may
be important.

77. I say this very forcefully, because it is a matter
of record that in the liberation struggle in Africa the
countries which have been foremost in giving support
to the liberation struggle have been the socialist countries-the
Chinese and the Soviets in particular.
These are the countries which have supported and
are supporting the liberation struggle and have provided equipment.
And it is no secret that they are
providing assistance, whether military or otherwise.
We even had occasion in the past to say that we would
welcome it if our American and our British colleagues,
as well as our other Western European colleagues,
if they were in a position to do so, also provided
equipment
and material for the liberation
struggle.
But as things have stood so far, the countries which
have lent support and have given material assistance,
be it in the form of armaments, equipment on logistics,
have been the socialist countries, and I emphasize
principally the Chinese and the Soviets.

74. Therefore, in a nutshell, what I am saying is that
if some of our colleagues in the Council wish to
discuss other aspects, they are entitled to ask for their
specific inscriptions
on the agenda so that it may
consider them. When they do so, of course, the
question of whether such discussion is in violation
of the principle of the rights of nations in relation
to the internal affairs of Members of the Organization
will be judged as the problem arises. But I really appeal
for members to make a deliberate effort, if it is not
possible to refrain completely from making other comments, not to be so swept away by other problems
as to forget the havoc, the damage,, the devastation
which the South Africans have been inflicting on our
brothers in Angola.

78. Now, if one could by any stretch of the imagination accept that the South Africans, because of the
support received by MPLA
from extracontinental
Powers, had an excuse to get into Angola, then I must
submit that we are preparing the grounds for our own
self-destruction,
because, as members of the Council
are aware, one of the by-products of South Africa’s
debacle in Angola has been the enactment of spurious,
monstrous legislation empowering the South African
army to move whenever it feels its interests affected.

75. I also for the fist time wish to take issue with
the statement made by the representative
of China,
only to say that we do not accept and we shall never
accept the thesis that the South African aggression in
Angola was caused by Soviet support, Cuban support,
9

Thus, by the logic of the ‘situation, it is quite conceivable that, if in the interpretation and conception
of the South African racists-and we all know how
twisted South African logic can be-the support given
to the liberation movement in southern Africa is such
that it threatens their interests, they might feel they
have a right to intervene. That is a very serious
proposition. Furthermore, if because of the support
given by the socialist countries, be they Chinese or
Soviet, to African States, or because of the so-called
.anti-communist campaign, of which they are supposed
to be the champions., the South Africans should feel
that they are so threatened as to be entitled to move
their forces up, then we ‘are in a serious situation.
So I repeat: We do not accept that the South African
intervention in Angola was the result of the support
given to the liberation movement in Angola by extracontinental Powers.

concert with the Portuguese forces in Mozambique
against FRELIMO [Front for the Liberufion of
Mozambique].
History teaches us that, long before
the issue of Angola emerged, the South African forces
were introduced into Zimbabwe, fighting against the
freedom fighters there. History, and recent history at
that, teaches us that, long before the issue of ideological or cold-war confrontations was brought to the
fore-1 refer to the current cold-war confrontationsthe South Africans committed naked aggression
against the Republic of Zambia. Therefore, the South
Africans had no justification and were not looking for
justification. They are in a sense an aggressive regime,
and they will continue to be an aggressive regime
unless the international community takes the necessary measures to ensure that they do not proceed on
such a course of action.

79. The. South African aggression in Angola was
premeditated. It is characteristic of the racist regime
in South Africa to survive by committing aggression
against its people from within and by committing
aggression against the African States from without.
History teaches us that, in the case of the southern
African situation, long before the problem of Angola
arose the South African forces were operating in

80. I said that I had to say this, and I do so with full
responsibility and full solemnity. I say it as the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania, a
responsible member of the Council, a loyal member
of the African Group and a Member of the Organization.
The meeting

rose ai 7.35 p.m.

IO
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-4080

I-Aupst

1984-2,200
