S/PRST/2013/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 February 2013
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6917th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 February 2013, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Protection of
civilians in armed conflict”, the President of the Security Council issued the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, and to the continuing and full implementation of
all its previous relevant resolutions including 1265 (1999), 1296 (2000), 1674
(2006), 1738 (2006), 1894 (2009), as well as all of its resolutions on Women,
Peace and Security, Children and Armed Conflict and Peacekeeping, and all
relevant statements of its President.
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security and its commitment and readiness to strive for sustainable peace in all
situations under its consideration.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern that civilians continue
to account for the vast majority of casualties in situations of armed conflict.
“The Security Council recognises that States bear the primary
responsibility to protect civilians as well as respect and ensure the human
rights of all individuals within their territory and subject to their jurisdiction,
as provided for by relevant international law.
“The Security Council reaffirms that parties to armed conflict bear the
primary responsibility to take all feasible steps to ensure the protection of
civilians and, urges parties to armed conflict to meet civilians’ basic needs,
giving particular attention to the specific needs of women and children,
refugees, internally displaced persons, as well as other civilians who may have
specific vulnerabilities, including persons with disabilities and older persons.
“The Security Council reiterates its demand that all parties to armed
conflict comply strictly with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. The Council stresses
the need for parties to take all required measures to avoid civilian casualties
and to respect and protect the civilian population.

13-23108 (E) 120213

*1323108*

S/PRST/2013/2

“The Security Council remains committed to addressing the impact of
armed conflict on civilians and its consequences in post-conflict situations, in
particular on women and children. In this respect, in reaffirming the principles
of international humanitarian law, the Security Council strongly condemns all
violations of international law against civilians, in particular the deliberate
targeting of civilians, indiscriminate or disproportionate attacks, and sexual
and gender based violence, including the use of sexual violence for political
motivations and as a tactic of war. The Council expresses grave concern about
situations in which armed forces and groups persist in committing violations
and abuses against children exposed to and affected by armed conflict and
post-conflict situations in open disregard of applicable international law and
the Council’s resolutions on this matter. The Council demands that all relevant
parties immediately put an end to these violations and abuses, calls upon them
to cooperate with the United Nations, and reaffirms its readiness to adopt
targeted and graduated measures. The Council calls upon States to ensure that
perpetrators of violations and abuses of international law are held fully
accountable.
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong opposition to impunity for
serious violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law and
emphasizes in this context the responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to thoroughly investigate and
prosecute persons responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes against
humanity or other serious violations of international humanitarian law. The
Council recognises international commissions of inquiry and fact-finding
missions as valuable mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law, and in
accordance with their respective mandates to make recommendations to
advance accountability and justice and protection for victims. The Council
considers the possibility, of using the International Fact- Finding Commission
established in accordance with Article 90 of the First Additional Protocol to
the Geneva Conventions.
“The Security Council notes that the fight against impunity and
accountability for the most serious crimes of international concern has been
strengthened through the work on and prosecution of these crimes in the
International Criminal Court, in accordance with the Rome Statute, in ad hoc
and “mixed” tribunals as well as specialized chambers in national tribunals. In
this regard, the Security Council reiterates its previous call on the importance
of State cooperation with these courts and tribunals in accordance with the
states' respective obligations, and expresses its commitment to an effective
follow up of Council decisions in this regard. The Council intends to
forcefully continue to fight impunity and also draws attention to the full range
of justice and reconciliation mechanisms, including truth and reconciliation
commissions, national reparation programmes and institutional and legal
reforms, including guarantees of non-recurrence. The Council reaffirms its
readiness to adopt appropriate measures aimed at those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

2

13-23108

S/PRST/2013/2

“The Security Council recalls in this regard applicable provisions of
international law on the right to reparations for violations of individual rights.
“The Security Council reaffirms the relevant provisions of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome Document regarding the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including paragraphs 138 and 139 thereof regarding the responsibility
to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity.
“The Security Council notes that, consistent with its functions in relation
to international peace and security, it seeks to remain engaged in all stages of
the conflict cycle. The Security Council also notes that it will continue to
explore ways in which to prevent the outbreak of armed conflict and develop
measures to address the root causes of conflicts in order to ensure sustainable
peace. The Council further stresses the importance of peaceful settlement of
disputes, conflict prevention and resolution to prevent their escalation and
their impact on civilians.
“The Security Council notes with concern the current and ongoing
humanitarian impact of armed conflict and regrets the impact of armed conflict
on the civilian population, including in or near densely populated areas, with
negative effects continuing even after the armed conflict has concluded. The
Security Council condemns all acts of violence and other forms of intimidation
deliberately directed at humanitarian personnel, as well as attacks on
peacekeepers. The Council calls on parties to armed conflict to comply with
the obligations applicable to them under international humanitarian law to
respect and protect humanitarian personnel and relief consignments and to take
all required steps to facilitate the safe, rapid and unimpeded passage of relief
consignments, equipment and personnel.
“The Security Council calls upon all parties to armed conflict to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian law to respect and
protect, and refrain from attacking, medical personnel, provided that they take
no action adversely affecting their status as civilians, and facilities, as well as
from using medical infrastructure in fighting. The Council further urges that
medical personnel be granted all available help for the performance of their
duties.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern about the severity and
frequency of attacks against schools, threats and attacks against teachers and
other protected persons in relation to schools, and the use of schools for
military purposes, and significant implications of such attacks on the safety of
students and their access to education. The Council calls upon all parties to
armed conflict to put an end to such practice and to refrain from attacks
against teachers and other protected persons in relation to schools, provided
that they take no action adversely affecting their status of civilians.
“The Security Council expresses deep concern about acts of violence
against journalists, media professionals and associated personnel in armed
conflict, in particular deliberate attacks in violation of international
humanitarian law, and calls upon all parties to armed conflict to put an end to
such practice. The Security Council recalls in this regard that journalists,
media professionals and associated personnel engaged in dangerous

13-23108

3

S/PRST/2013/2

professional missions in areas of armed conflict shall be considered as
civilians and shall be respected and protected as such, provided that they take
no action adversely affecting their status as civilians. The Security Council
recalls its demand that all parties to an armed conflict comply fully with the
obligations applicable to them under international law related to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, including journalists, media professionals and
associated personnel.
“The Security Council reiterates that safe, and unhindered access by
United Nations humanitarian agencies and national and international
organisations to people in need, in accordance with the humanitarian principles
of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, and the Guiding
Principles of Humanitarian Assistance, is a prerequisite for the effective
delivery of humanitarian assistance. The Security Council recognizes the need
for consistent engagement by humanitarian agencies with all parties to armed
conflict for humanitarian purposes, including activities aimed at ensuring
respect for international humanitarian law. The Council stresses the need to
ensure simplified and expedited procedures for humanitarian personnel and
goods in order to better deliver quick support to civilians on the ground. The
Council also underlines the importance of systematic monitoring and analysis
of constraints on humanitarian access.
“The Security Council recognises the needs of civilians affected by
foreign occupation and stresses further, in this regard, the responsibilities of
the occupying power in full compliance with international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council recognises the acute impact of conflict on refugees
and internally displaced persons. The Council stresses the need for all actors to
work together for a durable solution for refugees and internally displaced
persons including voluntary safe, dignified and sustainable return,
resettlement, or local integration, as appropriate.
“The Security Council also recognizes the importance of registration as a
tool of protection and as a means to the quantification and assessment of needs
for the provision and distribution of humanitarian assistance to refugees.
Further, the Security Council calls upon all actors to take adequate and
necessary measures to ensure respect for the principles of refugee protection
and obligations under refugee law, including the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps.
“The Security Council emphasises the need for peacekeeping missions
with protection of civilian mandates to ensure their implementation, and
stresses the importance of continued and further engagement by senior mission
leadership, with a view to ensuring that all mission components and all levels
of the chain of command are properly informed of and are involved in the
mission’s protection mandate and their relevant responsibilities. The Security
Council recognises the need for strong leadership in peacekeeping missions,
and also encourages further coordination between UN and regional and subregional institutions, as appropriate, on issues relating to the protection of
civilians in peacekeeping operations.

4

13-23108

S/PRST/2013/2

“The Security Council emphasises the importance of ensuring that
peacekeeping missions with protection of civilian mandates develop missionwide protection strategies for incorporation in the overall mission
implementation plans and contingency plans in consultation with the host
Government, local authorities, troop- and police-contributing countries, and
other relevant actors. The Council stresses the importance of ensuring the
widest possible dissemination of tools created to develop mission-wide
strategies and requests that mission reporting include information on their use
and effectiveness in protecting civilians, as well as recommendations on
necessary updates and revisions, based on field experience. The Council also
emphasises that effective interaction and coordination of United Nations
peacekeeping missions with host government authorities, civil society, and
local populations as well as with humanitarian actors, is essential for
improving and strengthening their respective and the overall protection
response. In this regard, the Council also emphasises the importance of
effective interaction and coordination as appropriate both among UN
peacekeeping missions and between UN peacekeeping missions and political
missions. The Council welcomes progress made by the Secretary General in
elaborating a conceptual framework, outlining resource and capability
requirements, and developing operational tools for the implementation of
protection of civilian mandates. In this context the Council reiterates the
importance of including provisions on the protection of women and children
including the appointment of gender advisers, women protection advisers, and
child protection advisers, as appropriate in the mandates of United Nations
missions.
“The Security Council reaffirms its practice of ensuring that mandates of
UN peacekeeping and other relevant missions include, where appropriate and
on a case-by-case basis, provisions regarding the protection of civilians,
stresses that mandated protection activities must be given priority in decisions
about the use of available capacity and resources, including information and
intelligence resources, in the implementation of mandates; and recognizes, that
the protection of civilians when and as mandated requires a coordinated
response from all relevant mission components.
“The Security Council recognises the need for systematic monitoring and
reporting on progress to protect civilians in armed conflict. The Council
reaffirms its practice of requiring mission specific benchmarks, as and where
appropriate, to measure and review progress made in the implementation of
peacekeeping mandates and in this regard underlines the importance of clear
mission specific benchmarks in the context of mission transition.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of the Aide Memoire on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2010/25) as a practical tool that provides a
basis for improved analysis and diagnosis of key protection issues, particularly
during deliberations on peacekeeping mandates and stresses the need to
implement the approaches set out therein on a more regular and consistent
basis, taking into account the particular circumstances of each conflict
situation.

13-23108

5

S/PRST/2013/2

“The Security Council notes the report of the Secretary-General on
protection of civilians in armed conflict of 22 May 2012 S/2012/376 and the
recommendations made therein, and requests the Secretary-General to submit
his next report, to include an assessment of concrete measures taken by
peacekeeping missions to implement their mandates to protect civilians and
the impact of those measures, by 15 November 2013 and for reports to be
submitted every 18 months thereafter.”

6

13-23108
