General Assembly-Fourteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

1386 (XIV). Declaration of the Rights of the Child (20 November 1959)
(item 64)
1387 (XIV). Publicity to be given to the Declaration of the Rights of the Child
(20 November 1959) ( item 64) . .
........
1388 (XIV). Report of the United Nations High Co:nmissioner for Refugees
(20 November 1959) (item 33)
1389 (XIV). Refugees from Algeria in Morocco and Tunisia (20 November
1959) (item 33).
1390 (XIV). World Refugee Year (20 November 1959) (item 33)
1391 (XIV). Unit1:d Nations Children's Fund (20 November 1959) (item 12).
1392 (XIV). Interrelationship of the economic and social factors of development
(20 November 1959) (item 12)
1393 (XIV). Low-cost housing (20 November 1959) (item 12)
1394 (XIV). Juvenile delinquency (20 November 1959) (item 12)
1395 (XIV). Technical assistance in narcotics control (20 November 1959)
(item 12) . . .
1396 (XIV). Study of the question of capital punishment (20 Novembe·r 1959)
(item 12)
1397 (XIV). International relations and exchanges in the fields of education,
science and culture (20 November 1959) (item 12) . .
1398 (XIV). International encouragement of scientific research into the control
of cancerous diseases (20 November 1959) (item 71)......
1458 (XIV). Draft International Covenants on Human Rights (10 December
1959) (item 34).
1459 (XIV). Draft Convention on Freedom of Information (10 December 1959)
(item 35)

1386 (XIV). Declaration of the Rights of the Child

19
20
20
21
21
21
22
22
22
22
23
23
23

24
24

U'hereas mankind owes to the child the best it has
give,
N1nv therefore,
Tiu General Assembly
Proclaims this Declaration of the Rights of the Child
to the end that he may have a happy childhood and
enjoy for his own good and for the good of society the
rights an<l freedoms herein set forth, and calls upon
parents, upon men and women as individuals. an:l
upon voluntary organizations, local authorities and nationa 1 Governments to recognize these rights and strive
for their observance by legislative and other measures
progressively taken in accordance with the following
principles :
1(1

PREAMBLE

Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have, in
the Charter, reaffirmed their faith in fundamental
human rights and in the dignity and worth of the human
person, and have determined to promote social progress
and better standards of life in larger freedom,
Whereas the United Nations has, in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed that everyone
is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth
therein, without distinction of any kind, such as race,
colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion,
national or social origin, property, birth or other status,
Whereas the child, by reason of his physical and
mental immaturity, needs special safeguards and care,
including appropriate legal protection, l,efore as well
as after birth,
Whereas the need for such special safeguards has
been stated in the Geneva Declaration of the Rights
of the Child of 1924, and recognized in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and in the statutes of
specialized agencies and international organizations concerned with the welfare of children,

PRINCIPLE

1

The child shall enjoy all the rights set forth in this
Declaration. Every child, without any exception whatsoever. shall be entitled to these rights, without distinction
or discrimination on account of race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or
~ocial origin, property, birth or other status, whether
of himself or of his family.
19

20

General Atisembly-Fourteenth Session
PRINCIPLE 2

The child shall enjoy special protection, and shall be
given opportunities and facilities, by law and by other
means, to enable him to develop physically, mentally,
morally, spiritually and socially in a healthy and normal
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity. In
the enactment of laws for this purpose, the best interests
of the child shall be the paramount consideration.
PRINCIPLE 3

The child shall be entitled from his birth to a name

and a nationality.
PRINCIPLE 4

The child shall enjoy the benefits of social security.
He shall be entitled to grow and develop in health ; to
this end, special care and protection shall be provided
both to him and to his mother, including adequate
pre-natal and post-natal care. The child shall have the
right to adequate nutrition, housing, recreation and
medical services.
PRINCIPLE 5

The child who is physically, mentally or socially
handicapped shall be given the special treatment, education and care required by his particular condition.
PRINCIPLE 6

The child, for the full and harmonious development
of his personality, needs love and understanding. He
shall, wherever possible, grow up in the care and under
the responsibility of his parents, and, in any case, in
an atmosphere of affection and of moral and material
security; a child of tender years shall not, save in exceptional circumstances, be separated from his mother.
Society and the public authorities shall have the duty
to extend particular care to children without a family
and to those without adequate means of support. Payment of State and other assistance towards the maintenance of children of large families is desirable.
PRINCIPLE 7
The child is entitled to receive education, which shall
be free and compulsory, at least in the elementary
stages. He shall be given an education which will promote his general culture, and enable him, on a basis
of equal opportunity, to develop his abilities, his individual judgement, and his sense of moral and social
responsibility, and to become a useful member of society.
The best interests of the child shall be the guiding
principle of those responsible for his education and
guidance; that responsibility lies in the first place with
his parents.
The child shall have full opportunity for play and
recreation, which should be directed to the same purposes as education; society and the public authorities
shall endeavour to promote the enjoyment of this right.
PRINCIPLE 8
The child shall in all circumstances be among the
first to receive protection and relief.
PRINCIPLE 9
The child shall be protected against all forms of
neglect, cruelty and exploitation. He shall not be the
subject of traffic, in any form.

The child shall not be admitted to employment before
an appropriate minimum age; he shall in no case be
caused or permitted to engage in any occupation or
employment which would prejudice his health or education, or interfere with his physical, mental or moral
development.
PRINCIPLE 10

The child shall be protected from practices which may
foster racial, religious and any other form of discrimination. He shall be brought up in a spirit of understanding, tolerance, friendship among peoples, peace and
universal brotherhood, and in full consciousness that his
energy and talents should be devoted to the service of
his fellow men.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1387 (XIV). Publicity to be given lo the Declaration of the Rights of the Child
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Declaration of the Rights of the
Child 1 calls upon parents, upon men and women as
individuals, and upon voluntary organizations, local
authorities and national Governments to recognize the
rights set forth therein and strive for their observance,
1. Recommends Governments of Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and the appropriate nongovernmental organizations to publicize as widely as
possible the text of the Declaration of the Rights of
the Child;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to have the Declaration widely disseminated and, to that end, to use
every means at his disposal to publish and distribute
texts in all languages possible.
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959.

1388 (XIV). Report of the United Nations High
Commissioner fo,- Refugees
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,2
Noting wi.th appreciation the progress made in the
implementation of the programmes of international
assistance carried out by the Office of the High
Commissioner,
Noting in particular the progress made, within the
framework of the World Refugee Year, as regards
the admission of additional numbers of refugees, including handicapped cases, to countries of resettlement,
as well as the contribution to the Office of the High
Commissioner of additional funds for international
assistance to refugees,
Expressing the hope that no additional efforts will
be spared for the repatriation of refugees who wish to
return to their country of origin,
Expressing the hope also that every effort will be
made for the resettlement or integration of refugees,
I. Invites States Members of the United Nations
and members of the specialized agencies to devote, on
1 See resolution 1386 (XIV).

2 Official Records of the GeMral Assembly, Fourteenth
Session, Supplement No. 11 (A/4104/Rev.l) and Supplement
No UA (A/4104/Rev.l/Add.n.
