14

General Assembly -

"Where the participant withdraws from the Fund after
having reached the age of fifty-five and before reaching the
age of sixty, an immediate life annuity equal in actuarial
value to the retirement benefit he would have received under
article IV.I (a), had he been sixty at the date his service
ceased, together with all those survivorship benefits and
options to which under articles IV, IV bis, VII, VII bis, VII
ter and VIII a recipient of a retirement benefit is entitled,
except only that article IV.I ( b) and article IV.4 shall not
apply."

2. Further resolves that a reference to article X.3
( d) shall be added to the second group of articles cited
in paragraph 2 of section III of resolution 1561 (XV).
995th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1615 (XV). Review of the resolution relating to
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 1585 (XV) of 20
December 1960,
Having considered the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
the question of the review of the resolution relating to
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses of the United
Nations, 3
Decides that if, as a result of a decision of the Security Council, new commitments relating to the maintenance of peace and security should arise under paragraph 1 of resolution 1585 (XV) in an estimated total
exceeding $10 million before the sixteenth session of
the General Assembly, a special session of the Assembly
shall be convened by the Secretary-General to consider
the matter.
995th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1619 (XV). United Nations operations in the
Congo: 1961 cost estimates and financing

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Security Council resolutions of 14 July,4
22 July 5 and 9 August 1960 6 and 21 February 1961, 7
and General Assembly resolutions 1474 (ES-IV) of 20
September 1960 and 1599 (XV), 1600 (XV) and 1601
(XV) of 15 April 1961,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the estimated cost of the United Nations operations in the Congo from 1 January to 31 December
1961 8 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon, 9
Bearing in mind that the extraordinary expenses for
the United Nations operations in the Congo are essentially different in nature from the expenses of the Organization under the regular budget and that therefore a
procedure different from that applied in the case of the
• Ibid., agenda item 50, document A/4715.
'Official Records of the Security Council, Fifteenth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1960 document
S/4387.
'
• Ibid., document S/4405.
• Ibid., document S/4426.
7
Ibid., Sixteenth Year, Supplement for January, February
and March 1961, document S/4741.
• 0 fficial Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Session,
Annexes, agenda items 49/50, document A/4703.
• Ibid., document A/4713.

Fifteenth Ses8ion

regular budget is required for meeting these extraordinary expenses,
Bearing in mind that the permanent members of the
Security Council have a special responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
therefore for contributing to the financing of peace and
security operations,
Noting with af'l'reciation the intention declared bv
certain Member States to make substantial voluntary
contributions,
l. Decides to open an ad hoe account for the expenses of the United Nations operations in the Congo
for 1961;
2. Approves the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
contained in paragraphs 2, 29 and 30 of its report, subject to paragraph 3 below ;
3. Decides to appropriate an amount of $100 million
for the operations of the United Nations in the Congo
from I January to 31 October 1961;
4. Decides further to apportion as expenses of the
Organization the amount of $100 million among the
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessment for the regular budget subject to the provisions of
paragraph 8 below, pending the establishment of a different scale of assessment to defray the extraordinary
expenses of the Organization resulting from these
operations ;
5. Urges the permanent members of the Security
Council to make sizable additional contributions ;
6. Appeals to all other Member States who are in a
position to assist to make voluntary contributions ;
7. Calls upon the Government of Belgium, a State
directly concerned with the situation in the Republic of
the Congo (Leopoldville), to make a substantial contribution;
8. Decides to reduce:
(a) By 80 per cent the assessment of Member States
whose contributions to the regular budget range from
0.04 per cent to 0.25 per cent inclusive;
( b) By 80 per cent the assessment of Member States
receiving assistance during 1960 under the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance, whose contributions to the regular budget range from 0.26 per cent to
1.25 per cent inclusive;
( c) By SO per cent the assessment of Member States
receiving assistance during 1960 under the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance, whose contributions to the regular budget are 1.26 per cent and above ;
9. Decides to apply the additional contributions of
Member States under paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 above to
offset the deficit resulting from the implementation of
the provisions of paragraph 8.
995th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.
1620 (XV). Examination of the administrative
and budgetary procedures of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Having in mind that among the mam purposes of the
United Nations are the maintenance of international
peace and security, the pacific settlement of disputes

15

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and international economic ancl social co-operation with
a view to the creation of conditions of stability and
well-being necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
among nations,
Recognizing that in order to fulfil these purposes the
United Nations must have at its disposal adequate financial resources and generally recognized procedures for
dealing with the financial problems resulting from activities undertaken by the Organization,
Believing that, with the continuing growth and development of the United Nations, increasing demands
will be made on the Organization in the fulfilment of its
purposes,
Believing also that in these circumstances it would
be appropriate to review the administrative and budgetary questions relating to the expenditures of the
United Nations,
1. Decides to place on the provisional agenda of its
sixteenth session, as a matter of prime importance and
urgency, the question of the administrative and budgetary procedures of the United :\' ations, including the
following points :
(a) Methods for covering the cost of peace-keeping
operations ;
( b) The relationship between such methods and the
existing administrative and budgetary procedures of the
Organization;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to appoint a working group composed of fifteen Member
States-the permanent members of the Security Council, two States from Africa, two from Asia, two from
Latin America, two from Western Europe, one from
Eastern Europe and one from the Commonwealth-to
consider the points mentioned in paragraph 1 above, in

consultation, as appropriate, \Vith the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions and
the Committee on Contributions, and to report in good
time for the sixteenth session of the Assembly;
3. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, in assisting the working
group, to consider what improvements might be required in the existing administrative and budgetary
procedures of the United Nations and any other measures to ensure the financial stability of the Organization;
4. Requests Member States to submit not later than
l July 1961, for consideration by the working group,
observations on principles to be applied in determining
a special scale of assessments for peace and security, and
on other matters relevant to its study;
5. Decides to refer to its sixteenth session all relevant documentation for consideration under this item,
the records of the fifteenth session and all draft resolutions submitted to it, any observations which may be
made by Member States, and the reports requested in
accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 above.

995th plenary meeting,
21 April 1961.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly. in pursuance of the
ahoz1c resolution, appointed the members of the working group
established under the terms of paragraph 2 of that resolution.
The working group is composed as follows:

BRAZIL,

BUL-

GARIA, CANADA, CHINA, FRANCE, INDIA, ITALY, JAPAN, MEXICO,
NIGERIA,

SWEDEN,

UNrnN

OF

SovrnT

SoCIALIST

REPUBLICS,

UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
A:s;n NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
