A/77/419

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 81

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Sarah Zahirah Ruhama (Malaysia)

I. Introduction
1.
The item entitled “Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts” was included in
the provisional agenda of the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly in
accordance with Assembly resolution 75/138 of 15 December 2020.
2.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its
agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee.
3.
The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 16th, 17th and 36th meetings,
on 17 and 18 October and 18 November 2022. The views of the representatives who
spoke during the Committee’s consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant
summary records. 1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
Secretary-General (A/77/264).

II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.19
5.
At the 36th meeting, on 18 November, the representative of Sweden, on behalf
of Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
__________________
1

22-26262 (E)

A/C.6/77/SR.16, A/C.6/77/SR.17 and A/C.6/77/SR.36.

251122

*2226262*

A/77/419

Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Uruguay, subsequently joined by
Afghanistan, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Gambia, Lebanon, North Macedonia
and Samoa, introduced a draft resolution entitled “Status of the Proto cols Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts” (A/C.6/77/L.19).
6.
At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.19
without a vote (see para. 7).

2/7

22-26262

A/77/419

III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee
7.
The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolution:

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its biennial resolutions on the status of the Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts, including its resolution 75/138 of 15 December 2020,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Reaffirming the continuing value of established humanitarian rules relating to
armed conflicts and the need to respect and ensure respect for those rules in all
circumstances within the scope of the relevant international instruments, pending the
earliest possible termination of such conflicts,
Stressing the need to consolidate the existing body of international humanitarian
law through its universal acceptance and the need for wide dissemination and full
implementation of such law at the national level, and expressing concern about all
violations of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 2 and the Additional Protocols, 3
Calling upon Member States to disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law as widely as possible, and calling upon all parties to armed conflict
to apply international humanitarian law,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of national commissions and
other bodies involved in advising authorities at the national level on the implementation,
dissemination and development of international humanitarian law,
Noting with appreciation the meetings of representatives of those bodies
organized by the International Committee of the Red Cross, together with relevant
partners such as national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, to facilitate the
sharing of concrete experience and the exchange of views on their roles and on the
challenges that they face,
Welcoming the important role of relevant regional forums in promoting respect
for international humanitarian law and disseminating knowledge of i nternational
humanitarian law in the respective regions,
Stressing the possibility of making use of the International Humanitarian Fact Finding Commission in relation to an armed conflict, pursuant to article 90 of
Protocol I 4 to the Geneva Conventions,
Stressing also the possibility for the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission to facilitate, through its good offices, the restoration of an attitude of
respect for the Geneva Conventions and Protocol I,
Taking note of the fact that the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission conducted its first operational mission in 2017,
__________________

A/77/264.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
3
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513, and vol. 2404, No. 43425.
4
Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
1
2

22-26262

3/7

A/77/419

Taking note also of the fact that, in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its resolution 1894
(2009) of 11 November 2009 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
Security Council noted the range of existing methods used, on a case -by-case basis,
for gathering information on alleged violations of applicable international law
relating to the protection of civilians, underlined the importance in that regard of
receiving information that is timely, objective, accurate and reliable, and considered
the possibility, to that end, of using the International Humanitarian Fact -Finding
Commission established by article 90 of Protocol I,
Noting with appreciation the role of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in facilitating and offering protection to the victims of armed conflicts,
Noting with appreciation also the continuing efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to promote and disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions and the Additional Protocols,
Noting the special responsibilities of national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies, as auxiliaries to the public authorities of their respective States in the
humanitarian field, to cooperate with and assist their Governments in the promotion,
dissemination and implementation of international humanitarian law,
Welcoming the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
Emphasizing the fundamentally non-discriminatory character of international
humanitarian law, including as reflected in the preamble to the 1977 Additional
Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, relati ng to the
Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, which, inter alia, reaffirms
that the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and of Additional
Protocol I must be fully applied in all circumstances to all persons who are pr otected
by those instruments, without any adverse distinction based on the origin of the armed
conflict or on the causes espoused by or attributed to the parties to the conflict,
Taking note with appreciation of Security Council resolution 2573 (2021) of
27 April 2021 on the protection of civilian objects in armed conflict, including objects
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population and objects critical to the
delivery of essential services to the civilian population,
Taking note with appreciation also of Security Council resolution 2601 (2021)
of 29 October 2021 on the protection of children affected by armed conflict and
facilitating the continuation and protection of education in armed conflict,
Recalling the imperative need to improve compliance with international
humanitarian law,
Noting the close cooperation between the International Committee of the Red
Cross and States to further strengthen international humanitarian law protecting
persons deprived of their liberty in relation to armed conflict,
Welcoming efforts by States to implement their obligations under international
humanitarian law, as well as programmes and other measures of States and their
armed forces that promote or ensure compliance with international humanitarian law,
Noting the work undertaken by States and by the International Committee of the
Red Cross in relation to sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict,
Noting also the work undertaken by States, the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and other actors in the “Health Care in Danger” projec t to
improve the protection of the provision of and access to health care,
Noting with appreciation Security Council resolution 2286 (2016) of 3 May
2016, and in this regard calling upon all parties to armed conflict to respect and
4/7

22-26262

A/77/419

protect the wounded and sick, as well as health-care personnel, humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties and their means of transport and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities, in a rmed conflict, in
accordance with their obligations under international humanitarian law,
Noting with appreciation also Security Council resolution 2222 (2015) of
27 May 2015 on the protection of journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in situations of armed conflict,
Noting the serious concern expressed by States regarding the humanitarian
impact caused by cluster munitions, and noting the en try into force of the Convention
on Cluster Munitions 5 on 1 August 2010,
Noting also the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty 6 on 24 December 2014,
Welcoming the important contribution to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts made by the significant debate generated by the publication in 2005 of the
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross on customary international
humanitarian law, as well as other recent initiatives by the Committee, welcoming
also its efforts to update regularly its customary international humanitarian law
database, and looking forward to further constructive discussion on the subject,
Acknowledging the fact that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court 7 covers the most serious crimes of international concern under international
humanitarian law and that the Rome Statute, while recalling that it is the duty of every
State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible for such crimes,
shows the determination of the international community to put an end to impunity for
the perpetrators of such crimes and thus to contribute to their prevention,
Noting the amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, relating to war crimes under the Rome Statute, ado pted on 10 June
2010 at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala from 31 May
to 11 June 2010, 8
Acknowledging the usefulness of discussing in the General Assembly the status
of instruments of international humanitarian law relevant to th e protection of victims
of armed conflicts,
1.
Welcomes the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
and notes the trend towards a similarly wide acceptance of the two Additional
Protocols of 1977; 9
2.
Calls upon all States parties to the Geneva Conventions that have not yet
done so to consider becoming parties to the Additional Protocols at the earliest
possible date;
3.
Calls upon all States that are already parties to Protocol I, or those States
not parties, upon becoming parties to Protocol I, to make the declaration provided for
under article 90 of that Protocol and to consider making use, where appropriate, of
the services of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission in
accordance with the provisions of article 90 of Protocol I;
4.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties
to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
__________________

Ibid., vol. 2688, No. 47713.
Ibid., vol. 3013, No. 52373.
7
Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
8
Ibid., vol. 2868, No. 38544.
9
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
5
6

22-26262

5/7

A/77/419

Conflict and the two Protocols thereto 10 and to other relevant treaties on international
humanitarian law relating to the protection of victims of armed conflict;
5.
Calls upon States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict; 11
6.
Calls upon all States parties to the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions to ensure their wide dissemination and full implementation;
7.
Affirms the necessity of making the implementation of international
humanitarian law more effective, and supports its further strengthening and
development;
8.
Notes with appreciation the eight resolutions adopted at the thirty-third
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from
9 to 12 December 2019, in particular resolution 1, entitled “Bringing IHL home: a
road map for better national implementation of international humanitarian law”, and
also notes with appreciation the subsequent publication of “Bringing IHL home:
guidelines on the national implementation of international hum anitarian law” by the
International Committee of the Red Cross;
9.
Calls upon Member States to actively participate in the thirty -fourth
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, to be held in Geneva in
2024;
10. Welcomes the activities of the Advisory Service on International
Humanitarian Law of the International Committee of the Red Cross in supporting
efforts made by Member States to take legislative and administrative action to
implement international humanitarian law and in promoting the exchange of
information on those efforts between Governments, and reminds Member States of
the availability of the manual on domestic implementation of international
humanitarian law;
11. Also welcomes the increasing number of national commissions or
committees for the implementation of international humanitarian law and their work
in promoting the incorporation of treaties on international humanitarian law into
national law and disseminating the rules of international humanitarian law, and
encourages Member States that have not yet done so to consider establishing national
commissions or committees, with the support of national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies where relevant, to advise and assist Governments in implementing and
disseminating knowledge of international humanitarian law;
12. Commends the International Committee of the Red Cross for organizing
the fifth Universal Meeting of National Committees and Similar Entities on
International Humanitarian Law, held online from 29 November to 2 December 2021,
and invites the International Committee to continue to organize such meetings;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session a comprehensive report on the status of the Additional Protocols
relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts, as well as on measures taken
to strengthen the existing body of international humanitarian law, inter alia, with
respect to its dissemination and full implementation at the national level, based on
information received from Member States and the International Committee of the Red
Cross;
__________________
10
11

6/7

Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511, and vol. 2253, No. 3511.
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
22-26262

A/77/419

14. Encourages Member States and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in transmitting information to the Secretary -General, to focus on new
developments and activities during the reporting period;
15. Welcomes the increasing trend of voluntary submissions transmitted to the
Secretary-General, as requested in paragraph 12 of resolution 75/138, and encourages
Member States to participate in the submission process at the seventy -ninth session
of the General Assembly;
16. Encourages Member States to explore ways of facilitating the submission
of information for future reports of the Secretary-General and, in this context, to
consider the convenience of using a questionnaire as drafted by Member States, with
the assistance of the International Committee of the Red Cross and, as appropriate, in
consultation with the Secretariat, for submission to the General Assembly at its
seventy-ninth session;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-ninth session
the item entitled “Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts”.

22-26262

7/7
