S/PV.8609

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8609th meeting

Thursday, 29 August 2019, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/674)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-26524 (E)
*1926524*

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and
2449 (2018) (S/2019/674)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/674, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018).
I now give the floor to Mr. Lowcock.
Mr. Lowcock: I again want to start today with the
situation around Idlib, on which we have briefed the
Security Council many times over the past four months.
The Secretary-General issued another statement on
20 August expressing deep concerns about the continued
escalation. He strongly condemned the continued attacks
on civilians and civilian infrastructure, including on
health-care and educational facilities, and urged the
parties to fully respect international humanitarian law.
On 21 August, the Secretary-General issued his
latest report (S/2019/674), which you just referred
to, Madam President, on the implementation of the
Council’s resolutions on Syria. The report covers the
period up to the end of July.
2/27

29/08/2019

In summary, according to conservative estimates,
more than 500 civilians have been killed, and many
hundreds more injured, since the start of the escalation
in north-west Syria in late April. The World Health
Organization and UNICEF report that 43 health-care
facilities, 87 educational facilities, 29 water stations
and seven markets have been impacted by fighting
since April. The Secretary-General’s report reminds us
that those attacks have been confirmed using tried and
tested systems, whereby the United Nations receives
reports from partners on the ground and reviews them
against at least two other independent sources.
I believe Geir Pedersen, in his statement, will touch
on recent military and political developments in the
area. I want to give the Council a few examples of the
humanitarian consequences that we have seen since my
deputy last updated Council members on 14 August.
Over the weekend from 16 to 18 August, an additional
44 civilians were reportedly killed owing to air strikes,
including 16 children and 12 women. Attacks also
reportedly impacted two schools in Hish, one in Ma’arat
Hurmah and one in Hazarin. On Monday, 15 civilians,
including women and children, were reportedly killed
in air strikes on seven communities in Idlib. And this
morning we received reports that yesterday 17 more
people, including three women and seven children,
were killed by air strikes and that a health-care facility
in Ghadqa town was damaged.
Over the past three weeks, since the collapse
of the conditional ceasefire on 5 August, dozens of
communities have emptied out in northern Hamah
and southern Idlib. Satellite imagery shows that entire
towns and villages have been razed to the ground. Most
of those who can are fleeing northwards, further into
Idlib governorate and closer to the Turkish border.
Those who stay behind are cowering in basements or in
what is left of their homes.
Approximately 576,000 individual displacement
movements have been recorded by United Nationssupported systems since May. In order to give the
Council a sense of scale, that is three to four times
the number recorded during the violence in eastern
Ghouta early last year, and almost 75 per cent more
than was seen during the offensive in southern Syria
in mid-2018. Many of those people are living in the
open air, frequently protected only by a plastic sheet.
Approximately 100 schools have been turned over for
displaced people, compromising their ability to provide
education for children.
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8609

On 22 August, following advances in many areas
of northern Hamah and southern Idlib, the Syrian
authorities announced once again the opening of the
Morek-Souran crossing point for civilians wishing
to leave the area. We understand that the Syrian
authorities have stationed buses in the area and that the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent has been asked to prepare for
possible population movements.

Despite all the challenges, the humanitarian
community is doing everything it can to respond to the
needs of the estimated 3 million people in and around
Idlib. With some 15,000 aid workers on the ground,
humanitarians continue to provide shelter materials,
food assistance and health services to the population,
including newly displaced people. More than 1 million
people receive general food assistance every month.

There are two shelters with a capacity of 150
families identified in Souran to receive people. The
United Nations and humanitarian partners have mobile
teams ready to respond in the area should civilians
decide to use the crossing point. From the information
available to us, however, it appears that relatively few
people are opting to move in that direction, compared
to the much larger number of people preferring to move
north and west further into Idlib.

The people of Idlib are reached exclusively through
the cross-border operation — because, as I have said
before, that is the only way they can be reached for as
long as access from within the country is impeded. It
is for that reason that the renewal of resolution 2165
(2014) later this year will be crucial.

One dimension of the Idlib conflict that we have
not covered much in our previous briefings, but is
covered by the Secretary-General’s latest report, is the
impact on agricultural activities in northern Hamah
and southern Idlib governorates. Traditionally, large
parts of the agricultural area in Idlib, considered to
be among of the most fertile land in the country, are
cultivated for wheat. Shelling, air strikes and widely
reported fires have contributed to the destruction of
crops and damage to farming equipment. Much of the
harvest has been lost, and the capacity to prepare the
soil for the new planting season is compromised.
I and other United Nations officials have repeatedly
called on the parties and the Council to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. The rules are clear.
The parties must at all times apply the principles of
distinction and precaution in the conduct of hostilities
and take all the necessary steps to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure from attacks and the effects
of violence. People’s homes, hospitals, schools, water
systems and markets must be protected. There can
be no reason, rationale, excuse or justification for
the destruction of civilian areas on the scale seen in
Idlib today.
In the months ahead, the board of inquiry, the
establishment of which was announced by the SecretaryGeneral, will investigate incidents in north-west Syria
that damaged or destroyed facilities that have either
been de-conflicted or received humanitarian support
from the United Nations.

Let me update the Council now on Rukban. Dire
conditions and the lack of assistance, coupled with the
hope for durable solutions, have led many people to
leave. Another joint United Nations-Syrian Arab Red
Crescent assessment mission took place last week. The
purpose was to determine the number of people wishing
to leave Rukban and those wishing to stay. The mission
informed everyone in the camp about plans for future
assisted voluntary departures and assessed the needs of
those wishing to stay.
As per our agreement with the Syrian authorities,
another mission is planned to Rukban within the next
couple of weeks to facilitate the transport of those who
said they wanted to leave Rukban for shelters in Homs.
All movement must be voluntary, safe, well-informed
and dignified, with humanitarian access assured
throughout. The agreement is that in the same mission
the United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
will provide critical humanitarian assistance to those
who decide to remain in Rukban.
Let me turn now to Al-Hol. There are currently some
68,600 people in that camp. Approximately 40 per cent
of them are Syrians, 45 per cent are Iraqis and 15 per
cent are other foreign nationals. Some 94 per cent are
women and children, of whom 67 per cent are under
the age of 18. Most have been exposed to violence and
trauma under the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
They are now living in extremely difficult conditions
and face an uncertain fate. That includes the risk of
being denied repatriation, rehabilitation, reintegration
or a fair trial, and the risk of becoming stateless despite
having citizenship or a claim to citizenship.
Solutions to those difficult issues need urgently
to be found. The United Nations has repeatedly called

19-265243/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

on all Member States to take the measures necessary
to ensure that their nationals are repatriated for
the purposes of prosecution, rehabilitation and/or
reintegration, as appropriate, in line with international
law and standards. In that effort, it is important that all
children under 18 be considered primarily as victims
and be duly protected and assisted.
The United Nations has taken note of statements
released by the United States and Turkey with regard
to their plans to coordinate the establishment of a socalled safe zone in north-eastern Syria. The United
Nations is not a party to, and has not been consulted
on, that agreement. I must emphasize that any measures
taken must ensure the safety and welfare of civilians,
including by protecting them from violence, forced
displacement or loss of livelihoods, and that sustained,
unimpeded and safe humanitarian access to civilians
in need must be guaranteed, including through the
cross-border programme for the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners.
The United Nations and humanitarian agencies
run a large relief operation all across Syria, reaching
6 million people in the period covered by the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report. Humanitarian assistance
provided by United Nations agencies included food
for an average 3.6 million people per month and more
than 2.1 million health treatments to people around
the country. The response this year, however, is
significantly less well-funded than it was at this stage in
2018. I would therefore ask all those who made pledges
at the Brussels Conference in April to take early action
to implement them.
Finally, let me return to Idlib. Three weeks from now
it will be one year since the signing of the memorandum
of understanding on Idlib — an agreement that called
for restraint and aimed to prevent further escalation
in north-west Syria. Yet one year on, the bombing and
fighting go on in plain sight, day in and day out. Three
million people, two thirds of them women and children,
count on the Council’s support to make the violence
stop. I told members last month (see S/PV.8589) what
some of them said to me. We cannot turn back the clock
on what has happened. But Council members can take
meaningful action now to protect civilians and ensure
full respect for international humanitarian law. It is
within the Council’s power to do that.
The President: I thank Mr. Lowcock for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
4/27

29/08/2019

Mr. Pedersen: The scale of violence and instability
in Syria is extremely alarming. We have an ever-rising
civilian death toll, millions displaced, untold tens
of thousands detailed or missing, large parts of the
Syrian territory fragmented among various actors,
confrontations between States on multiple axes and a
resurgent Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant stepping
up its guerrilla attacks. But we do not yet have the
launch of a real political process. Those dynamics can
and must change. Let me highlight the dangers before
us and the prospects for launching the political track.
Let me also underline the importance of the support
of the Security Council if we are to begin to shift
the dynamics.
Let me highlight five major immediate concerns
regarding the situation on the ground. Let me start
with the situation in the north-west. Despite an
attempted Russian-Turkish reinstatement of the
ceasefire announced in early August, hostilities in and
around Idlib quickly resumed. A major Government
offensive retook the southern tip of the de-escalation
area, pro-Government air strikes, shelling, rockets
and mortars continue. More civilians have been
killed, as Mr. Lowcock just highlighted, and many
more have fled their homes. More health facilities and
other civilian infrastructure have been hit, including
markets, schools, camps for internally displaced
persons and water stations. Towns have been almost
entirely depopulated as civilians, including women and
children, flee shelling and are stranded without shelter,
food or water.
Turkey reported that one of its military convoys into
Idlib faced aerial attacks. Meanwhile, its observation
post in Morek has been encircled by pro-Government
forces — a reminder that the situation risks sparking
international conflict. President Putin and President
Erdoğan met on Tuesday, 27 August, and indicated that
they had reached a common understanding on how to
stabilize the situation based on the September 2018
memorandum of understanding. We can only welcome
that high-level diplomacy and that statement and hope
that it will bring calm to Idlib. But let me express the
gravest concern that the violence is, so far, not abating.
No one pretends that there is an easy solution to
the challenge of countering the Security Council-listed
terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham or groups such
as Huras Al-Din and foreign terrorist fighters. Their
attacks must cease. But counter-terrorism cannot
put 3 million civilians at risk. They have the right to
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

protection under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. The actions killing and
displacing them must stop now. The situation in Idlib
needs a predominantly political solution.
Secondly, let me turn to the situation in the northeast. Tension flared in July with troop concentrations
on the Turkish side of the border. Advances in United
States-Turkey talks in August helped avert conflict. We
are closely following developments, as the first steps
appear to have been taken to implement those interim
understandings. But, as the Secretary-General said,
a concrete political settlement is needed — one that
respects Syria’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity, takes into account legitimate Turkish security
concerns, provides for the well-being of the diverse
Syrian population in that area and allows their voices
to be heard.
Thirdly, with regard to Israeli-Iranian tensions,
Israel confirmed that it conducted air strikes on the
outskirts of Damascus on 24 August. Israel said its aim
was to pre-empt drone attacks staged from Syrian soil,
which it stated were being planned by Iranian Al-Quds
Force operatives and Shiite militias in Syria. Syrian
State media said that Syrian air defence systems had
intercepted hostile rockets before they reached their
targets. Hizbullah said that two of its fighters were
killed in the strikes and has threatened to retaliate
from Lebanon. Such escalatory actions are extremely
worrisome. I urge all parties and, indeed, all States
in the area, to respect the sovereignty of Syria by
refraining from attacks and provocations and showing
maximum restraint in actions and rhetoric alike.
Fourthly, in south-west Syria, reports of detentions,
demonstrations, disappearances and assassinations
are a source of serious concern. Mr. Lowcock just
highlighted the challenges in Rukban and Al-Hol and I
really have nothing to add to that.
Fifthly, let us remember that Syrian families face
multipronged dangers of violent conflict, terrorism,
displacement, conscription, arbitrary detention, torture,
separation, gender-based violence and myriad other
protection issues. Syrians also face unprecedented
levels of poverty, economic shortcomings and a sense
of hopelessness. Millions of Syrian refugees continue to
see obstacles to a safe, dignified and voluntary return.
It should be clearer than ever that there is no
military solution to the situation in Syria. A nationwide
ceasefire, stipulated in resolution 2254 (2015), has

S/PV. 8609

never been more relevant and necessary, including as
a matter of international peace and security. And it
is clear that only a political process and, ultimately,
a political solution can restore Syria’s sovereignty,
protect the rights and future of all Syrians and begin to
address the deep divisions within Syrian society.
That is why, even amid the fighting, I have spared
no effort in discharging my mandate to facilitate
intra-Syrian negotiations that begin a process to
develop a new constitution, pursuant to which free and
fair elections, under United Nations supervision, shall
take place, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). I have
been carefully consulting the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and the opposition Syrian Negotiations
Commission in order to establish a solid agreement on a
credible, balanced and inclusive, Syrian-led and Syrianowned constitutional committee, convened under
United Nations auspices in Geneva, that can serve as a
door-opener to a broader political process. I thank both
the Government and the opposition for the substantive
and open dialogue each has with the United Nations.
Throughout, it has been clear that nothing is
agreed until everything is agreed. Nonetheless, there
is a strong understanding on two equal co-chairs, one
nominated by the Government and the other by the
opposition; United Nations facilitation through my
good offices; a 75 per cent voting threshold, while
striving for consensus; a large body of 150 members and
a small body of 45 members; and a clear commitment to
guaranteeing the safety and security of the committee
members and their relatives.
In early July, I held productive talks with Syrian
Foreign Minister Walid Al-Moualem and the leadership
of the opposition Syrian Negotiations Commission on
all remaining details of a package to resolve outstanding
names and agree on terms of reference and core
rules of procedure. The package is nearly finalized.
The outstanding differences are, in my assessment,
comparatively minor. I am convinced we can conclude
negotiations. I am in contact with both the opposition
and the Government. I have also conveyed my readiness
to return to Damascus in the very near future as part
of completing the work. I am quietly hopeful that the
United Nations will be in a position to announce an
agreement before the start of the seventy-fourth session
of the General Assembly.
The Governments of Russia and Turkey have been
of particular assistance and are fully supporting the

19-265245/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

United Nations leadership of the negotiation process
on the constitutional committee. I will be visiting
Iran shortly and look forward to its continued support.
I have no doubt that the summit of the Presidents of
Russia, Turkey and Iran planned for mid-September
can contribute to the efforts under way.
I appreciate the strong support provided by the
United States and several European and Arab countries
for the overall United Nations effort, as well as the
active support of the European Union. I look forward to
visiting and holding consultations in Washington, D.C.,
later this week. I continue to strongly urge the United
States and the Russian Federation to deepen their own
direct dialogue, building on the efforts they have made
during the year.
In recent months, I have heard some Syrians react
with scorn at the notion of progress on the constitutional
committee in Geneva while violence surges and no
progress is being made on other files. I have found the
insights from a broad range of Syrian civil society and
Syrian women, including via our Civil Society Support
Room and Women’s Advisory Board, to be extremely
important in that regard. They reveal an underlying
reality: a viable process cannot just be about meetings
in Geneva. It needs to address real-life problems for
Syrians from the outset. To be a meaningful door-opener
and to be the moment that turns the page towards a new
Syria, the launch of a constitutional committee should
be accompanied by measures that have real impact on
the ground.
Real action on detainees, abductees and missing
persons could be one such measure, if done in a
meaningful way and on a meaningful scale. During
the reporting period, a fourth simultaneous release
operation took place under the umbrella of the IranRussia-Turkey-United Nations working group. I am
pleased that, owing to the strong insistence of the United
Nations, there was clear progress in terms of respect
for basic provisions of international humanitarian
law. For the first time, the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) was allowed to act as a neutral
intermediary, and members of my team observed the
operation, too.
But that and all other release operations to date have
been vastly insufficient in scale. In line with resolution
2254 (2015), all sides should engage in unilateral releases
and move beyond one-for-one exchanges. I believe
that women, children, the sick and the elderly must be
6/27

29/08/2019

released at scale. The Government and the opposition
must collect, protect and manage information they
have on individuals they are holding, monitoring or
seeking. Again, an internationally recognized neutral
intermediary, such as the ICRC, could play a key role
in supporting all sides, including families, with the
compilation of information on detained and missing
persons, as well as in keeping that information safe and
handling it confidentially.
With the support of the ICRC, my team has
developed procedures for conducting searches for
missing persons in Syria in line with international
humanitarian law and in the true spirit of resolution
2474 (2019), unanimously adopted by the Council in
June. Those procedures will be put on the agenda of
the next working group meeting. My invitation for that
meeting to take place in Geneva, as part of the working
group’s rotating consultations, still stands.
International players have the responsibility to
deepen their dialogue too, as well as to support the
United Nations-facilitated process as we work directly
with the Syrian parties. I have no doubt that the Astana
format and the small group format will continue. The
United Nations takes a practical approach to working
with such important groupings. But the time has come to
bring together the will embodied in both of those formats
and in the permanent membership of the Council in a
very practical way, namely, a group of key players in a
common forum in Geneva, supporting a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process facilitated by the United Nations
in the discharge of its mandate from the Council. If the
Syrians are to overcome their mistrust and division and
move step by step along the path towards healing Syrian
society and restoring Syria’s place in the international
community, a common international support format for
Geneva will be absolutely key. I ask for the Council’s
support in making that happen.
I am deeply conscious of the profound grief and
suffering of the Syrian people everywhere and of the
need to end this conflict for the sake of Syria, the Syrian
people, the region and the world. We are entering a
crucial month for the parties to engage with the United
Nations in finalizing the constitutional committee and
key international players to stabilize Idlib, the northeast and regional tensions, as well as to come together
behind the United Nations effort. That could enable the
United Nations to convene a constitutional committee,
accompanied by the first steps to overcome deep
mistrust, build confidence and offer some hope after
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

a long period of darkness. It will not be easy, but this
is the one path towards a better future for Syria and a
step-by-step implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I deliver
this statement on the humanitarian situation in Syria
on behalf of the three co-penholders, namely, Kuwait,
Germany and Belgium.
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock for his important briefing today on the
humanitarian situation in Syria.
The Secretary-General stated last week that he was
“deeply troubled by the continued escalation in
north-west Syria and the prospect of an offensive
deeper into Idlib, which could trigger a new wave of
human suffering, possibly impacting up to 3 million
civilians ... [and] strongly condemns continued
attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including on health-care and educational facilities.”
(SG/SM/19705)
Over the past four months, the ongoing military
campaign using continuous air strikes, shelling
and — reportedly — barrel bombs has caused immense
human suffering and taken an enormous toll on the
population. It has caused death, displacement and
destruction. As described once again in detail by
Mr. Lowcock for the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) during its briefing, over
500 civilians — including many children — have been
killed. Over 400,000 people have fled the violence
once or several times, not knowing where to spend
the night, with camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs) being overcrowded. Hospitals, schools, markets
and IDP locations have been targeted, hit and destroyed
by air strikes. Many of those strikes occurred in
de-confliction zones, which means that the parties that
launched the attacks were well aware of their location.
Time after time, we have called upon the parties
to uphold the September 2018 memorandum of
understanding on Idlib. We have called for the protection
of the 3 million civilians living in the region. We have
deplored the loss of innocent civilian lives. We have
condemned the violations of international humanitarian
law and have called for accountability.

S/PV. 8609

We have also condemned the attacks perpetrated by
Security Council-designated terrorist groups while, at
the same time, reiterating that counter-terrorism efforts
can never absolve any of the parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law, including
the principles of distinction and proportionality.
We have called for a surge in diplomacy among key
players to urgently stabilize and de-escalate the
situation — tragically, for all concerned on the ground
in Syria, to no effect so far. OCHA has repeatedly
called for a unified Security Council to take action, a
call Mr. Lowcock repeated this morning.
Since the beginning of the de-escalation in Idlib
at the end of April, the humanitarian co-penholders
have strived to keep the attention of the international
community on this important humanitarian situation.
We have found support among many around this
table. Today we call for the Council to urgently take a
unified stance, with us, against this violence that has
caused so much human suffering. The situation cannot
continue. That is why the co-penholders regarding the
humanitarian situation in Syria — Kuwait, Germany
and Belgium — have presented a draft resolution to the
members of the Council that aims to urgently alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Idlib. We look forward to
working constructively with all Council members on
the text.
In the meantime, our attention also goes to other
parts of Syria. In Al-Hol camp, over 70,000 persons
still receive humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian
agencies have been able to scale up their response,
but the situation remains of deep concern nonetheless.
In southern Syria, across Dara’a, Quneitra and rural
Damascus, where high levels of population movements
continue to be recorded, 2.8 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance. In Rukban, the United
Nations was able to conduct an assessment mission last
week. This is welcome news, but what is crucial now is
that the United Nations be permitted back in Rukban
in the weeks to come in order to provide assistance to
those who decide to stay in the camp and to help others
leave in a voluntary, safe and dignified manner.
I would like to conclude this intervention by
recalling the following: with the crisis in Idlib in mind,
cross-border operations, as renewed under resolution
2449 (2018), are more than ever of life-saving
importance. There is no other way to provide adequate
support to the 3 million civilians in the area who rely
on that mechanism.

19-265247/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in French)
Allow me to continue with some comments in my
national capacity with regard to the political aspect.
First, I wish to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
his briefing and his commitment. I wish to assure him
that he can count on our full support. We are all aware
of what we are facing. There can be no military solution
to the Syrian crisis. It can be resolved only through a
negotiated political process, pursuant to resolution 2254
(2015) and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex), under the aegis of the United Nations. We
support all Mr. Pedersen’s efforts to implement the
resolution, including the implementation of a national
ceasefire, the initiation of a political transition through
the holding of national elections, to include the Syrian
diaspora, and the fostering of a safe, stable and
calm environment.
For my country, the establishment of a Syrianowned, Syrian-led constitutional committee, facilitated
by the United Nations, will be an important step forward,
provided that the committee is credible, in other words,
balanced, inclusive and representative, and that it
works under clear rules and is facilitated by the United
Nations. We are in favour of the Special Envoy and the
United Nations playing a central role in that process,
as envisaged by the Astana guarantors who initiated
the idea of the committee. We continue to support the
efforts of the Special Envoy in that regard and eagerly
await the rapid establishment of the committee. Its
establishment, however, is not an end in itself. It must
constitute the basis of a credible political process able
to bring together all Syrians who seek peace.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock for their briefings. As Secretary of
State Pompeo stated in this Chamber last week (see
S/PV.8600), we appreciate the opportunity to use the
Security Council to confront the complex challenges of
the Middle East. There are few places with challenges
today greater than those in Syria.
In the recently published report on the situation in
Idlib, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reconfirmed that, despite the denials of
Al-Assad and his supporters, the greater Idlib area
has around 3 million Syrians, roughly 20 per cent of
the country’s remaining population. More than half
the civilians there are children. The report notes that
hundreds of civilians have been killed or injured due
8/27

29/08/2019

to air strikes and shelling since May, and more than
400,000 people are estimated to have fled their homes
to escape from violence. The overwhelming majority of
those displaced are moving to densely populated areas
close to the Turkish border in northern Idlib governorate,
where humanitarian assistance is overstretched.
Attacks by the Al-Assad regime, Russia and their
allies in north-west Syria continue and have increased
in recent weeks. The number of civilians killed, injured
or displaced from their homes continues to rise. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies are causing devastating
harm to civilian infrastructure, including to schools
and medical and water facilities. As Under-SecretaryGeneral Lowcock emphatically stated moments ago,
there can be no justification for that. We saw this tragic
story unfold yet again when a targeted air strike in the
Ma’arat Hurmah neighbourhood in southern Idlib took
the lives of two humanitarian workers, a paramedic
and an ambulance driver. Even more barbaric, a White
Helmet volunteer who rushed to save their lives was
himself killed in an infamous double-tap air strike.
Meanwhile, the past week has seen escalating
violence and the regime’s capture of Khan Shaykhun,
the same town that was victim to a sarin attack by the
regime in April 2017 that killed nearly 100 people. The
United States supports calls for a resolution to address
the situation in Idlib.
These attacks make it impossible to believe that the
regime and Russia are being honest when they say that
they are not pursuing a military solution to this conflict.
We object to the offensive launched by the Al-Assad
regime and its allies under the false pretence of counterterrorism operations. We know what counter-terrorism
operations look like and, although we agree that there
is a terrorist problem in Idlib, what we are witnessing is
not counter-terrorism but, rather, an excuse to continue
a violent military campaign against those who refuse
to accept the Al-Assad regime as it is. Therefore, we
call upon the United Nations to move swiftly with the
board of inquiry responsible for investigating attacks
on medical facilities in north-west Syria.
The dire the situation in Syria is not limited to
Idlib. Throughout the country, more than 6 million
internally displaced persons have yet to return to their
homes because of continued violence. Millions more
live in constant fear for their safety and security, while
also lacking basic necessities and a way to provide for
themselves and their families. The United States calls
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8609

on all members of the Council, as well as our regional
partners, to ensure that the United Nations has the
ability to freely implement cross-border aid deliveries
through all agreed border crossings in accordance
with resolution 2449 (2018). There is no substitute for
cross-border operations, and it is particularly important
now that we are seeing a deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Idlib.

take hold, accompanied by a ceasefire across all Syria,
in particular in Idlib and northern Hamah. Progress on
a political track is unrealistic unless those conditions
are met. Of course, no path forward is possible without
the cooperation of the Al-Assad regime and Russia. We
call on both to end their violence in Syria and join the
international community in a process that will result in
the final stabilization of the country.

We continue to call for full humanitarian access
to Rukban and the immediate delivery of critically
needed aid, as well as the ability for displaced persons
to depart in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner
to the location of their choosing if they wish to do so.
We do not support forced relocations. Further, it is
important that the Syrian regime permit regular access
for humanitarian agencies to reach all displaced people
in need, including those in Rukban.

We also reiterate the call made by the United States
and other Council members during our recent meeting
on detainees for the Al-Assad regime to immediately
release innocent civilians held in regime prisons and to
grant impartial and independent international entities
access to detention centres in order to begin building
mutual trust and the basis for reconciliation that is
needed for a lasting peace.

Repeated failures by the Astana guarantors to
maintain a ceasefire between the Al-Assad regime
and opposition groups, such as the one two weeks
ago, demonstrated that the format is incapable of truly
preventing violence or making substantive gains towards
a political solution and other mandates of resolution
2254 (2015), including the release of detainees.
The United States strongly supports the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria to
establish the constitutional committee, which should be
led and launched by the United Nations as an integral
part of resolution 2254 (2015). The inability of the Astana
guarantors to deliver on the constitutional committee
for the past two years shows that the regime and Russia
are content to use this format to slow political progress.
We call on the members of the Astana group to halt
their futile attempt to seize ownership of the political
process and instead put their full support behind the
Office of the Special Envoy.
On 7 August, the United States and our Turkish
counterparts committed to establishing a combined
joint operations centre and implementing this security
mechanism in north-eastern Syria. We believe that
this mechanism will be a viable way to secure and
stabilize the border and ensure continuity in the efforts
of the Global Coalition. The United States stands
with Turkey in calling for the preservation of the 2018
Sochi agreement, as agreed by Turkey and Russia
last September.
We call upon all members of the Council to help
ensure that efforts to establish a true de-escalation zone

Until then, we will continue to apply pressure
through all appropriate means to isolate this murderous
and corrupt regime and its allies.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome Special Envoy Mr. Geir
Pedersen following his recovery from his illness, and to
thank him for his valuable briefing on the developments
on the Syrian political track. We also thank Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for his briefing on the humanitarian situation
in Syria.
We associate ourselves with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Pecsteen de Buytswerve, a short while ago on behalf
of the penholders on the Syrian humanitarian situation,
namely, Germany, Belgium and Kuwait. I would like to
make the following observations in my national capacity.
We are weeks away from the one-year anniversary
of the signing of the memorandum of understanding
between Russia and Turkey in September 2018, which
at the end of last year and the beginning of this year
significantly contributed to de-escalating the situation
in the Idlib Governorate, where 3 million people live.
However, over the past few months there has been a
military escalation in north-western Syria, which has
led to the displacement of approximately half a million
people and the deaths of at least 500 civilians.
We reiterate our condemnation of the targeting of
innocent civilians, health centres and civilian facilities
by any party. We reiterate once again the need for all
sides to abide by international humanitarian law and

19-265249/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

international human rights law. We emphasize that
counter-terrorism operations do not absolve any party to
a conflict from its obligations under international law,
including compliance with the principles of distinction,
proportionality, caution and the protection of civilians
and civilian targets.
We are concerned that the continued military
escalation in north-western Syria will have negative
repercussions on the efforts of the Special Envoy
and his team to revive the Syrian political process.
We stress the need for de-escalation and achieving a
ceasefire in order to stop the bloodshed of the brotherly
Syrian people, who have suffered greatly over the past
few years.
As stated by our colleague, the representative of
Belgium, the co-penholder on the Syrian humanitarian
situation will work, along with all other Council
members, to draw up a draft resolution that would
put an end to the deteriorating humanitarian situation
in Idlib.
We are closely following developments regarding the
formation of the long-awaited constitutional committee.
We heard what Mr. Pedersen said a while ago. Like
him, we hope that an agreement can be reached on the
formation of the committee before the opening of the
upcoming General Assembly session. We reiterate the
need for the constitutional committee to be balanced,
inclusive and credible. Moreover, the political process
must be supported by confidence-building measures,
most notably making progress on the issues of releasing
the detainees and prisoners and of the missing persons.
In conclusion, I once again stress that there is no
military solution to the Syrian crisis. There must be
a political solution that takes into consideration the
aspirations of all Syrians and guarantees the security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank the two
briefers of the United Nations, which continues to have
the United Kingdom’s full support for the important
work that it is doing.
Since this is my last meeting in the Chamber, I
wanted to offer a few reflections on the Council’s work
on Syria. It weighs heavily on me that, despite the best
efforts of many of us in the Chamber, the international
community and the Council have failed the people
10/27

29/08/2019

of Syria. However, we should be in no doubt that the
Al-Assad regime bears the primary responsibility for
the suffering of the Syrian people, as well as for Da’esh.
And we cannot forget Russia’s 12 vetoes to protect the
Al-Assad regime. The Syrian people have endured
unspeakable suffering and continue to do so. The
regime has bombed them with chemical weapons. It has
systematically tortured and murdered its opponents.
It has targeted civilians through mass indiscriminate
aerial bombardment. That is still happening this week,
as we saw through the horrific images of the violence
in Ma’arat Al-Numan yesterday.
Eight years on from the start of this conflict, we
should not forget why it began. In the spring of 2011,
ordinary Syrians, among them teachers, students and
doctors, took to the streets of Damascus, Dara’a, Homs
and other towns and cities across Syria to protest
peacefully for greater freedom and better governance.
I witnessed some of those protests myself. The regime
responded with overwhelming force, shooting civilians
in the streets and arresting, torturing and murdering
them. That is what started the conflict and what
sustains it today. At no point since then has the regime
seriously engaged in a political process; it has pursued
a ruthless military strategy against its own people to
stay in power at any cost.
While I think it is important to say such things,
these words alone will not help the Syrian people today.
First, the least we can now do is to put a stop to the
violence in Idlib by demanding and implementing an
immediate ceasefire. Since the recent escalation, the
regime and its allies have killed more than 500 civilians
and displaced more than 400,000. Of the 3 million
Syrians in Idlib, less than 1 per cent belonged to the
terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.
In Idlib, there remain more babies than terrorists
and, as my American colleague said, more than half the
population, 1.5 million out of 3 million, are children.
The Council must insist on an immediate ceasefire to
protect civilians and prevent further war crimes. We
therefore strongly support the draft resolution proposed
today by Belgium, Kuwait and Germany.
In addition, the least we can do is to ensure justice and
accountability for the crimes committed by the Al-Assad
regime and by Da’esh. The United Kingdom will be
relentless in its efforts to ensure accountability through
its support for the international impartial, independent
mechanism and the United Nations commission
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

of inquiry and through national prosecutions. We
welcome the successful prosecutions already under
way in Europe and the Secretary-General’s decision to
establish a board of inquiry. One day, Bashar Al-Assad
will face justice for his crimes.
We must also keep laser focus on the actions of the
military units currently engaged on the ground in Idlib,
from the regime, Russia and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham.
They include, but are not limited to the 679th, 680th
and 947th squadrons at the Hama airbase; the 7th, 675t,
677th and 685th squadrons at the Shayrat airbase; the
695th and 698th squadrons at the Al-Nasiriyah airbase;
and the 1st and 819th squadrons, as well as the Russian
5th and 827th squadrons, at the Tiyas airbase. We will
be watching the actions of those military units and their
commanders, and we will hold them accountable.
The least we can do is address the root causes of
this conflict. As resolution 2254 (2015) recognizes in its
call for inclusive and non-sectarian governance, there
will never be stability and peace in Syria as long as the
regime terrorizes its people and tortures and murders
those who oppose it. Such conditions will continue to
act as a breeding ground for extremism and terrorism,
such as perpetrated by Al-Qaida and Da’esh.
Finally, this conflict has undermined and weakened
the United Nations and the wider, rules-based
international system. Al-Assad has used chemical
weapons against his own people. He has thumbed his
nose at the Council and its resolutions, at the General
Assembly and at the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons — aided and protected by Russia
and Iran. If we, as United Nations States Members, are
to uphold the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations,
which sought to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and reaffirmed our faith in fundamental
human rights and the dignity and worth of the human
person, we must do more to prevent criminal, rogue
regimes from violating international law and imposing
death and suffering on their people. Respect for State
sovereignty can never be a license to allow a leader to
commit war crimes against his own people.
The Council must learn the lessons from the last
eight years of this conflict and from the suffering of the
Syrian people. We must now urgently come together to
stop the violence in Idlib and to protect Syrians from
further suffering.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First,
like others, I would like to thank Mark Lowcock

S/PV. 8609

and Geir Pedersen for their very detailed and useful
briefings, as always. I am particularly pleased to see
Mr. Pedersen in the Council restored to full health.
The Syrian tragedy has, for some months, entered
into a new phase of the Syrian regime’s ruthless strategy,
following the horrifying destruction of Aleppo at the
end of 2016 and the dreadful battle in Ghouta in 2018.
We are witnessing a similar situation in Idlib, even as
elements could be put in place to advance the political
process, the only way to definitively put an end the
vicious cycle of violence. In that regard, collective
action is urgently needed on three fronts — strictly
enforcing the rules of war, bringing about a cessation
of hostilities and beginning, at long last, the search for
a political solution to the conflict, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
There is an urgent need to silence Idlib’s weapons
and prevent Syria from becoming the scene of a new
escalation and conflagration. France is particularly
concerned about the significant intensification of
the offensive of pro-regime forces in Idlib in recent
weeks. We call on the signatories to the ceasefire
agreement — Russia, first and foremost — to return to
full compliance with their commitments and to ensure
an effective ceasefire in the north-west, with a view to
freezing the fronts and reaching a nationwide ceasefire,
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
In that regard, we welcome the dialogue between
the United States and Turkey on north-east Syria, as
well as the first steps towards establishing a security
mechanism, which advance the necessary de-escalation
of tensions in the east. It is essential that all efforts
focus on the fight against Da’esh, which continues
to pose a major threat to our security. For our part,
we are pursuing action within the framework of the
international coalition against Da’esh, with a view to
the lasting stabilization of these liberated territories.
The second and equally important point is that
respect for international humanitarian law is binding
on all and is not negotiable. I would like to reiterate
two absolute priorities — the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, and
immediate, secure, comprehensive, sustainable and
unhindered humanitarian access to the entirety of
Syrian territory. We condemn in the strongest terms
the attacks of the regime and its allies, which continue
to indiscriminately target civilian populations and

19-2652411/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

infrastructure in the north-west. It is particularly
unacceptable that health infrastructure, including those
that have been de-conflicted, and schools continue to be
targeted. We reiterate our full support for the internal
investigation launched by the Secretary-General in that
regard. The fight against terrorism cannot justify the
sacrifice of civilians, much less children. Such crimes
must not go unpunished.
It is also critical that humanitarian aid reach the
people who need it most through the fastest and most
direct channels. We reiterate our call for parties that
have the means to do so to exert the necessary pressure
on the regime to ensure unhampered humanitarian
access to all areas under its control, and thereby enable
humanitarian workers to respect the cardinal principles
of neutrality, independence, impartiality and humanity,
especially in the south-west and eastern Ghouta. It is
also essential that the United Nations be able to access
displaced persons and refugees who have returned home.
It is also critical that significant and concrete progress
be made with regard to detained and missing persons.
In that connection, I support the recommendations just
made by Mr. Pedersen.
The third priority is to ensure that the urgency of
the situation in Idlib does not cause us to lose sight
of the political urgency. We all know, but it bears
repeating, that only an inclusive political solution can
stabilize Syria in the long-term and eventually allow
refugees to return to their country. In that regard, we
reiterate our full support for the Special Envoy’s efforts
to relaunch a political process, under the auspices of the
United Nations, on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
in its entirety.
More than ever, it is necessary to finalize a
constitutional package that is credible and balanced, both
in the composition of the committee and in its rules of
procedure, and to convene the constitutional committee
in Geneva, under the auspices of the United Nations, as
soon as possible. The Special Envoy has indicated that
we are close to achieving that goal. We therefore call on
the parties to finalize its establishment without delay,
with the supervision of the United Nations. However,
if the regime’s obstruction continues, it will be up to
the Special Envoy to tell us whether the constitutional
committee can really help initiate a political discussion.
Nevertheless, the constitutional committee cannot
be the only driver for the political process. In order to
ensure that the process does not stall, we must now
12/27

29/08/2019

address the other aspects of resolution 2254 (2015), first
by paying attention to the preparations for the Syrian
elections, which must be free and transparent and, in
keeping with resolution 2254 (2015), supervised by the
United Nations. All Syrians, including refugees, must
be allowed to participate. In order to emerge from the
Syrian tragedy, it is critical to give the Syrian people
the ability to once again freely express their views on
their country’s future.
To bring about the political future that we all so
ardently seek, France places its full support in the
efforts of the Special Envoy to bring together the small
group and the guarantors of Astana within the same
international forum. We hope to see progress on this
issue over the weeks ahead.
Lastly, Council members are aware of our
position — shared with the European Union and which
remains unchanged — on reconstruction, the lifting of
sanctions and normalization.
We call on all members of the Security Council
to assume their responsibilities to bring an end to the
tragedy unfolding before our very eyes in Idlib and
urge them to support the draft resolution put forward
by the humanitarian co-penholders, Belgium, Germany
and Kuwait. Tragically, we have been too slow to act.
There is no more time to lose.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their
comprehensive briefings and efforts to find a light at
the end of the tunnel.
We are delighted once again to have Special Envoy
Pedersen in our midst: I welcome him home. We have
always supported his work seeking a solution, including
on a credible, balanced and inclusive Syrian-led and
-owned process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015). We hope that the constitutional committee will
be established soon.
My delegation shares the concerns expressed in the
Secretary-General’s most recent report (S/2019/674)
regarding the continued escalation in north-west
Syria, which has resulted in over 500 civilians being
killed, hundreds injured and more than half a million
individuals displaced since April. We are not only
concerned by the continued escalation of violence
in north-west Syria but also deeply troubled by
the possibility of an offensive deeper into Idlib, as
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

mentioned by the Secretary-General in his statement of
20 August (SG/SM/19705), which could signal further
suffering for 3 million civilians, 76 per cent of whom,
as we all know, estimated to be women and children.
In that regard, Indonesia wishes to highlight three
pertinent points.
First, the attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure must end. We strongly urge all parties
to fully respect international humanitarian law,
strictly uphold the September 2018 memorandum of
understanding on Idlib and refrain from the destruction
of facilities on the de-confliction list and of United
Nations facilities.
Secondly, there is a need to ensure sustainable
humanitarian assistance and access to civilians in
need. The situation in Rukban camp remains dire. It is
important for the United Nations to facilitate and assist
those who have expressed their willingness to leave, as
well as to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance.
We underline what Mr. Lowcock said regarding the need
for such to be voluntary, safe and dignified. We also
appreciate the approval given by the Syrian Government
in that regard and the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Syrian Red Crescent. Continued
dialogue and cooperation among all stakeholders are
urgently needed to ensure that humanitarian access is
being provided, including in Al-Hol camp.
Thirdly, we are pleased to hear encouraging
developments regarding the constitutional committee,
as reported by Special Envoy Pedersen earlier. At this
stage, we must appreciate any positive developments
that keep the process in motion. We sincerely hope that
the outstanding gaps and issues will immediately be
resolved, through further communication and peaceful
discussions. Again, strong and genuine commitment on
the part of all parties to making progress in this process
is critical.
Indonesia remains seriously concerned with the
possible impact of the ongoing escalation in the northwest on efforts to advance the political process. We
cannot secure a credible political process without a
successful de-escalation in Idlib. It would be a tragedy,
for the Syrians, the region and the international
community, if peace were to be rejected and the ongoing
escalation of violence were permitted to prevail in
north-west Syria.
In conclusion, I should like to end by quoting what
Geir recalled in his statement: “let us remember that

S/PV. 8609

Syrian families face multipronged dangers”. He also
mentioned that there is a sense of hopelessness. It is up
to us all in the Security Council to restore hope to the
children and families of Syria.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Mark Lowcock, UnderSecretary-General, and Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for their
informative briefings on the humanitarian situation and
latest developments in the political process in Syria.
My delegation shares the Secretary-General’s
concern regarding the ongoing military escalation in
north-west Syria, particularly in Idlib governorate,
where approximately 3 million people are trapped in the
fighting, as Mr. Lowcock reported. This new outbreak
of violence is exacerbating an already alarming
humanitarian situation and represents a major obstacle
to the smooth running of the political process. According
to humanitarian agencies, the resumption of hostilities
in Idlib governorate has claimed the lives of more than
500 civilians, displaced more than 578,000 people and
destroyed social and educational infrastructure.
Against the backdrop of the continuing deterioration
in the security situation and ongoing humanitarian
challenges, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the parties to adhere
strictly to the agreement made in Sochi on 17 September
2018 between the Russian Federation and Turkey with a
view to achieving the de-escalation required to relieve
the civilian population in distress and resume the
political process.
My delegation takes this opportunity to remind the
parties to the conflict that any action targeting civilians,
health and education facilities, means of transport and
personnel bearing the distinctive signs defined under
the Geneva Conventions constitutes a war crime subject
to prosecution under the provisions of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.
The Security Council’s commitment to finding
lasting solutions to the humanitarian challenges in
Syria must be accompanied by the promotion of a
political solution to the crisis. That is why Côte d’Ivoire
welcomed the holding, on 2 August, of the thirteenth
round of the Astana process, in Nur-Sultan, which
allowed the guarantors of that process to reiterate the
need for the implementation of all agreements relating
to Idlib, including that of 17 September 2018.

19-2652413/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

Moreover, my country welcomes the fourth visit
of the Special Envoy to Damascus, on 10 July, to
reconsider with the Syrian authorities the issue of
establishing a constitutional committee to review and
amend the Constitution.
Likewise, my delegation welcomes the initiative
of Pope Francis, who, in a letter sent to the Syrian
authorities on 22 July, stressed the need for a viable
political solution to the conflict and encouraged the
parties resort to diplomacy, dialogue and negotiation
with the assistance of the international community.
The search for solutions to the Syrian conflict will
also need to incorporate confidence-building measures
between the parties, such as the exchange of detainees,
the return of remains and identification of missing
persons, in accordance with the Astana process. My
delegation encourages the parties to the conflict to
continue such initiatives and urges them to prioritize
dialogue as the viable solution for ensuring lasting
peace in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire expresses its full
support for the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General towards establishing a credible,
balanced and inclusive constitutional committee, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of the present meeting and express our
thanks to Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Pedersen for their
highly informative briefings.
Peru is following the ongoing conflict and grave
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
with deep concern. It is clear that, since April, despite
the fact that there has been an evolution on the ground,
the level of violence has escalated, especially in northwestern areas such as Idlib and Hama. Women and
children, as in all such bloody conflicts, are the principal
victims. We condemn in particular the extensive
damage to the area’s infrastructure, including schools
and medical centres, as a result of air strikes that do
not discriminate between combatants and civilians. In
that regard, we welcome the decision of the SecretaryGeneral to mount an investigation into these and other
incidents in the north-west of the country. We hope that
will lead to much-needed accountability in Syria.
Peru reaffirms its condemnation of terrorism in
the strongest terms but once again emphasizes that
combating this scourge cannot, and must not, be
14/27

29/08/2019

interpreted as a justification for putting the lives of
millions of people at risk.
The responsibility to protect the civilian
population makes the cessation of hostilities in northwestern Syria imperative, which we believe could be
achieved by effectively implementing the September
2018 agreement reached between Turkey and Russia
or through new ways of devising a solution that the
Council should urgently explore and implement in
a united manner, as embodied in the proposed draft
resolution. That is necessary, inter alia, to provide
assistance to the hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons living near the border with Turkey in
extremely precarious conditions.
The focus on events in north-west Syria must
not allow us to lose sight of the humanitarian crises
in other parts of Syria. We commend the efforts of
the United Nations and other humanitarian actors to
provide continued assistance to the 68,000 internally
displaced persons living in the Al-Hol camp and
underscore the importance of continuing to encourage
the international community to support them. Given
that a major percentage of them are of Iraqi origin,
we encourage the Iraqi authorities to conclude the
necessary processes to make their return a reality
within internationally accepted parameters with the
support of the Organization.
While we welcome the recent assessment of
humanitarian needs in Rukban by the United Nations
and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, we underscore the
obligation to allow continued access for that assistance,
as well as to guarantee that those who wish to return to
their homes can do so in a voluntary, dignified and safe
manner. We also hope that the bilateral arrangements
announced in the northern part of the country will
not pose a threat to the civilian population or affect
humanitarian assistance operations.
With regard to the political arena, Peru is eagerly
awaiting that the efforts of the Special Envoy in
conjunction with the parties and the Astana format lead
to the speedy establishment of a legitimate and balanced
constitutional committee in line with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex). We commend the progress that has been made
to that end. We emphasize the urgent need to agree on
a single measure encompassing aspects relating to its
composition, decision-making functions and mandate
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

as soon as possible so that it leads to free elections
monitored by the United Nations.
In conclusion, I underscore the urgency of the
parties continuing to work on measures that foster a
better environment of understanding, particularly with
regard to the release of detainees, the identification of
missing persons and the transfer of human remains.
We welcome the work being done within the Astana
framework but note the need to make further significant
progress in that regard.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings. We appreciate the constructive efforts of the
United Nations and all parties concerned in promoting
a political settlement to the Syrian issue and improving
the humanitarian situation on the ground.
The protracted conflict in Syria has brought about
untold suffering to the country and its people and has
become one of the major challenges hampering the
return of security and stability to the Middle East.
China supports the settlement of the Syrian issue
through political means and calls on the international
community to scale up its humanitarian assistance
to Syria. In that regard, I would like to make the
following points.
First, based on the principle of a Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254 (2015),
we should continue to promote a political settlement
to the Syrian issue. The priority now is to establish
a representative constitutional committee accepted
by all parties. That is the most realistic way forward
to launch a political process in Syria. For some time,
Special Envoy Pedersen has been in close contact
with all parties with regard to the establishment of the
constitutional committee through his tireless efforts.
At present, only a few outstanding issues remain. Hope
is within sight.
The international community should stand firmly
behind the Special Envoy and support the continued
role of the Astana process. Security Council members
should remain united and speak with one voice.
All parties in Syria should continue to resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultations and
increase mutual trust through measures such as the
exchange of detainees.

S/PV. 8609

Secondly, rampant terrorism poses a major threat
to the Syrian political process. Combating terrorism is
an important aspect of resolving the Syrian issue. Idlib
is part of Syria. A proper solution to the issue of Idlib is
closely linked to the territorial integrity of Syria, as well
as the country’s future. The international community
should work in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law, uphold
unified standards and combat terrorist organizations in
order to prevent the resurgence of terrorist forces.
Recently, Russian President Putin met with Turkish
President Erdoğan, and they agreed to take joint
measures to promote the normalization of the situation
in Idlib. In mid-September, Russia, Turkey and Iran will
hold a summit. China applauds such diplomatic efforts
and looks forward to seeing their positive outcomes.
Thirdly, based on the situation on the ground,
we should take tailored measures to address the
humanitarian issues in various regions as well as in
camps for internally displaced persons throughout the
country. China supports efforts to protect innocent
civilians and provide them with decent living conditions.
Based on a long-term perspective, we should support
the Syrian Government’s reconstruction efforts in areas
where the security situation is relatively stable.
The international community bears a moral
responsibility to help Syria restore economic development
and social stability, instead of relying solely on exerting
pressure. China has been providing humanitarian
assistance to Syria in several areas, including food
assistance, power supply, public transportation and
personnel training. China is currently in contact and
coordinating with the Syrian Government. The focus of
our plan is to launch livelihood projects to support the
post-war reconstruction of Syria.
In the process of promoting a political settlement of
the Syrian issue and providing humanitarian assistance
to Syria, we must respect its sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. We cannot allow Syria
to be fragmented by separatist forces. All the relevant
parties of the international community should work
together to build up the momentum and create the
necessary conditions for achieving a political settlement.
Recently, the Special Envoy of the Chinese
Government on the Syrian issue, Mr. Xie Xiaoyan,
visited Iran and Syria. He met with Special Envoy
Pedersen in Geneva and had an in-depth exchange
of views with all sides concerned. As always, China

19-2652415/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

stands ready to play a constructive role in achieving a
political settlement to the Syrian issue.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Pedersen for
their informative briefings. We reiterate our support
for their efforts to improve the living conditions
of the Syrian population and achieve peace in that
country — an aspiration that the Dominican Republic
fully shares.
The Dominican Republic supports all diplomatic
means for resolving this crisis regardless of whoever
takes the initiative to that end. That goal is undoubtedly
an ambitious task facing great challenges going forward,
in the light of the fragile and volatile situation in the
north-western part of the country. The 500 confirmed
civilian deaths over a three-month period, with more
than 400,000 displaced people and repeated attacks on
health-care and educational infrastructure, paint a truly
bleak picture.
We welcome the investigative process announced
by the Secretary-General and hope to see its results as
soon as possible. Furthermore, we support the draft
resolution submitted by the co-penholders as a clear
demonstration of the Council’s commitment to peace
in Syria.
We believe that, at the present juncture, it is
essential to maintain our focus on the ultimate goal of
our efforts. For the Dominican Republic that objective
is clear — ensure a credible political process for and by
Syrians, with the facilitation of the United Nations, that
opens the door to a new national framework based on
the rule of law, respect for human rights and sustainable
development. We acknowledge the progress made on the
composition and rules of procedure of the constitutional
committee and await progress on its mandate. Those
three elements should be considered holistically. We
urge Ambassador Pedersen to continue advocating that
approach and solidifying the role of the United Nations
as guarantor and facilitator of the process.
In Ambassador Pedersen’s most recent briefing
to the Council (see S/PV.8567), he conveyed to us the
feeling of distrust and lack of faith on the part of the
various stakeholders, in particular the opposition and
civil society, in the political process. For the Dominican
Republic, such sentiments jeopardize a sustainable
political solution. In order to reverse it, we believe it is
essential that the parties move forward with concrete
measures in the following direction.
16/27

29/08/2019

First, they should move forward with the full
implementation of the September 2018 ceasefire
agreement. In areas under the control of the Government,
people must be able to return to their normal lives
without fear. That includes the millions of displaced
persons and refugees, whose return depends on viable
conditions for a dignified and safe life. The parties
should also advance the process to release detainees,
starting with the immediate suspension of arbitrary
detention and the unilateral release of women, children,
those who are ill and people with disabilities, as an act
of good faith. And they should ensure that all segments
of the society are included in the decision-making
process, in particular Syrian women.
The catastrophic humanitarian situation that
continues to unfold in the north-west of the country
could end up burying any opportunity that lies ahead
in the political process. Therefore, halting all hostilities
that endanger the lives of civilians must be pursued at
all costs. Retaking Idlib, however, cannot be pursued
at any cost. International humanitarian law must be
respected, civilian infrastructure must be protected and
humanitarian access must be maintained.
We underscore that any consideration of
establishing a possible safe zone must ensure the safety
and well-being of, and humanitarian access to, the
population. Furthermore, security and assistance must
be provided for the hundreds of thousands on the border
with Turkey. We encourage the donor community to
intensify efforts to fund the humanitarian response
plan as soon as possible. A sustainable solution to the
conflict will emerge only from the political commitment
of all parties, including external ones, to the peace and
prosperity of the Syrian people — their main objective.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
you, Madam President, for convening today’s important
meeting. We also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for their useful briefings.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, while
the conflict in Syria might make fewer headlines
eight years later, it certainly remains one of the most
complex humanitarian crises in the world, as proved
by the statistics just provided by Mr. Lowcock and
some of the delegations that took the floor before me.
The ongoing harsh offensive by the Syrian army is
significantly increasing tensions in Idlib and parts of
the neighbouring cities of Aleppo, Hamah and Latakia.
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The situation is deteriorating rapidly, with extremely
high levels of violence continuing to hamper the
humanitarian response, and in particular the provision
of food aid to more than 20,000 people in some areas
of Idlib. In addition, those displaced in camps, such as
Rukban and Al-Hol, remain in inhumane conditions.
While it is true that we must support local efforts
to eradicate terrorist threats, we remain deeply
concerned about the plight of civilians who are faced
with continuous bombardment. There are many civilian
victims and, in that context, Equatorial Guinea believes
that it is important that all parties directly involved in
the conflict comply with all agreements reached on
Idlib, aimed both at continuing to fight terrorists and at
ensuring the safety of civilians.
We believe that, even in the fight against terrorism,
we must always ensure respect for international
humanitarian law. With regard to protecting health
centres and medical personnel in Idlib, we insist that the
allies of the parties must be more involved in order to
prevent the deterioration of the situation. Furthermore,
the parties to the conflict must be reminded that any
attack, including attacks on education centres and
health facilities, considerably undermines efforts
to resolve the crisis and poses a serious threat to the
security of the region.
In that regard, Equatorial Guinea joins the support
expressed for the Secretary-General’s initiative to
establish an internal board of inquiry at Headquarters
to investigate a series of incidents in north-western
Syria. We have high expectations for the work of the
board of inquiry. We hope that the Council will be
provided with a comprehensive report on the issue in
the coming weeks.
With regard to the political process, the Government
of Equatorial Guinea believes that all the necessary
conditions now exist for the successful convening of the
constitutional committee, which would make it possible
to initiate direct consultations among Syrians on the
parameters for the future of their country, as envisaged
in resolution 2254 (2015).
As every delegation, including those of the Syrian
Government and the armed opposition, agreed on
and finalized the composition of the constitutional
committee in the last round of consultations held in
Nursultan earlier this month, there is no doubt that
it is possible and feasible to move towards a political
solution, above and beyond the military truce established

S/PV. 8609

specifically in the areas most committed to the process,
such as the north and north-west of the country.
We also recall the overriding obligation of the
parties to continue to provide unwavering support
to the Special Envoy for the successful conclusion
of the process, without forgetting the need to resolve
the problems on the battlefield first, before creating
a strengthened institutional framework to restore
political stability and peace in Syria.
I wish to conclude my statement by reiterating
the obligation that falls to us members of the Security
Council to continue our efforts and urging the
negotiating parties to resolve all other matters relating to
the committee’s rules of procedure as soon as possible,
as well as facilitating the beginning of its work.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, we would like
to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. Geir Pedersen
for their comprehensive briefings. Allow me to make
four remarks.
First of all, on the situation in northwest Syria,
we associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
namely, Belgium, Kuwait and Germany.
We remain deeply concerned by the military
offensive in north-west Syria through indiscriminate
air strikes, shelling and the use of barrel bombs.
The ongoing escalation has severe consequences for
civilians, who were again indiscriminately targeted
in blatant violation of international humanitarian law.
We have repeatedly stated that there can be no excuse
for attacks against innocent civilians, the destruction
of hospitals and schools through targeted aerial attacks
and the displacement of 500,000 civilians.
We, too, are concerned by the presence and
attacks of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other United
Nations-designated terrorist groups in Idlib. As the
Special Envoy reminded us in his briefing, there is
no easy solution or panacea, but their attacks must
stop. They must cease. However, the fight against
terrorism does not justify indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Therefore, we
remind the Russian Federation and the Syrian regime
once again that counter-terrorism operations do not
override the responsibility to protect civilians, or any
other obligations under international humanitarian
law. The Syrian regime and the Russian Federation

19-2652417/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

29/08/2019

must immediately end their military offensive in and
around Idlib.

of the constitutional committee under the auspices of
the United Nations.

We urge all sides to recommit fully to the ceasefire
arrangements of the Russian-Turkish memorandum of
understanding and implement it in full, including by
withdrawing their forces from the agreed demilitarized
zone. We need to see a de-escalation zone without
escalation. The Council needs to do everything in its
power to urgently alleviate the humanitarian situation
in Idlib. Kuwait, Belgium and Germany have presented
a draft resolution to the members of the Council that
aims to do exactly that. We look forward to working
constructively with all Council members on the text.

Thirdly, there will be no solution to the tragic
conflict in Syria without a serious change in the
Syrian regime’s behaviour. It remains essential to
create a safe, calm and neutral environment in which
a political transition can take place. First and foremost,
this requires an immediate end to the brutal actions of
the Syrian regime. However, arbitrary arrests, torture,
sexual violence and forced disappearances and killings
of detainees continue, even in so-called reconciled
areas. Those actions must finally stop. It is this Syrian
regime’s policy that keeps Syrian internally displaced
persons and refugees from returning home. It is the
responsibility of the Syrian regime to provide credible
security guarantees that would enable the voluntary,
safe and dignified return of Syrians to their country.
As discussed during the Council’s meeting at the
beginning of August (see S/PV.8593), we also need
to see meaningful progress on the issue of detainees
and missing persons. Again, the Special Envoy has
reported some progress in that area, but of course it is
not yet sufficient.

Secondly, as there is no military solution to this
conflict, Germany remains convinced that only a
political solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
can achieve sustainable peace and stability in Syria.
We recognize the role that the Astana group and the
Russian Federation in particular can play with regard
to a political solution under the guidance of the United
Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen. But we need to
finally see tangible progress and concrete results.
Promises and optimistic statements are not sufficient.
The constitutional committee is a good case in
point. It is overdue and urgently needed as an entry point
into a political transition process. It could and should
have been established a long time ago. Today we heard
from Mr. Pedersen that the package is nearly finalized
and that he is hopeful that it can be finalized before the
beginning of the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly. That is good news. Unfortunately — and we
have to be honest about this — we have heard this too
many times. We hope that he is right, but we have been
told time and again about progress on the establishment
of the constitutional committee, and time and again we
have been left disappointed. We have to say that this
is largely due to the Syrian regime and its policies of
obstruction and procrastination.
Let me also say that we are particularly alarmed
by reports that the regime’s intelligence services
threatened and intimidated prospective members of the
constitutional committee, as well as their families in
Syria, in order to sabotage the committee before its first
session. Damascus must stop harassing its prospective
members and allow their free movement in and out of
the country. It must seriously engage on the formation
18/27

As long as the Syrian regime does not change its
brutal behaviour and end its continuous violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, there will be no lifting of sanctions.
As long as there is no credible, inclusive and genuine
political process firmly under way, there will be no
participation in reconstruction efforts from our side.
We therefore call on Syria to finally engage seriously in
bringing about a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process, facilitated by the United Nations on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015) in all its elements.
My final point refers to accountability, which is
most crucial from our point of view. The crimes and
atrocities committed on all sides during the Syrian
conflict, including horrific accounts of murder, torture,
sexual violence and crimes against children, must be
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
National reconciliation and lasting peace in Syria will
not be possible without justice and accountability.
The International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2011 has become a central
repository of information and evidence of the crimes
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

committed in Syria, and therefore has a crucial role to
play in the prosecution of crimes committed during the
Syrian conflict. We will continue to support the work
of the Mechanism and the Commission of Inquiry.
We also welcome Secretary-General’s establishment
of a board of inquiry regarding the incidents in Idlib.
We will continue to pursue accountability in order to
achieve justice for the victims and eventually enable
national reconciliation and sustainable peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Geir Pederson, and the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Mark Lowcock, for
their briefings.
Unfortunately, today’s meeting is a textbook example
of the how the Syrian issue is often discussed in the
Security Council. The humanitarian problems — which
certainly do exist — are being distorted and blown out
of proportion. We are also very concerned by what
is happening, however we are very conscious of the
primary reason they exist. None of us must forget
the fact that this situation is not due to the activities
of the regime and its allies, as our Western colleagues
repeat over and over again, but rather the activities
of terrorists working in the area — who, by the way,
cannot complain about insufficient material or military
support.
We must not forget that, if it were not for the
terrorists who went to Syria and tried, with the support
of some of our Western colleagues, to overthrow the
Syrian authorities, Syria would not be facing these
terrible problems, which have caused the deaths of
hundreds of thousands of people and affect the lives
of many millions of others who had to flee from their
homes or live in poverty.
Neither the Syrian people nor the peoples of other
countries will ever forget this. History, as my British
colleague said, will judge those who claim to stand
for Western values but, because of their geopolitical
ambitions, have almost destroyed an entire country and
condemned it to unprecedented suffereing, as well as
those who sang the same tune in the Security Council
spreading mendacious and unverified information
in order to impede the political process and national
reconciliation. Even if members do not have test tubes
in their hands today like their predecessors who lied
about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, they are still
doing the same thing.

S/PV. 8609

Russia without doubt supports the efforts of
Special Envoy Pedersen and is taking active measures
to promote the political process and to restore trust
between the parties to the Syrian conflict. As has
already been noted, intensive work is being done in the
Astana process, together with Iran and Turkey and in
cooperation with the Special Envoy, the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic and the opposition. I would
like to emphasize that the Astana process is the only
forum contributing to political reconciliation in Syria.
The most recent meeting under the Astana format
took place on 1 and 2 August. A noteworthy feature
was the participation of Beirut and Baghdad as new
observers. The fifth summit of the guarantor countries
is planned for mid-September in Turkey. The meeting
in Nur-Sultan took place in a constructive atmosphere,
with all the participants, first and foremost the
guarantor countries, seeking compromise and more
effective cooperation. We hope that, despite the
increasingly blatant efforts of our Western colleagues
to impede the process, we will soon be able to launch
the constitutional committee. We, like Mr. Pedersen,
are optimistic that the preparatory work on this aspect
will soon be completed.
Nonetheless, we emphatically encourage — and I
would like to emphasize this insistence — all parties
genuinely interested in the success of the political
process who want to work towards a stable settlement
in Syria not to throw a spanner in the works of these
efforts. A lot has already been done. Any confrontational
or imbalanced actions or discussions, including within
the United Nations, will not help efforts towards a
political settlement in Syria. I will be quite honest:
such discussions or actions would directly impede
Mr. Pedersen’s efforts, which is not what we want.
The joint statement issued by Russia, Turkey and
Iran on 2 August emphasized the need to establish
calm on the ground by fully implementing all of the
agreements with regard to Idlib, especially the Sochi
memorandum of 18 September 2018. It also expressed
serious concern at the increasing prevalence of
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in the de-escalation zone and
confirmed the commitment of the parties to further
cooperate on finally eliminating the terrorists. All
of this, of course, while respecting the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular
in Idlib, was discussed during negotiations between the
Presidents of Russia and Turkey on 27 August, where

19-2652419/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

they reaffirmed the Russian-Turkish understanding on
this and other issues.
Idlib remains the main theatre of tensions. Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham has effectively turned the region into
a bridgehead for attacks on the positions of Syrian
Government forces and against civilians in nearby
towns and cities. During this month alone, fighters
have been able to carry out more than 20 attacks on the
positions of Syrian forces, resulting in more than 140
killed and approximately 230 Syrian personnel injured;
dozens of civilians were also injured. Attacks are also
continuing on Russian military facilities in Syria. For
instance, the Khmeimim airbase was attacked by the
terrorists using missiles four times in August alone. If
one were to believe our British colleagues’ assertions
that there are more infants than terrorists in Idlib, then
it would seem that many of those infants have grown
beards and know how to use the latest weapons. Do
you not think this is rather bizarre? We certainly do. In
answer to the constant provocation from the terrorists
and to reduce the threat against civilians, the Syrian
army, with the support of Russian aviation, has been
compelled to take action. However, we must emphasize
that all the measures have been taken strictly inside the
demilitarized zone, which should have been established
a year ago pursuant to the Sochi memorandum.
The possibility of a reconciliation has been
mentioned in this Chamber, but nobody has mentioned
that the Syrian Government agreed to the ceasefire in
Idlib brokered in Nur-Sultan on 2 August on the condition
that all parties adhered to the Sochi memorandum,
which would entail the withdrawal of heavy weapons.
However, the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham terrorists refused
to comply with the ceasefire and to withdraw fighters
beyond the de-escalation line. Therefore, the ceasefire
did not hold, and the fault for that does not lie with
Damascus but with the terrorists who are continuing to
bombard Idlib.
Russian and Syrian military forces are striving to
ensure that the actual situation in the Idlib de-escalation
zone is reported as widely as possible in the press. On
26 August, representatives of more than 20 Russian
and European media outlets visited the area around
Khan Shaykhun, in south-east Idlib province, which
was liberated by Syrian Government forces. Yes, this is
the very same Khan Shaykhun where, some time ago,
White Helmets staged a blatant provocation, alleging
that the Syrian forces had used chemical weapons. We
debunked those claims loud and clear a long time ago.
20/27

29/08/2019

Journalists have been able to see with their own eyes
how the terrorists are using civilian infrastructure for
military ends, as well as inspect their extended network
of fortifications. We had hoped to hear about that from
our Western colleagues — although, of course, we did
not hear anything, even though journalists from these
Western countries were courageous enough to go out
there and find out for themselves the truth about the
situation in terrorist-controlled areas.
As for other regions in Syria, we are concerned
about the continued instability in the north-east of the
country. Despite the alleged end of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, terrorists are continuing their
underground activity and are activating their socalled sleeper cells. This also complicates matters in
terms of the fighting between Kurdish formations and
Sunni Arabs who have historically lived in the area.
The Russian position on this remains unchanged:
we advocate re-establishing territorial integrity
and sovereignty in Syria as a guarantee of national
security for neighbouring countries and to achieve
regional stability.
The overall humanitarian situation in north-east
Syria also remains dire. A clear example of this is the
situation in the Al-Hol camp for internally displaced
persons, which is in territory outside the control of the
Syrian authorities. We have been asking for a long time
that the forces controlling this territory share with all
of us what is actually happening there. However, there
is still a complete void with regard to information about
what is actually happening beyond the Euphrates.
Accordingly, we have a logical question for those who
claim to care so much about humanitarian stability in
Syria. Why is it that they focus their attention almost
exclusively on Idlib province? Are they indifferent to
the fate of Syrians living in the north-east? Is it not true
that civilians are dying there as a result of the activity
of fighters and that infrastructure has been destroyed?
We have information suggesting that it is true, and we
have shared it with members. Do members not have that
information, or are they simply not interested in what is
happening there?
We are also worried by the situation in the Al-Tanf
area. We wish to recall once again that, under the
Geneva Convention, an occupying Power is responsible
for the population in the territory it is occupying. That
holds true of all the areas I have listed. Russia, together
with the Syrian Government and in coordination
with specialized international humanitarian agencies,
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

continues its work to dismantel the Rukban camp,
which is in the zone of illegal American occupation,
and help people resettle. In the second half of
August, an assessment mission of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent carried out a survey the civilian
population in the camp who wished to leave. Within a
month from now, we plan to organize the departure of
a total of approximately 16,000 people. Overall, since
March, some 18,000 refugees have already left Rukban.
Following their departure, almost all of them were able
to return to their places of permanent residence in areas
controlled by Damascus.
We continue to believe that humanitarian assistance
should be provided to all Syrians throughout the Syrian
territory without preconditions. We believe that it
is important to promote the reconstruction of Syria,
which should be carried out in strict accordance with
the norms of international humanitarian law and the
principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence.
We must work to create the conditions for and promote
the safe and voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their places of residence in Syria
and to ensure their right to return and to support.
In conclusion, let me share an observation about
a trend that we see recurring. As soon as the Syrian
forces gain some advantage on the ground and begin
to force terrorists out, our Western colleagues increase
their cries and calls for an end to military activity. It
seems they have forgotten our common decision to
uncompromisingly fight terrorists. As we have heard
today, those terrorists become “innocent babies” and
there appear schools and hospitals that have supposedly
been bombed by Russia but in fact either did not exist
or were not targeted.
We refute all that, but nobody listens to us. It seems
that the objective is not to establish the truth but rather
to reverse any move by Syria towards peace under its
elected President and legitimate Government.
I wish to disappoint some members. That process
is irreversible. There is already an agreed consensus
in support of a new peaceful Syria that is owned by
the Syrian people and not by Western puppets and
mercenaries. Terrorists and those who support them
no longer have the advantage. It is not possible to
save them. The sooner that is understood, the quicker
we will achieve peace in Syria and the more lives we
will be able to save. The Council should not forget

S/PV. 8609

this enormous responsibility to history and future
generations that rests with it today.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): I would like to start
by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for their insightful briefings this morning.
South Africa continues to express its deep concern
about the many civilians, in particular women and
children, who have lost their lives, sustained severe
injuries and been displaced due to the recent upsurge
of violence in north-west Syria. We have grave
concerns over the widespread destruction of civilian
infrastructure and basic services, with schools, health
facilities, markets, water stations and residential areas
destroyed in the fighting.
We also express concern that a number of aid
agencies have suspended their operations due to increase
in violence. The large numbers of people fleeing the
area add to the already overburdened humanitarian
response. We continue to urge all parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is
also important that the signatories of the September
2018 ceasefire memorandum adhere to its provisions.
South Africa reiterate that, while we acknowledge
the threat and violence committed by terrorist
organizations, it is also necessary that all actions taken
to counter terrorism activities not be undertaken at the
expense of innocent civilian lives and that any other
such actions be taken only within the parameters of
international law. We express support for the opening
of a peace corridor in northern Syria in an effort to
establish a safe zone in the region and to facilitate the
repatriation of Syrian refugees through such corridors.
We continue to call for the immediate cessation of
hostilities between the parties engaged in the conflict.
We wish to re-emphasize that the situation in Syria can
be resolved only through negotiation and dialogue in
a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led process supported by
the United Nations. We therefore call on all parties to
exert every effort towards the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015) to further avoid the displacement
of Syrians and loss of innocent lives. We recognize the
role of the Astana process in trying to find a solution
to the situation in Syria. Furthermore, we call for the
early convening of the constitutional committee and

19-2652421/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

thank the Special Envoy for his hard work in that
regard. To ensure its legitimacy, the committee should
be inclusive and representative of all Syrian actors.
Without a political process, the humanitarian situation
will further deteriorate, leading to more destruction
and deaths.
In conclusion, we further call for respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Syria by all
States Members of the United Nations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for their briefings. As always, I reiterate
our full support for their work.
The current situation in Syria remains unacceptable.
As we speak, a deadly escalation of the conflict in
north-west Syria is ongoing. Since April, more than 500
civilians have been killed and hundreds more injured,
including the most vulnerable groups, that is, women
and children. Strikes have caused the destruction of
civilian infrastructure, including internally displaced
persons camps, markets, schools and, most importantly,
health-care facilities.
Any military operation should be conducted
fully in line with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The protection
of civilians and provision of unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance are not a choice but a legal
obligation for all sides to the conflict. Those who do
not comply should be held accountable.
That is why we should focus on the need to enhance
multilateral cooperation and uphold international law
to address the multiple challenges not only in Syria but
also in a wider regional perspective. That was the aim
of our high-level debate, held almost two weeks ago, on
challenges to peace and security in the Middle East (see
S/PV. 8600).
As almost every day we hear about the suffering
of the civilian population in Idlib province, we want to
underline that civilians should be subject to protection,
in line with the international law. In that context, I
would like to thank the three penholders in charge of
the humanitarian dossier on Syria for proposing a draft
resolution, as recently announced. They can count on
our support.
22/27

29/08/2019

There is a need for enhanced efforts aimed at
the promotion of and compliance with international
humanitarian law, as indicated in the recently adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2019/8, on the initiative
of Poland, on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. Let me recall the words of
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Peter Maurer, on this important anniversary
“[C]ontinued violations of the law do not mean the
law is inadequate, but rather that efforts to ensure
respect are inadequate. We can and must do more.
The Council can do more.” (S/PV. 8596, p.5)
Let me conclude by underlining that there can
be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. Any
lasting settlement can be achieved only through a
political agreement, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). A
political settlement is urgently needed, since it remains
the only way towards sustainable peace under the
extremely dire circumstances. We look forward to the
establishment of the constitutional committee, the first
step towards a genuine political process, under the
supervision of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for managing the work of the Security Council for this
month. I also express our satisfaction about the recovery
of Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, to good health. We are pleased to see him back
at work.
I have noted from the statements of some of my
colleagues — particularly those from the delegations
of the United States, Britain, France, Belgium and
Germany — that they are now speaking as if they were
the Special Envoy. They have drawn up a new road map
for him, one that has nothing to do with the road map
that he follows and was agreed upon by everybody.
The new road map is full of landmines in the shape
of preconditions and was presented in a rude way that
does not respect the mandate of the Special Envoy. In
fact, it violates his mandate and its provisions, thereby
obstructing the Special Envoy’s noble mission.
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

The only path, the most effective and the least
costly, to end the suffering of the Syrian people is for
the States that sponsor terrorism to recall their monsters
from Idlib and Al-Hol camp, which is being run by the
occupying United States forces in a dear part of my
country. I ask them to take back their monsters and put
them in their civilized caves in Europe, Britain — as
Britain is no longer part of Europe — Australia, the
United States, Turkey, the Caucuses, the Gulf, Tunisia,
Egypt, Jordan and Central Asia. Then the bloodshed of
the Syrian people will stop and my country — all of it,
not just Idlib — will enjoy peace and security.
Terrorism in the caves of Tora Bora led to the attacks
on New York on 11 September 2001. Terrorism in the
caves of Idlib led to the killing of tens of thousands of
Syrians in Aleppo, Hama, Latakia and throughout the
Syria. Therefore, no one can blame us when we exercise
our sovereign right to combat terrorism.
As we are speaking about terrorism, I mention
the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism in The
Hague, the Netherlands. According to the Centre, there
are nearly 4,300 European terrorists fighting in Syria
and Iraq. The “moderate armed Syrian opposition” has
been genetically modified. First, they were Europeans,
then became Syrians and now, members of the moderate
armed Syrian opposition. Of those 4,300 European
terrorists, 2,838 are from Belgium, Britain, France
and Germany. Four European countries sent us almost
3,000 terrorists. These statistics are not accurate, as
they are European statistics. The Syrian Government’s
figures are much bigger. The number of Belgian
terrorists in Syria today who are fighting the Syrian
Government is 400. Fighting what? They are fighting
the Syrian Government.
I would like the Belgian representative to ask my
dear friend and Belgian colleague, Ambassador Jan De
Ruyt, who was here in 2011, what I said to him back then,
when the crisis first started in Syria. I told him that we
had detected the first foreign terrorist in Syria. He was
a sniper, attacking Syrian soldiers and policemen in
Homs. He was Belgian. The very first foreign terrorist
detected in Syria was from Belgium. I encourage the
Belgian representative to ask his colleague Ambassador
De Ruyt. We could speak at length about this matter.
It has become the regular approach of certain
speakers in the Council, and has occurred in 62
meetings prior to this one, that with every victory of
the Syrian Arab Army in confronting the hordes of

S/PV. 8609

global terrorism, they launch campaigns of lies in order
to defame and mar the image of the Syrian State. The
Council will recall that, when Homs was liberated,
some claimed the use of what was then called exploding
barrels. Regarding Al-Qusayr and Qalamoun, on
the Syrian-Lebanese border, lies were spread about
forced evictions and demographic changes. When
the eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo were liberated
there were claims of siege, starvation and obstructing
access to medical supplies. When the eastern Ghouta
villages were liberated lies were fabricated about the
use of chemical weapons. Now we hear other claims
about targeting medical and educational facilities and
services in Idlib and its outskirts.
All those claims are baseless and simply part of the
unjust and aggressive political architecture of terrorism
that has been targeting my country for the past eight
years. I assert before the Council that the Syrian Air
Force and the friendly Russian Air Force do not attack
civilian targets. Instead, they attack only terrorist bases
and centres, unless one considers the bases and centres
of terrorists as sanctuaries of worship, kindergartens
and centres that promote international humanitarian law.
Moreover, there are not 3 million Syrians in Idlib.
That number is misleading and incorrect. Idlib does not
hold 20 per cent of Syria’s population. It is, instead,
a small province in Syria, compared to Syria’s other
provinces. The number of residents living in Idlib is no
more than 1 million.
Earlier this month, I took part in the thirteenth
round of the Astana meetings, which were held in NurSultan, the capital of Kazakhstan. That round of talks
concluded in the adoption of an important declaration
that reiterated a strong commitment to the Syrian Arab
Republic’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as
continued cooperation with the Syrian Government until
the terrorist organizations in Syria are totally eliminated.
The declaration also rejected the separatist agendas that
aim to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. Moreover, the declaration reiterated adhering
to international resolutions pertaining to putting an end
to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan — first and
foremost resolution 497 (1981).
In that context, my delegation would like to thank
the delegations of Russia and Iran, as well as the host
State, Kazakhstan, for their contributions to ensure the
success of that round of talks. We emphasize the need
to not prejudice this track because, as enjoys broad

19-2652423/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

support and consensus, especially from the Syrian
people, who are primarily concerned with determining
their own future. We also stress the need to not obstruct
this track for any reason.
What is astonishing here is the provocative measure
by the United States and Turkey, which coincided with
the final meeting of the Astana round of talks, taken
directly after the final declaration was issued, as
thankfully mentioned by our Russian colleague. They
have taken that provocative measure aimed at creating a
new reality on the ground in the areas illegally occupied
by the forces of those two States.
That provocative measure took the form of
a statement issued by those two parties on an
agreement to establish a so-called safe zone on Syrian
territory — I repeat: on Syrian territory, not in Florida,
Texas or Istanbul. My country categorically rejects
that agreement, as it constitutes a blatant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic, which has been affirmed by all Security
Council resolutions on Syria. It is also a blatant violation
of the principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. This United States-Turkish
agreement has further exposed those two countries’
partnership in the aggression against Syria and the
manoeuvring and deceit governing their policies.
We are facing a dangerous reality in which two
antagonist countries are supporting terrorism in my
country and overtly negotiating encroachment over the
territories of a third State — my country, Syria — while,
at the same time, the Security Council, through 20
resolutions, has confirmed its firm commitment to
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. The United States delegation
supported those 20 resolutions, which were adopted
unanimously. Can the Council therefore let us know
what position it takes vis-à-vis the hostile behaviour
of the United States and Turkey in entrenching
the occupation of part of my country? Is there any
justification for the Council’s silence on the blatant and
public violation of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations?
Certain all-too-familiar Member States strive
to exhaust Council members by sometimes calling
for almost daily meetings, providing false witnesses,
proposing draft letters, statements and draft resolutions
and establishing committees, such as the one recently
set up to investigate claims that hospitals and medical
24/27

29/08/2019

centres are being targeted, based on so-called opensource accounts that are both misleading and unfounded.
All such efforts are meant to level accusations against
the Syrian Government and tarnish its reputation,
rather than to rely on the documented information that
my Government provides to the United Nations. In that
regard, I thank Mr. Lowcock for putting himself today
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in the service of the agendas of the antagonist
countries vis-à-vis my country.
Israel’s participation in this terrorist architecture
was demonstrated in the recent Israeli attacks on the
territories of three Arab States, namely, Syria, Iraq and
Lebanon, which were supported by the United States
Secretary of State in a manifestation of the United
States-Israel partnership aimed at continued instability
and insecurity in the region to serve Israeli interests.
The Polish presidency thankfully held a meeting
on 20 August regarding the challenges to international
peace and stability in the Middle East (see S/PV.8600),
during which most speakers confirmed that Israel’s
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
and its aggressive policies are the root cause of
those challenges. In the light of the firm statements
delivered by dozens of speakers, we would assume that
there is no place for further political illiteracy in this
international Organization.
Certain speakers mentioned today the current
situation in Idlib. In that regard, I would like to confirm
that my Government has demonstrated the patience
of Job, opted for political solutions and has provided
sufficient time, as it has always dealt seriously with
all attempts to restore calm. It has abided by such
initiatives to safeguard the lives of Syrian citizens and
end the actions of those who trade in the pain and blood
of Syrians throughout Syria.
As I said, we recently witnessed that seriousness at
the thirteenth round of the Astana talks, in which the
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic participated and
where we adopted a final communiqué, which was very
constructive. But that communiqué was completely
rejected, while I was in the middle of a press conference
at Astana. I was reading out an official statement
on behalf of my Government after the meeting’s
conclusion, and the agreement was broken and rejected
within half an hour of its adoption. Who broke that
agreement? Turkey, the terrorists and the sponsors of
the terrorists in Idlib.
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Terrorist organizations and their sponsors have
chosen the military solution through their continued
targeting of civilian areas in Aleppo, Hamah, southern
Idlib and Latakia where hundreds of innocent victims
were killed and thousands were injured. This has met
with silence by the co-penholders on the humanitarian
issue, who failed to say a single word to condemn it in or
outside the Council. Rather, the co-penholders talk only
about confidence-building measures with the terrorists,
thereby disregarding the fact that the Western-backed
terrorist groups have killed a large number of those
whom they kidnapped and were holding hostage.
Furthermore, out of concern for the safety of its
citizens, my Government recently announced the
opening of a humanitarian corridor in the city of Souran
to enable civilians who wish to leave the areas in which
terrorist groups are present in the northern rural Hamah
area and southern Idlib for areas in which the State is
present. We are working on meeting the various needs
of those civilians in terms of food, shelter and medical
care. Moreover, my country has agreed to send an entire
hospital of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the Al-Hol camp. It seems the news of sending
an entire Red Cross hospital to the Al-Hol camp has
not reached Mr. Lowcock. My country’s Government
strongly rejects the claims in the report of the Secretariat
(S/2019/674) aimed at besmirching its reputation and
spreading false and unfounded accusations involving
the targeting of civilian infrastructure in Idlib.
The twenty-fourth report (S/2019/570) of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
asserts that
“[Idlib] contains the greatest concentration of
terrorist elements anywhere in the Levant and Iraq
and is described as ‘the world’s biggest dumping
ground for foreign terrorist fighters’.”(S/2019/570,
para. 2)
I repeat, Idlib is “the world’s biggest dumping ground
for foreign terrorist fighters”. Those are the words
used by the Security Council’s Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.
The report continues, stating that the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham is the sole and effective party controlling
armed and unarmed activities in those areas. It is no
secret to anyone that the Astana agreement on the
de-escalation zones does not cover the armed groups that
had been designated by the Security Council as terrorist
entities. Furthermore, the Astana agreement stipulated

S/PV. 8609

a series of obligations, including those requiring the
armed groups that signed the agreement to dissociate
themselves from terrorist organizations, especially
Da’esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and all their affiliates.
The Astana and Sochi agreements also reaffirmed
the right of the Syrian Government and its allies to
confront the terrorist organizations regardless of what
they called themselves. In that regard, we reaffirm
that the armed entities present in Idlib, such as Jabhat
Al-Nusra, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, Da’esh, the East
Turkestan Islamic Movement, Huras Al-Din and Jaysh
Al-Muhajireen Wal-Ansar, among others, are all armed
terrorist groups. The efforts of the States sponsoring,
recycling and presenting them will not succeed
in projecting them as the moderate armed Syrian
opposition. Moreover, with the support of our allies,
we will not stop defending the lives of our citizens
and combating terrorism. Standing alongside Syria
today represents the true measure of credibility with
regard to the war on terrorism. By the way, the Huras
Al-Din organization, which is sponsored by United
States intelligence, is also funded by the Kuwaiti
Salafist movement. I would like to draw the attention
of our colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait to that
piece of information. Huras Al-Din — Guardians of
Religion — is a terrorist organization run by United
States intelligence and funded by the Kuwaiti Salafist
movement. I would ask him to investigate that.
In conclusion, the Government of my country
values the efforts of the Special Envoy and reiterates
its readiness to continue working with him in order to
ensure the success of his mission, which is to facilitate
an intra-Syrian dialogue that is Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led, without any foreign intervention. However,
ensuring the success of the Special Envoy’s work
requires putting an immediate and unconditional end
to illegal foreign presence on all Syrian territories. It
also requires a full and effective commitment to the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. It also entails support for the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its allies in combating
terrorism and meeting the basic needs of the Syrian
people, promoting reconstruction and facilitating the
return of refugees, instead of laying down conditions
as we heard today. That has to be done by offering
genuine, not promotional, humanitarian assistance and
funding the humanitarian response plan, which only
received 27 per cent of the funds to date despite the fact
that we are in the last third of the year.

19-2652425/27

S/PV.8609

The situation in the Middle East

Moreover, we stress the need to lift the unilateral,
coercive economic measures that have been imposed on
the Syrian people. They constitute economic terrorism
that complements the terrorism carried out by terrorist
organizations. They represent a cheap and useless
attempt at extortion. Its most recent manifestation
came through an announcement by the United States
Administration to impose sanctions on firms and people
participating in the Damascus International Fair.
The President: The representative of Kuwait has
requested the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): The
representative of Syria mentioned Kuwait while
levelling many accusations against Kuwaiti parties and
institutions. He usually makes such accusations during
his statements, and he has the right to do so. However,
it is also our right to reply.
Those accusations are baseless. He mentioned that
the Salafist movement in Kuwait supports a faction
known as the Huras Al-Din. It is the first time that
we are hearing about such a movement. There is no
Salafist movement in Kuwait that supports any faction.
We have charities with specific religious affiliations.
But the Kuwaiti Government can confirm that they are
not involved with any terrorist group, whether in Syria
or elsewhere. Those charities provide funding only for
humanitarian purposes, similar to what the Government
of Kuwait does with regard to the situation in Syria.
The humanitarian dimension gets our priority. That is
why Kuwait hosted three international conferences.
We are still one of the first countries to support the
humanitarian operations of the United Nations in Syria
in support of Syrian refugees and displaced persons.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has requested the floor to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): When we speak of countering terrorism, we
refer to terrorism that has led us to suffer for eight
years, claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians and destroyed our infrastructure. When we
talk about terrorism and say that an individual is a
Kuwaiti, Egyptian, Tunisian, Australian, American
or Belgian, it does not mean that we are accusing the
Governments of those countries. We are drawing the
attention of those Governments to the presence of
people sponsoring terrorism in their countries. Salafist
movements are known throughout the Gulf, not just in
26/27

29/08/2019

Kuwait. There are Salafist and Wahhabi movements
that are influenced by the Saudi Wahhabi ideology. The
Kuwaiti Government is well aware of that.
For years, we have unequivocally proven that there
are members of the Kuwaiti Parliament, for instance,
who are part of the Salafist movement, such as
Al-Tabatabai and Shafi Al-Ajmi. Are not they Kuwaiti
nationals? They are two members of Parliament. I
believe one of them is still a member of Parliament and
the other is a former member. There are video clips
on several social media platforms in which those two
terrorists encourage the slaughter of Syrians, based on
their sectarian and religious affiliation.
The New York Times featured a full-page article
in 2013 about a staff sergeant called Al-Mutairi,
whom we mentioned previously. He alone had sent
$400 million to Syria in cash and weapons. He was a
staff sergeant in the Kuwaiti army. The representative
of Kuwait compels us to mention names. There is
another Kuwaiti terrorist called Al-Jalahma — one of
the many terrorists active in Syria, alongside Saudis,
Egyptians, Tunisians and others. That does not mean
that the Kuwaiti Government sponsors terrorism. We
are simply drawing the attention of Governments to the
fact that terrorists from their countries come to Syria.
They are not Syrians. They are foreign terrorists. It is
our right, as a Syrian State, to fight and expel them. If
those countries are concerned about them, they should
take them back, as we said in our statement. They
should return those monsters back to their caves in
their countries.
The President: The representative of Kuwait has
requested the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize
for requesting the floor again. As I mentioned before, I
have genuinely tried not to respond to the representative
of Syria, so that we do not start an argument for one
reason: we need to focus our discussion on the agenda
item. We should not divert our attention to other
issues that are not supposed to be discussed today.
However, given the fact that the representative of Syria
has mentioned this matter again and again, we are
compelled to respond.
As the Council knows, the representative of Syria
mentioned an individual called Al-Mutairi several
times. The New York Times featured an article on him
four or five years ago, to which he referred. I would like
to inform the Council that that individual, known as
19-26524

29/08/2019

The situation in the Middle East

Al-Mutairi, does not exist. The Al-Mutairi is a big tribe
in Kuwait. We are speaking of 2 million individuals or
more. To be honest, the information of The New York
Times article is false. I hope that the representative of
Syria will provide us with a United Nations document
or any other credible report from the Secretariat. Then
we would respond to any proved accusations against
any individual. We have laws in Kuwait and can
prosecute and hold accountable any individual with ties
to any terrorist group, whether Al-Mutairi or any other
individual. I believe that there is one person whom the
representative of Syria mentioned that is designated on
the list of terrorists, and we took every possible measure
against him through the Security Council. If the Syrian
representative has names of persons who committed
crimes against the Syrian people or participated in
any operations on Syrian territories against the Syrian
people, then let the Syrian representative provide
us with their names, or he could directly provide the
Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) with all the information he has regarding
those persons. Should the Council decide to include
any of those names on the list, we will then take the
necessary measures against those individuals.
I do not believe that it is right to level accusations
haphazardly against persons who do not exist and
accuse them of terrorism based on reports issued by
The New York Times or any other newspaper. I wish
that the Syrian representative would accept the content
of United Nations reports on the situation in Syria
and the detainees there. United Nations reports are
independent, objective and unbiased.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
I now give him the floor, hopefully for the final
time today.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): As a matter of fact, I am keen on Kuwait

S/PV. 8609

more than my colleague the representative of Kuwait.
As I said, we are not levelling these accusations
against the Government of Kuwait. However, given
that the representative of Kuwait insists on denying
the credibility of what I said, this confirms that our
suspicions are true.
We must not protect terrorism, in accordance with
Council resolutions. We are not talking only for the
sake of talking. We have provided these names to the
relevant counter-terrorism subcommittees. We do what
we say. We are not simply basing these accusations
on articles from The New York Times, despite their
importance. If the Mutairi tribe of 2 million people
was all terrorists, then that would be a Kuwaiti disaster.
No. We are referring to one Al-Mutairi individual — a
staff sergeant in the Kuwaiti army — who is involved
in terrorist acts in my country. This is confirmed and
not just the talk of The New York Times. We have
provided the counter-terrorism subcommittees of the
Council with all the necessary evidence, but when we
asked to include Shafi Al-Ajmi on the list of terrorist
individuals, the delegation of Kuwait opposed it.
The President: The representative of Kuwait has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I hope
that this is the last time that I ask for the floor. Honestly,
it is unacceptable for the Syrian representative — or
others — to say implicitly or explicitly that Kuwait is
accused of being involved in terrorism.
I would like to correct the information that the
Syrian representative mentioned in his latest statement
on Shafi Al-Ajmi. This individual is listed on the lists
of the Sanctions Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). He was designated pursuant
to a decision by the Security Council. Back then, we
were not a member of the Security Council to be able to
oppose that decision.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

19-2652427/27
