United Nations

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6178th meeting
Wednesday, 5 August 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Sawers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Somdah
Mr. Hu Bo
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Čačić
Mr. Faivre
Mr. Kimura
Mr. Belkheir
Mr. Vargas
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Gümrükçü
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Ta Nhung Dinh

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-44473 (E)

*0944473*

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I would like to inform the
Council that in addition to the list of countries that I
mentioned this morning, I have received letters from
the representatives of Nepal and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I would like to remind all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
I now give the floor
Representative of Morocco.

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): It is a real pleasure,
Mr. President, to participate in this debate under your
leadership and your guidance.
I have the honour to speak on behalf the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this public
debate and for the opportunity to express and share our
views at this important juncture for United Nations
peacekeeping in terms of policy debates and future
direction. We thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their insightful and informative
statements.
The Movement continues to stress that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should not be used as
a substitute for addressing the root causes of conflicts,
which should be addressed in a coherent, well-planned,
coordinated and comprehensive manner with the
relevant political, social, economic and development
instruments. NAM further maintains that the United
Nations should give high consideration to the manner

2

in which those efforts can continue without
interruption after the departure of peacekeeping
operations, so as to ensure a smooth transition to
lasting peace, security and development.
NAM believes that peacekeeping operations
should strictly observe the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as those that have evolved to govern peacekeeping as
its basic principles, namely, the consent of the parties,
the non-use of force except in self-defence, and
impartiality. The concept of the defence of the mandate
cannot be put at the same level as these three guiding
principles, since its application is restricted to the
operational and tactical levels.
NAM also emphasizes that respect for the
principles of sovereign equality, political independence
and territorial integrity of all States and non-intervention
in matters that are essentially within their domestic
jurisdiction should be maintained in this regard.
NAM continues to underscore that United
Nations peacekeeping operations should be provided
from the outset with political support, adequate human,
financial and logistical resources and clearly defined
and achievable mandates. The credibility of the
authorized mandates rests on their clarity and their
achievability.
The establishment of complex peacekeeping
operations in recent years underlines the importance of
a well-planned and carefully designed political process
supported by the parties to a conflict. The consent of
the parties and their adherence from the outset to the
peace process is the best way to ensure that
peacekeeping operates efficiently and leads to lasting
peace, security and development.
With respect to securing the needed financial and
logistical resources, NAM reiterates that all Member
States contribute to the budget and that no special
privileges should be established or recognized. Rather,
we should all continue to sustain this unique tool at the
disposal of United Nations. Better planning and
budgeting, improved managerial and organizational
capacity and energized triangular cooperation between
troop-contributing countries (TCCs), the Secretariat
and this Council are key to enhancing and
strengthening the Organization’s capacity to face the
current challenges.

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

To accomplish this, it is necessary to synergize all
initiatives and processes to ensure continuity of the
reform process and to coordinate all efforts in a
coherent and strategic direction for peacekeeping. To
begin with, the General Assembly and its Special
Committee in charge of reviewing all aspects of
peacekeeping operations, the Security Council and the
Secretariat should work in a manner to ensure synergy
of efforts to meet our collective goals.
Troop-contributing countries of the NAM remain
committed to these goals by providing 87 per cent of
the personnel of United Nations peacekeeping. This
unchallenged reality requires their imperative
involvement in a meaningful manner in all aspects and
stages of a peacekeeping operation. In this regard, we
would like to express appreciation for the effort made
by the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations to seek the views of TCCs on
various aspects of current peacekeeping operations.
NAM also appreciates the Council’s call, through
today’s draft presidential statement, to deepen
consultation through the mechanism of triangular
cooperation. NAM will undoubtedly provide its views
in due course on how to energize such cooperation. In
this context, the concept paper prepared by the United
Kingdom presidency lays down some promising
options for a better dialogue and interaction.
Given its mandate, which has been reaffirmed
over years by the General Assembly, the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations remains
“the only United Nations forum mandated to
review comprehensively the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects,
including measures aimed at enhancing the
capacity of the Organization to conduct United
Nations peacekeeping operations …” (A/63/19,
para. 18).
Its military and policy expertise, built on extensive
debate and discussion, could feed this Council’s needs
for such expertise. The Committee, also known as the
Committee of Thirty Four (C-34), has always provided
the framework to discuss reform processes such as the
Brahimi report, the Peace Operations 2010 reform
agenda and the major restructuring of DPKO and the
creation of the Department of Field Support (DFS).
The assessments and recommendations provided
in the DPKO-DFS non-paper entitled “A New
Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for

09-44473

United Nations Peacekeeping” need to be considered
by the C-34, which took note of the non-paper in its
last session. I would like to emphasize once again that
the Special Committee remains the appropriate forum
to discuss the non-paper’s ideas and suggestions, such
as a robust approach to peacekeeping.
NAM will carefully examine the Secretariat’s
non-paper and provide its observations and comments
in the same manner it did for the guidelines and
principles referred to within the Secretariat as the
“Capstone Document”.
Twice this year — during the first and second
debate, under the French and the Turkish presidencies
respectively — NAM has provided its views and would
like to renew today our readiness to deepen
consultations between the TCCs and the Council in
order to meet the rising challenges, having peace and
security as the main objective and benchmark. We also
reiterate our call on all developed countries to share the
burden of peacekeeping. Engaging their troops and
dealing with difficulties stemming from deployments
in hostile environments and difficult political contexts
would demonstrate that there exists a genuine
partnership among Member States and would bring
much-needed responses to the future direction of
United Nations peacekeeping.
Thanking you, Mr. President, for your indulgence,
I would like to wish you all the best in your new
endeavours.
The President: I thank the representative of
Morocco for his kind words. I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Ms. Hulan (Canada): Mr. President, thank you
for organizing today’s debate. In the interests of time,
Sir, and as you requested at the outset of this meeting, I
will deliver a summary version of Canada’s statement
and would note that the full text of these remarks is
being circulated in hard copy.
Canada welcomes the renewed attention which
the Council has given to the future of United Nations
peacekeeping in recent months, in particular the
initiative undertaken by your own delegation, Sir, and
that of France, as well as the efforts of the Security
Council Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
under the able guidance of Japan.
Canada also thanks Under-Secretaries-General
Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their briefings

3

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

earlier and for the collective efforts of their two
departments in producing the non-paper before us
today. The vision of renewed partnership that they have
given us is a vital one, and we view this non-paper as a
serious and forward-looking contribution to the
continuing dialogue on the future of peacekeeping.
The presidential statement to be adopted
following this meeting is a good preliminary response.
We particularly welcome advances that have been
made in the important area of benchmarking and with
respect to designing credible and achievable mandates,
which are the cornerstone of effective United Nations
operations. The commitment expressed in the
presidential statement to engage in deeper and more
meaningful consultations with troop- and policecontributing countries is also heartening, and Canada
looks forward to future Council decisions on how this
commitment will be further implemented.
United Nations peacekeeping has had many
successes over the years. Peacekeeping activities have
prevented relapse into violent conflict, created
conditions for durable peace and saved lives. However,
if peacekeeping is to remain a viable and effective tool
for managing conflict, its practice must adapt to the
needs of the increasingly complex environments in
which missions are deployed. Delivering on this
aspiration will require continued effort and progress in
both peacekeeping policy and practice.
It is clear that peace operations are most effective
when supported by a solid political consensus.
However, it is equally clear that the membership as a
whole is still grappling with the implications of many
of the new and emerging challenges facing peace
operations.
Achieving the renewed global partnership called
for in the non-paper will require inclusive policy
consultations with Member States and partner
organizations. Among the issues that we believe would
profit from future discussions are the scope of mandates
and the modalities by which they are conducted, the
political dimensions of peace operations, and
resourcing. We believe that a shared understanding of
these issues within the membership as a whole lies at
the very heart of any effort to renew broad-based
support for United Nations action, and we look forward
to engaging in an inclusive discussion with other
Member States on all of these issues in the months
ahead.

4

The fact that there remain complex issues that
legitimately require further deliberation should not
deter us from making progress in the near term where
progress is possible. In our view, there are a number of
practical steps that can be taken in the immediate term
to improve the manner in which peace operations are
mandated, supported and conducted. Let me highlight
just three.
First is enhanced consultation with troopcontributing countries (TCCs). The manner in which
TCCs are consulted by this body on mission mandates
is highlighted repeatedly through A New Partnership
Agenda. Canada believes that this dialogue is
fundamental in crafting the partnership that that
document envisages. We therefore urge the Secretariat
and the Security Council to take practical steps to
enhance those consultations. We welcome the proposals
in that regard. Specifically, we urge the Council to
ensure that those consultations take place during the
mandate-generation phase, not after the fact. In our
view, that need not be a cumbersome process, nor does
it imply in any way an erosion of the Council’s
fundamental authority for crafting and approving
mandates. However, prior consultation and a genuine
responsiveness by this body and the Secretariat to the
views of those tasked with carrying out the mandates
would be, in our view, of benefit to all parties.
Second is enhancing the political consensus
underpinning individual peace operations. As other
speakers have noted in this debate, improving and
sustaining the political support of regional actors,
donors and troop contributors for individual operations
is critically important. We have learned in recent years
that the shared objectives and concerted collaboration
of mission-specific coalitions, such as that which exists
for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
can provide invaluable political, diplomatic and
practical support for United Nations missions. While
we acknowledge that this model may not be
appropriate for every mission, we believe that the
practice can and should be deepened with the active
support of this Council.
Finally, allow me to say a word on the
non-military dimensions of peacekeeping operations. It
is increasingly recognized within the membership that
a basic condition for the exit of a peacekeeping
presence is the consolidation of legitimate national
security and justice institutions. Indeed, policing,
security system reform and rule of law are now

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

recognized as core functions of modern peacekeeping.
Our work and investment need to reflect that reality. In
the next phase of the current review, Canada would
welcome further exploration of that set of challenges
and, specifically, the elaboration of a strategic direction
for the future of United Nations policing efforts that
identifies areas of need, including the specialized skills
required for tackling organized crime and investigating
sexually-based violence; assesses the likely scale of the
policing demand and how to meet it, including a
review of formed police units; and, lastly, explores
alternative models of deployment.
In conclusion, my delegation would like once
again to thank the Secretariat and the delegations of the
United Kingdom, France and Japan for their
considerable efforts to advance this agenda. I can
assure them of Canada’s fullest support through the
next phase of this important initiative, including
through the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and in the Fifth Committee.
The President: I thank the representative of
Canada for the contribution that her delegation has
made to this debate over the past months and years.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me join
previous speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra for their important remarks. My delegation
associates itself with the statement delivered earlier by
the Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of
Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
We welcome the Council’s recognition that
United Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership that brings together the commitments and
contributions of the entire United Nations system. In
this shared effort, all stakeholders need to be on the
same page, working in concert and with a sense of
common purpose to effectively address the
peacekeeping challenges.
Indeed, there has not been a shortage of ideas and
initiatives. We have seen many processes initiated by
the Council, individual Member States and the
Secretariat to improve the global partnership.
Nevertheless, it is essential that, at the end of those

09-44473

processes and in order to ensure the ownership of all
stakeholders, there should be one agreed framework
encapsulating those many initiatives on how to make
progress.
We note that the Council, for its part, has recently
laid down benchmarks in a number of its resolutions
relating to specific peacekeeping operations. The focus
on timelines and strategic workplans, with tracking of
progress, is, indeed, a positive development. We also
recognize the efforts of the Council to develop
practices to improve collective oversight. We appreciate
the efforts of the Council to enhance dialogue with
stakeholders for better planning and oversight of
peacekeeping operations.
In that context, we thank Under-SecretariesGeneral Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their
non-paper, entitled “A New Partnership Agenda:
Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping”. The non-paper is, indeed, an important
contribution to the wider deliberation processes on how
to better address the challenges of peacekeeping. The
non-paper could also be used as a basis for further
concrete efforts. It is our hope that its contents will be
duly discussed by Member States and feed into the
comprehensive review undertaken by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34).
Indonesia believes that, in order to arrive at a
clear, credible and achievable mandate, there should be
meaningful and multistage consultations by the
Council with stakeholders at an early stage.
On the operational aspect, benchmarks set up by
the Council should be the basis for deciding whether a
mission has achieved its objectives. In addition, greater
effort should be made to fill the gaps between the
Council’s mandates vis-à-vis the concept of operations
and the rules of engagement, which serve as the
manual for peacekeepers in the field. There is often an
absence or lack of clear parameters on the number and
types of personnel and equipment to cover the vast and
complex mandate of a mission to protect civilians.
Clarity of parameters is also needed to ascertain
the success of a peacekeeping mission, thus ensuring a
seamless transition from the peacekeeping to the postconflict peacebuilding phase. The importance of
coherence and integration among peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development must be emphasized.

5

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

We share the view contained in the New Horizon
non-paper on the need to define, with Member States,
the logistical, training and equipment requirements for
missions. We look forward to the development of the
draft strategic guidance note from the Secretariat on an
approach to robust peacekeeping before the end of
2009.
We encourage further systematic collaboration
among peacekeeping stakeholders, which could be
mapped out by the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and the C-34. While we note
the assurances of the Council that it will strive for
more meaningful engagement and better informationsharing with troop-contributing countries (TCCs), one
key challenge remains — how to ensure that inputs
from TCCs or potential TCCs are fully utilized in the
Council’s decision-making process.
I have some concluding thoughts. Indonesia
welcomes the continued support of the Council for
partnership in peacekeeping with relevant regional and
subregional organizations. It is our firm belief that
such organizations have much to contribute, not least
to the full range of responses when addressing a
situation that may endanger international peace and
security. A full range of responses suggests that a
peacekeeping mission by itself is not a panacea for
conflict resolution. It has to be, and usually is, an
integral part of the broader political solution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
initiative to organize this open debate and to thank you
for the concept note that you circulated among all
delegations. The topic is extremely relevant not only
for the Security Council, but for the entire United
Nations system. We associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of the Kingdom
of Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
but would like to add some specific remarks.
As a country that benefited directly from a United
Nation mission, Guatemala recognizes the fundamental
importance of the Organization’s peacekeeping
operations. They are a basic activity of the United
Nations and an indispensable tool for the work of this
Organization, in which we participate as a troopcontributing country.

6

At the same time, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are faced with increasing demand,
expanding scale, increasingly diverse mandates and
growing complexity. This is taking place in a context
of limited financial and technical resources, placing
great pressure on our capacity to respond. Thus, the
issue of how to enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping operations has been on our
agenda for many years, and today more than ever
before, answers are needed.
For our part, I should like to make the following
observations. First, and as indicated in the concept
reference note, we agree that it is important that
peacekeeping operations have clear, feasible and
verifiable mandates tailored to the particular situation
of each case. We believe that, in the formulation and/or
extension of mandates, every available tool should be
taken into account on the basis of a needs assessment
for each case. Resolution 1353 (2001) provided us with
a comprehensive vision of what should be done in that
regard.
Secondly, we should ensure that missions receive
sufficient financial resources to fulfil the mandates
entrusted to them. In that connection, my delegation
believes that the expression “major financial
contributors” should not be used in relation to
peacekeeping operations, as it runs counter to the letter
and the spirit of the Charter. All Member States
contribute to the budget in accordance with their
capacity to pay.
Thirdly, consultations with countries that are not
Council members and that contribute troops to
peacekeeping operations should be enhanced. Thus, it
is necessary to improve the relationship between those
who formulate mandates and plan and manage
peacekeeping operations and those who carry out such
mandates.
Troop-contributing
countries
should
participate fully from the outset in all aspects and
stages of peacekeeping operations, helping the Security
Council to take appropriate, effective and timely
decisions.
In that regard, we highlight the importance of
strengthening and intensifying the interaction between
the Working Group on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and the troop-contributing countries. We
commend the important work being done by Japan as
Chair of the Working Group, and we look forward with
interest to the interim report on the work of the Group

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

in 2009, which, we understand, will be distributed
shortly.

with the relevant aspirations and objectives set out in
the Charter.

Fourthly, the concept note mentions joint
meetings between political experts and military experts
to discuss aspects of peacekeeping operations. My
delegation believes that such joint meetings, held
within the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34), are vital. Thus, it would also be
desirable to expand the coordination between the
Security Council and other General Assembly forums,
in particular the C-34, which, as members are aware,
was established pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 2006 (XIX), precisely to consider in depth
all aspects related to peacekeeping operations.

The President: I now call on the representative
of Bangladesh.

Fifthly, we have closely followed the process of
the non-paper originally entitled “Project New
Horizon” and recently issued as “A New Partnership
Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping”. We hope that the document will be
considered by the C-34 with a view to producing a
detailed assessment of the current and future
challenges to peacekeeping operations indicated in the
document by both Departments.
In conclusion, we believe that we have much
better information today about how to address the
challenge facing us than we had a number of years ago.
We have significant assets at our disposal as a result of
lessons learned in many complex operations over the
past 15 years, in addition to the guidelines set out in
the now-classic 2000 Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the
“Peace Operations 2010” proposal, the restructuring of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
creation of the Department of Field Support. In
addition to all that, we now have the evaluations and
recommendations contained in the New Horizon
document. Over the past few years, interesting
functional associations have also been established
between the United Nations and regional forums, in
particular the African Union.
In short, we must abandon incomplete reforms,
tensions within management and command systems
and the disproportionality between mandates and
resources, as well as problems of scale, since those
aspects only reduce the efficiency of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. My delegation firmly
believes that in the future, through strengthened
cooperation and political will, we can achieve effective
United Nations peacekeeping operations in keeping

09-44473

Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): First, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to thank you for convening this important
debate. My thanks also go to Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Malcorra and to Force Commander General
Agwai for their comprehensive and informative
briefings this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Morocco
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, I
wish to briefly highlight certain points that we believe
to be important.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have
experienced many difficult situations in terms of their
legitimacy and modus operandi. It is necessary to
adjust their modes of operation while retaining the
basic and guiding principles agreed upon by Member
States. Many initiatives have been accomplished, some
have not, and some are ongoing. I would like to
mention the necessity of crafting clear, credible and
achievable mandates.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1327
(2000) on the Brahimi report (S/2000/809), resolved to
give peacekeeping operations such mandates. Given
the increased complexity of the mandated tasks of the
missions, there is a need for well-defined and
unambiguous mandates.
The Security Council, in its resolution 1327
(2000), noted the need to address the root causes of
violent conflict through the promotion of sustainable
development and democratic society. I wish to stress
that the Security Council should be able to address
those causes of conflicts effectively and that further
action should be taken to bridge the institutional divide
between peacekeeping operations and post-conflict
reconstruction.
I would also stress the need for further
harmonization and consolidation of United Nations-led
initiatives, whereby lessons learned from Councilmandated integrated peacekeeping missions could be
taken into account. We also emphasize the need for

7

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

greater synergy between peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding activities.
Regarding consultation with troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), my delegation has spoken of this on
a number of occasions. I would like to mention here
that all necessary steps on such matters should be taken
in compliance with resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353
(2000).
It is imperative and logical to benefit from the
experience and expertise of the troop-contributing
countries while planning, implementing, extending or
adjusting peacekeeping mandates. The TCCs can
undoubtedly contribute to the planning process of the
Security Council in arriving at appropriate decisions on
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Given the scale and complexity of peacekeeping,
there is a lack of adequate human, financial and
logistical resources. Although peacekeeping is one
component among a range of overlapping and mutually
reinforcing activities that include peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, it is undeniably the
critical building block and a crucial transitional phase
that paves the way to lasting peace. It is therefore
necessary to make all resources available to ensure the
maintenance of peace and security in a conflict area.
We also believe in a wider partnership in
peacekeeping. We emphasize that the contributor base
should be expanded to ensure collective burdensharing. Bangladesh welcomes the complementary role
played by regional organizations in United Nationsmandated peacekeeping operations. Their role,
however, must not be seen as a substitute for that of the
United Nations. United Nations peacekeeping forces
must maintain a true international character in order to
uphold their universality, impartiality and neutrality.
Turning to the New Horizon non-paper, we take
note of the Secretariat’s efforts to put these
assessments and recommendations together.
The President: I
representative of Serbia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Peacekeeping operations
are one of the most important aspects of the capacity of
the United Nations to safeguard international peace and
security, and I wish to join those who have spoken
before me in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
convening this meeting of the Security Council on this
important issue.

8

Serbia attaches great importance to the United
Nations role in promoting and maintaining
international peace and security, and is committed to
participating in the system of collective security. In this
way, it makes its contribution to projecting and
building a favourable security environment at the
global and regional levels, and continues the tradition
of Yugoslavia’s participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, dating as far back as 1956.
Following more than a decade-long absence,
Serbia, by sending military observers to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor in June
2002, once again joined the ranks of States that take
active part in the establishment and maintenance of
peace and stability in the world. In addition to military
observers, Serbia’s contribution to peacekeeping
missions has also included the dispatch of medical and
police teams. Today, Serbia takes part in five
peacekeeping operations.
The participation of Serbian personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping operations is becoming an evermore important element of the foreign policy of my
country and a new expression of its international
cooperation and its inclusion into international
integration processes. The defence and national
security strategies of the Republic of Serbia, adopted in
April 2009, provide for the country’s active
participation in multinational operations mandated by
the United Nations. The main tasks and objectives of
these strategies in the security sector are aimed at
building and maintaining international peace and
security.
Peacekeeping mandates are much more
diversified today than they have been in the past and
include, in addition to conflict prevention and
maintenance of peace components, post-conflict
reconstruction and long-term social development tasks.
We therefore need a comprehensive approach that
establishes a solid basis and criteria for making
peacekeeping operations more efficient and effective.
We also need to establish more firmly a principle of
analysis and review of each individual peacekeeping
operation, and to strengthen the cooperation and
coordination of the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies in areas of joint responsibility.
Furthermore, it is necessary to prepare an
integrated strategy for planning and implementing
peacekeeping missions. Despite the positive results of

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

those missions and their focus on the protection of
civilians, the number of civilian victims is,
unfortunately, increasing.
In order to ensure the success of a peacekeeping
operation, we need first and foremost to define its
mandate in clear terms, always taking into account the
specific situation in which the operation is going to
take place, as well as the involvement of external
factors. This is particularly true for the deployment of
rapid reaction forces, where we need to define very
clearly the role of the troop-contributing countries as
well.
Recently, the United Nations has been
increasingly involved in coordinating activities among
different peacekeeping missions. In addition, regional
organizations tend to be assigned an ever-greater role
in peacekeeping operations in various parts of the
world. However, their participation in maintaining
regional peace and security cannot be a substitute for
the key role of the United Nations in the
implementation of a peacekeeping operation. Regional
organizations’ mandates must be strictly in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter and
fully under the aegis of the Security Council.
The success of a peacekeeping operation
depends, in great measure, on the cooperation of the
United Nations with troop-contributing States.
However, we must not disregard United Nations
cooperation with troop-receiving countries. This
cooperation should not be limited to the specific
questions of the conduct of the operation; rather, it
should encompass a whole range of other questions of
wider importance, such as terrorism, trafficking in
drugs and human trafficking, concerning which close
coordination can be very useful.
Such cooperation should be institutionalized
through status of mission and status of forces
agreements. Moreover, peacekeeping missions should
not deal with the causes of conflict and must be carried
out in strict respect for the principle of territorial
integrity and political independence.
Under resolution 1244 (1999), the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has been engaged as the civilian part of the United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the territory of the
Republic of Serbia, in Kosovo and Metohija, with the
task of maintaining stability and security in that
province.

09-44473

In June last year, an initiative was launched to
reconfigure
UNMIK,
involving
an
enhanced
operational role of the European Union in the rule of
law area. The Republic of Serbia took active part in the
UNMIK reconfiguration debate. Following an
agreement between the Government of the Republic of
Serbia and the United Nations, and with the approval
of the Security Council, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) assumed full
operational responsibility in the rule of law area on
9 December 2008.
According to that agreement, EULEX will fully
respect resolution 1244 (1999) and operate under the
overall authority and within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations. It will submit reports
to the United Nations on a regular basis. The
deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo will be
carried out in close consultation with the relevant
stakeholders, taking into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all communities, and
will coordinate with UNMIK. For Serbia, the
implementation of the six-point plan of the SecretaryGeneral remains of paramount importance.
As in the past, the Republic of Serbia is ready to
make its maximum contribution to the functioning of
UNMIK and EULEX, as well as to any other
peacekeeping operation under United Nations auspices.
Serbia continues to insist that UNMIK must continue
to play the central role in maintaining peace and
stability in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as the role of
coordinator in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). We also firmly believe that the proper funding
of the Mission should be maintained.
In conclusion, let me say that the recent
contributions of the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support towards defining the
present and future challenges of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and finding ways of dealing
with them are very valuable. They give us an excellent
base for further discussions that should be carried out
in the spirit of cooperation and awareness of the
importance of the issues involved.
The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of India.
Mr. Puri (India): Mr. President, let me begin by
thanking you for organizing this debate. India attaches
the highest importance to the issue of peacekeeping.
This is the second time in six weeks that I have spoken

9

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

in this Chamber on this topic, which is indicative of the
importance that my delegation attaches to engaging in
the ongoing deliberations on this subject in the Council
and in other forums. My delegation would like to take
this opportunity to align itself broadly with the
statement made by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
A number of initiatives, including that of the
delegations of the United Kingdom and France, are
under way with the aim of taking stock of the current
state of peacekeeping. These efforts are being
supplemented or complemented by those of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Secretariat’s New Horizon project.
A number of common themes run through these
parallel efforts. The draft presidential statement
circulated among Member States, which we have
studied carefully, attempts to come to grips with some
of these issues. Without going into the merits of the
question of whether a presidential statement is the
appropriate format for addressing these issues, we
would like to express our appreciation for the work that
has gone into the document. We find some of the ideas
and recommendations useful and timely.
As a nation that has provided and continues to
provide the United Nations with thousands of soldiers
and policemen, in addition to a large proportion of
operating air assets, we feel that the nature of the
Security Council’s mandates and the manner in which
they are generated represent an area of major and
continuing concern. Mandates are too broad and have
very little correlation with the ability of the
Organization to deliver. We reiterate the importance of
the recommendation contained in the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) that mandates be clear and achievable.
We also reiterate that this will not be possible without
substantively involving countries that contribute
manpower and resources to peacekeeping operations.
India is not unfamiliar with the concept of robust
peacekeeping. In December 1962, an Indian officer,
General Dewan Prem Chand, led an acclaimed United
Nations military operation, consisting largely of Indian
troops, deployed in the United Nations Operation in the
Congo (ONUC), which ended the Katangese secession
and restored authority to the Congo Government.
ONUC, in which India lost 39 peacekeepers, was the
first robust United Nations peacekeeping operation.

10

The Operation was conducted in response to a
clear mandate arrived at after consultations. Today, we
receive feedback from our personnel on the ground
informing us that questions of substantive
interpretation of the mandates, with repercussions
beyond the immediate, are often left to the judgement
of mission personnel on the ground. This is a difficult
situation, particularly for military officers, who operate
best when there are unambiguous instructions and
objectives. Unrealistic mandates have led to situations
in which mission personnel are forced to ask national
contingents to undertake tasks and utilize contingentowned equipment in a manner inconsistent with the
legal framework under which they are deployed.
We note with appreciation the thrust of the
statement on the question of triangular consultations.
We would here once again like to draw attention to our
most recent experience in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where changes in the rules of engagement
and concept of operations were communicated to the
troop-contributing countries after they had been
authorized. I reiterate that being informed is not the
same as being consulted.
We also note the Council’s intention to increase
interaction with the Secretariat during the drafting of a
mandate on the rule of law and peacebuilding
dimensions of an operation. We believe that the future
effectiveness of the United Nations in maintaining
peace and security in the context of peacekeeping lies
in its ability to harness national governance capacities
in affected countries. These national capacities, as the
post-colonial experience of many societies reveals,
usually exist in ample measure. The challenge lies in
applying to these situations the capacities and
knowledge of countries that have undergone successful
post-colonial nation-building exercises. The Council
therefore needs to expand the ambit of its consultations
to include these countries.
The Secretariat has a predilection for
codification. Doctrines and benchmarks are constantly
being written and updated. While we have no argument
that there is a need to set standards, we need to remind
ourselves that standards should be set in a manner that
is realistic and relevant to the operating environment in
which United Nations peacekeepers deploy. Doctrines
and standards must not become like mandates —
statements rather than a blueprint for action.

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

Field support needs far greater attention. It is our
view, based on our experience of supporting the large
contingents that we currently have under deployment,
that the Department of Field Support (DFS) needs far
greater internal coordination and client orientation. It
has also been our view that the Department needs to
function as a military support operation with a lean
command structure. We feel that there is a need for far
greater engagement of Member States on the question
of the functioning of the DFS.

The question is how we can extend and deepen
that partnership. From the perspective of a troopcontributing country like Uruguay, it is essential to
deepen and, in some cases, effectively utilize existing
mechanisms. With respect to the Security Council, that
would not only entail convening meetings pursuant to
resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001), but also
involve the consultation mechanism referred to the
note of the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2002/56.

In conclusion, I would salute the peacekeepers
from India and other nations who have laid down their
lives while serving in United Nations missions. I would
also like to reiterate India’s commitment to work with
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security, including through the mechanism
of peacekeeping.

As recent meetings of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations convened by the Japanese
delegation have clearly shown, substantive meetings
between troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat
and the Working Group on specific missions can be
very productive. It is important that such meetings be
convened in a timely manner before mandates are
approved or renewed, as well as at key junctures during
a mission. We therefore encourage the effective
implementation of that mechanism.

The President: I give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish first to thank you for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank UnderSecretaries-General Susana Malcorra and Alain Le Roy
for their presence and their briefings, and to General
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Secondly, I should like to express my
delegation’s appreciation of the indisputable efforts of
the Security Council throughout this year to achieve
more fluid and substantive interaction with troopcontributing countries.
Several initiatives and actions have been
undertaken on this issue in the United Nations in recent
months. Uruguay appreciates them all and is convinced
that, although there is still much to be done in order to
agree consensual responses to the principal challenges
facing peacekeeping operations, these exercises are of
intrinsic value and have already allowed certain basic
understandings to emerge.
In our view, the central understanding that has
taken shape pertains to strengthening the concept of the
partnership involved in United Nations peacekeeping.
The future of peacekeeping operations is inconceivable
without a broader and deeper dialogue among the
major actors of the system — Member States, in
particular troop-contributing countries, the host State,
the Security Council and the Secretariat.

09-44473

It is also important that we continue to convene
meetings such as today’s on a regular basis in order to
address this issue in a general manner and specific
matters of sensitivity to all Member States. As we have
stated since the beginning of the year, we must not
underestimate the importance of ensuring a broad basis
of support for Council-approved mandates, especially
if we take into account the nature of the new tasks
being integrated into those mandates. These tasks are
more complex and require more robust rules of
engagement, for example in the protection of civilians.
While we recognize that the Security Council has
promoted the development of such tasks, seeking as
broad a consensus as possible among all Member
States would not only ensure the greater legitimacy of
and weaker resistance to such action, but would also
generate stronger commitment among all those
involved in its implementation. Thus, the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations must
be re-evaluated, and to that end we must all strive to
build confidence among those involved.
Moreover, the relationship with the Secretariat is
fundamental in this respect. It is clear that there is
plenty of room for the troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat to improve and deepen their dialogue,
and both sides must work to that end. In addition to
seeking to deepen and ensure that mechanisms for the
exchange of information and consultation become more

11

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

substantive, there is a clear need to improve the level
of representation for the troop-contributing countries at
Headquarters and in the field, particularly at the senior
level. We stress this point not solely to emphasize the
issue of geographical distribution of office, but also
because we fully believe that communications in the
field and between the field and Headquarters regarding
the implementation of mandates would be significantly
improved by enhanced feedback between national
systems and the Organization.
This discussion of the New Horizon project and
the new partnership agenda is an excellent opportunity
to build broad consensus on such practical aspects as
the definition of critical strategies to address current
and future peacekeeping operations. The documents
submitted by the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support provide an excellent
basis for the debate on these issues in the months to
come, to which we hope to make a constructive
contribution.
The President: I give
representative of Australia.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I thank you, Sir,
for convening today’s debate. I congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency, and would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate Uganda on its
presidency last month.
At the outset, I should also like to acknowledge
the efforts of the United Kingdom, including its work
this year with France on peacekeeping reform. I should
also like to thank Mr. Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra for
their statements today, for their patient presence here
with us during this debate, and for their ongoing efforts
to keep Member States informed on the progress of
initiatives to date. Finally, I should like to congratulate
the United States on its very important announcement
today that it will be paying its outstanding
peacekeeping dues.
We welcome the initiative represented in the New
Horizon non-paper. Given the constraints on time, we
will highlight just a few key points that we would like
to make in that regard.
Political support through the life cycle of a
United Nations peacekeeping mission is critical to its
overall success. There needs to be more sustained
consideration by the Council of missions during all
stages of their development, not only when a mission is

12

due to appear on the Security Council’s agenda. In this
regard, and was as acknowledged earlier today in the
statements of Japan, New Zealand and Canada, we
agree that there is advantage in the contributions of
informal mission-specific coalitions of engaged
stakeholders. Such informal support groups can
provide valuable assistance in mobilizing political
support and resources. We think that this is a welcome
step and provides a constructive opportunity to gather
input from a wide range of stakeholders, including
troop- and police-contributing countries, on a
particular mission.
Our own membership in the core group on TimorLeste has enabled us to observe the benefits that wider
cooperation on a particular mission can provide,
particularly one that is integrated and involves several
non-United Nations components. The core group has
been pivotal in ensuring that Member States supporting
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
have been able to provide input into the development
of the Mission mandate, thereby ensuring their
sustained political support during the different
evolutions of the mission cycle. The leadership by
South Africa and Japan as co-Chairs of the core group
has very much assisted the group to function well.
When we create or renew peacekeeping missions,
the Security Council needs to ensure that those
missions’ mandates are both credible and achievable.
This requires a clear understanding within the Council
regarding the implications of mandated tasks with
regard to resources and possible outcomes. One
particular area where this requires significant
improvement is mandating tasks on the protection of
civilians, as Under-Secretary-General Le Roy
highlighted earlier today.
The Council has been effective in including the
protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations. However, it is critical that we now ensure
these mandates are effectively applied in the field.
Some missions have started to develop the means to do
this, such as through the use of joint protection teams
in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or the initiative by
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur on the protection of civilians. We welcome
these developments, but stress that further work must
be done to capture the lessons that are being learned in
these missions. We need to ensure that these lessons
are shared and included in the development of training

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

and guidelines to assist all peacekeepers to implement
these mandates in the field.

I would like to support the statement made by
Morocco on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The successful achievement of peacekeeping
mission mandates also requires the timely provision of
essential resources. Any lack of responsiveness can put
those mandates at risk. We therefore welcome the work
of the Department of Field Support in developing a
support strategy that has the potential to modernize and
globalize United Nations peacekeeping support
structures, thereby improving the protection of
Member States’ personnel and resources.

There is no doubt that this debate on United
Nations peacekeeping operations is very timely and
extremely important, due to the growing challenges
facing such operations. We are invited to consider the
various initiatives undertaken recently to contribute to
the development of peacekeeping operations, in
particular the study published by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, along with the French-British initiative.

We also recognize the importance of the related
issue of planning. Australia therefore welcomes the
progress achieved thus far on strengthening integrated
mission planning and hopes to see further progress
occur. We also support the development by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of guidelines
on civil-military coordination.

Here, I would like to highlight the need to ensure
that all Member States, in particular troop-contributing
countries, participate actively in such debates
throughout the consideration of all items related to this
pivotal issue, in the light of the increased need for
peacekeeping operations and the need to ensure peace
and security in the world. My delegation believes that
the General Assembly and the relevant bodies and
committees, particularly the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, remain the appropriate
framework in which to examine this issue, with the
participation of all Member States and the Secretariat
and with the valuable contribution of the Security
Council and its Working Group of the Whole on
Peacekeeping Operations.

Australia believes that it is only through
concerted effort and input from all parties who have an
interest in United Nations peacekeeping that we will
truly be able to address the challenges that continue to
face it. Australia looks forward to working with the
Secretariat, the Security Council and other Member
States on further discussing and making progress on
some of the recommendations contained in the New
Horizon non-paper.
In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge once again the service of those men and
women deployed to peace operations around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to express to you, Mr. President, the
warm congratulations of my delegation on your
presidency of the Council for this month. I am
convinced that, thanks to your broad experience, the
work and deliberations of the Council will be
successful. I would also like to pay tribute to you for
choosing peacekeeping operations as the main item on
the agenda under your presidency. I would also like to
thank Mr. Le Roy, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and Ms. Malcorra, the
Under-Secretary-General for Field Support, for their
participation in this debate and for their valuable
briefings on developments in the subject that we are
discussing.

09-44473

Tunisia has participated for over 40 years in
peacekeeping operations and continues to participate in
and contribute to these operations. We are convinced of
the noble goals of our Organization, and thus the
maintenance of peace, stability and security in the
world is an essential issue for us. Here, I would like to
reiterate our determination to support and participate in
peacekeeping operations, which are among the greatest
successes of our Organization in spite of the
difficulties faced, as these operations provide hope to
people who are living in a climate of conflict, crisis or
war.
While we strive to coordinate our activities and
experience with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to highlight the following
points.
With respect to the structure and organizational
framework of peacekeeping operations, transparency
must be ensured with regard to all resolutions related
to the creation and enhancement of a peacekeeping
operation or to the renewal of a mandate. This must be
accomplished through ongoing coordination with

13

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

stakeholders, particularly troop-contributing countries,
the Secretariat and the Security Council. This is one of
the main and pivotal points contained in the
presidential statement that has been proposed by the
United Kingdom for adoption at the conclusion of this
meeting.
Next, we must pool our efforts to develop the
capacity of peacekeeping operations and ensure their
coherence, and we must examine the contents and
objectives of these operations in the light of the New
Horizon study. Given the importance and sensitivity of
this subject, there should an ongoing in-depth dialogue
between Member States and the Secretariat before the
study can be adopted.
With respect to the management on the ground of
peacekeeping operations and their governing
principles, we would like to highlight the importance
of respecting the basic principles governing
peacekeeping operations, that is, the consent of
stakeholders, non-resort to force except in self-defence
and the principle of neutrality, which is very essential.
In addition, the primary responsibility of these
missions is to endeavour to ensure the protection and
safety of civilians. We should also take care to
guarantee that forces are protected when they are
deployed or redeployed by providing them with the
equipment they need to carry out their mission and by
creating favourable conditions for doing so in order to
ensure success. Prior consultations should take place
with the troop-contributing countries on logistics issues
related to the mission.
Those are the observations that my delegation
wanted to share with the Council. I think that these are
points that are of importance to all. I think too that this
debate will enable us to compile the points of view and
the visions of Members in order to ensure greater
effectiveness and benefit in peacekeeping operations,
given the increased demand for these operations, due to
the unfortunate increase in the number of hot spots of
tension and crises in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Council’s presidency and to wish you success in your
work.

14

We welcome the opportunity to participate in this
debate on United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
third in a series of important discussions that the
Council has held since January, in addition to the
meetings of the Council’s Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, to which the Pakistan
delegation has also contributed. It is right that the
Council devotes time and attention to this dialogue and
interaction aimed at making peacekeeping work better.
After all, peacekeeping is today the flagship activity of
the United Nations and one of the key instruments in
the hands of the Council to carry out its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
The challenges of effective planning and
management of peacekeeping operations are quite well
known to the policymakers and practitioners. There
also seems to be a fairly good idea of the kind of
responses and actions, backed with adequate
mechanisms, capacity and resources, that are required
to address those challenges. What is generally lacking
is the implementation part. And it is here that this
process, and the draft presidential statement that is
before the Council, could add value.
Let me say that implementation will become
easier if the relevant actors and stakeholders are
operating, not in a piecemeal or fragmented manner,
but with unity of purpose and a common strategic
vision of peacekeeping. To ensure continued success, it
is essential to preserve the identity of United Nations
peacekeeping. What gives strength to the strategic
vision is the strict observance of the Charter and the
basic principles of United Nations peacekeeping, as
also stressed by the representative of Morocco on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, whose statement
my delegation fully supports.
Implementation will also be enhanced if the
mandates for peacekeeping operations are clear,
credible and achievable, and if they are matched by
appropriate resources. We are glad that the Council is
committed to doing just that. Realities on the ground,
not political expediencies, should guide the Council’s
decisions. Maintenance of international peace and
security should be the objective and the main
benchmark. When lives are at risk, that objective, not
cost considerations, should drive peacekeeping.
Overstretch of resources also results in implementation
lag and overstretch of a mission’s duration, which
ultimately increases costs.

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

Effective implementation also requires more
meaningful and tangible partnership with the troopcontributing countries (TCCs), and we hope to see that
happen as a result of this exercise. This partnership
means not only enhanced dialogue and consultation but
also adequate representation of the major TCCs at the
leadership level in the field and, particularly, at
Headquarters. That is the best way of ensuring
coherence between those who design mandates and
those who implement them. We would have liked to
see this aspect properly reflected in the presidential
statement.
Collective burden-sharing requires greater
participation by Member States in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. I believe we should seriously
pursue the two-way process of broadening the
contributors’ base with more developed countries and
broadening the decision makers’ base with more
developing countries. Everyone should be fully in the
loop. Without that, predictable capacities and credible
actions cannot be ensured. Some cannot just
monopolize the design, management, review and
monitoring role, while the others are consigned to the
implementation role. If we share the strategic vision of
United Nations peacekeeping, we should also be
willing to share the burden for its implementation. And
we should be able to better explain why some of us,
who have the capacity, are not willing to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping operations but are there
to advise how the job should be done.
It is understandable that the Council reviews
certain aspects of peacekeeping and opens up to other
stakeholders with regard to its decision-making
processes. That also makes sense in the context of
improvement of the Council’s working methods.
However, such reviews cannot be Council-centric. The
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations has the
mandate for the comprehensive review of the whole
question of peacekeeping operations and is the right
forum with the right expertise for that purpose. It must
be fully utilized. More attention needs to be given to
core issues, including the surge in demand and rapid
deployment.
The Council, for its part, should do what it can do
best, that is, to evolve larger political consensus in
support of peacekeeping, to promote political processes
and to pursue comprehensive approaches for conflict
prevention and resolution. It should accord priority to
resolving inter-State conflicts alongside intra-State

09-44473

situations — which, by the way, consume most of the
peacekeeping resources at present. And for the latter,
there should be a fuller interface of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities through early engagement of
the Peacebuilding Commission when the peacekeepers
are on ground.
Lastly, for better implementation, we require
continuity and coherence in the various reform
proposals and other processes currently under way. As
the leading troop contributor, Pakistan will carefully
consider the recommendations of this debate and the
Secretariat’s non-paper entitled “A New Partnership
Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping”, on which a fuller discussion may be
desirable in the context of the wider reform process.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Pakistan’s
continued support and strong commitment to the
success of our collective peacekeeping efforts in the
interest of world peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We congratulate the
United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August and
commend Uganda for having successfully steered the
work of the Council during month of July. We welcome
the opportunity to participate and share our views in
the Council’s debate on United Nations peacekeeping.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We also thank the UnderSecretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and General
Agwai for their briefings to the Council.
This debate highlights once again the urgency of
meaningfully and collectively addressing the
complexities of peacekeeping today. Peacekeeping is
one of the major means at the disposal of the United
Nations to fulfil its mandate of maintaining
international peace and security. The Charter of the
United Nations clearly mandates the maintenance of
international peace and security as the primary
responsibility of the Organization, in particular of the
Security Council.
Despite some shortcomings and challenges,
United Nations peacekeeping operations have played
an important role in helping countries emerge from
conflict, consolidate peace, maintain stability and

15

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

engage in national reconstruction, especially on our
continent of Africa. We hope this debate will contribute
to enhancing and improving the effectiveness,
efficiency and continued relevance of United Nations
peacekeeping.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretariat to
review peacekeeping operations as outlined in its
non-paper “A New Partnership Agenda: Charting a
New Horizon for United Nations Peacekeeping”. We
hope that that non-paper, alongside other existing
literature such as the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) and
the 2010 reform agenda, will provide a basis for
engaging in a meaningful discussion on the
multifaceted challenges facing peacekeeping. In that
regard, we would like to limit our focus to five key
issues that we believe could chart a way forward on
United Nations peacekeeping if given meaningful
consideration.
A comprehensive, coordinated and inclusive
approach to improving the effectiveness of
peacekeeping during the planning, in-theatre and exit
stages of such operations should be enhanced. In order
to achieve that, all key stakeholders, including the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat, must be thoroughly consulted and engaged.
While the current mechanism for consultation, such as
the Council’s meetings with troop-contributing
countries, have provided a forum for engagement,
frequent and substantive interaction could prove useful.
In that regard, South Africa would like to
emphasize the critical contribution made by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the General
Assembly’s Fifth Committee and other stakeholders in
enhancing United Nations peacekeeping efforts. We
also recognize the important work conducted by the
Peacebuilding Commission in post-conflict societies.
South Africa is of the view that burden-sharing is
key to dealing with the complex challenges of
peacekeeping. While many of us acknowledge the
importance of our collective responsibility towards
effective peacekeeping, that should be guided by
political will and matched by actual actions on the
ground. For that reason, we encourage the general
membership of the United Nations to continue to
generously contribute to all peacekeeping operations,
with both personnel and equipment.
South Africa supports ongoing United Nations
efforts to strengthen its partnership and dialogue with

16

relevant regional organizations, such as the African
Union (AU) and the European Union, in the area of
peacekeeping. We believe that those partnerships
should be strengthened as they provide comparative
advantages. In that context, we are encouraged by the
ongoing partnership and cooperation between the AU
and the United Nations, as recently witnessed in the
cases of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia, as well as continued cooperation between the
AU Commission and United Nations Secretariat.
The issue of flexible, predictable and sustainable
resources for peacekeeping operations, especially as it
relates to the African continent, is critical to
peacekeeping. With the evolving complexity of modern
peacekeeping, it is important to recognize the leading
role that the African Union has played over recent
years in the prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts on the continent, in line with Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. Through various
subregional and regional efforts, including in Burundi,
Cote d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the AU has shown how peacekeeping
operations support the political settlement of disputes.
All of that has happened despite the limited resources
at the Union’s disposal.
Clearly, for those AU efforts to work and to
contribute towards robust and successful United
Nations peacekeeping operations, we need to seriously
consider the issue of flexible, predictable and
sustainable resources. In that regard, South Africa is
encouraged by the Prodi report (see S/2008/813) and
its recommendations, in particular its focus on the need
for a strategic relationship and stronger coordination
between the AU and United Nations. We hope that the
report of the Secretary-General to be submitted in
September will go beyond the recommendations
outlined in the Prodi report and provide political space
for advancing options for the financing of AU
peacekeeping missions, including through assessed
contributions.
The Secretariat non-paper makes the important
observation that peacekeeping is not always the right
answer. My delegation concurs with that view and
would agree that mediation and the peaceful settlement
of disputes is far more cost-effective in terms of both
resources and human life and should always be the
first, best option to peacekeeping deployment. That
would require that the United Nations re-energize its

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

political machinery with full capacity and work hand in
glove with regional and subregional organizations,
focusing especially on enhancing early warning
capacities.

resolutely against the perpetrators of rape and other
forms of sexual violence against civilians. There must
also be strict adherence to the policy of zero tolerance
vis-à-vis United Nations peacekeepers.

Our experience in the AU is that, with the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council and
the subregional initiatives mandated by the AU, we
have utilized mediation to show that regional efforts
are crucial to address regional conflicts. Subregional
organizations, such as the Southern African
Development Community, continue to deploy their
mediation efforts in the resolution of conflicts in
Zimbabwe and Madagascar. In that regard, regional
and subregional organizations have a crucial role to
play and have comparative advantage, mostly due to
proximity. All our efforts have been anchored in the
United Nations Charter, particularly Chapter VI,
Article 33. Thus, mediation has become more
important than ever before.

In conclusion, we remain convinced that
peacekeeping is not an easy task and cannot be an end
in itself. It has to be a tool towards the creation of
better conditions for sustainable development and good
governance. We will argue for an integrated approach
that incorporates peacebuilding during the start-up of a
peacekeeping operation. Those arrangements, in our
view, could facilitate a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and might serve as a
stimulus for participation in DDR and SSR in the postconflict period.

Recognizing the challenges of multidimensional
integrated peacekeeping,’ South Africa supports efforts
to effectively link peacekeeping with broad
peacebuilding strategies. Disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programmes, closely
synchronized with the implementation of security
sector reform (SSR), have become indispensable pillars
of effective peacebuilding and also contribute to
sustainable post-conflict reconstruction. However, we
believe that the need for multidimensional
peacekeeping operations should be viewed against the
need for peacekeeping to focus on its core business.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that peacekeeping operations must be in consonance
with the principles and purposes enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. The principles of the consent
of parties, the non-use of force except in self-defence,
a clear and robust mandate and impartiality must be
faithfully adhered to. The emphasis should also be on
making full use of political processes and integrated
functions, instead of a military function alone. In that
way, a peacekeeping mission can help to maintain
long-term goals in maintaining peace and security in its
task area.
South Africa also feels strongly that a robust
mandate in peacekeeping should at all times ensure the
adequate protection of human’ and humanitarian rights,
the protection of women and children in armed conflict
and the protection of civilians, and should act

09-44473

Finally, my delegation would like to reiterate its
firm support for the cause of peacekeeping. We assure
everyone of our cooperation in that regard. We will
continue to work with others in taking concrete
measures that advance global peace and stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Arguello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
endeavours as President of the Security Council for the
month of August and to thank you, above all, for
convening this open debate on a subject to which my
country attaches great importance. I would like to take
advantage of this opportunity to reiterate to you and,
through you, to the other members of the Security
Council the need for the Council to hold frequent open
meetings so as to allow all Members of the
Organization to express their opinions and to interact
with the Council members.
Likewise, I would like to thank Ms. Susana
Malcorra and Mr. Alain Le Roy for their briefings this
morning, which we followed with great attention.
The United Nations is the foundation of the
international collective security system, which, as
stated in the Preamble of the Charter, was established
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
and, to that end, to unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security. However, to mitigate
the non-functioning of the mechanisms intended to
carry out that purpose it was necessary to create
peacekeeping operations.

17

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

Since 1948, peacekeeping operations have
become one of the Organization’s most effective tools
for fulfilling its mandate, which is why my country
considers that, in their various forms, they continue to
be a valid and essential tool to maintain and strengthen
international peace and security. At the same time, we
believe that, ultimately, the Organization’s success will
be proved the day its presence, in particular through
the deployment of peacekeeping operations, is no
longer necessary.
Mindful of that objective, my country particularly
values the efforts being made in various areas of the
Organization to strengthen its capacity to deploy
peacekeeping operations as well as to improve the
coordination of activities on the ground. Likewise, my
country believes that the French-British initiative
regarding the Council and the concepts set out in the
New Horizon non-paper contribute valuable elements
for consideration in the debate on the future of
peacekeeping operations.
There is a consensus among States Members of
the Organization regarding the need to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to advance
peacekeeping operations. There is also agreement that
peacekeeping operations are not and cannot be a sole
solution applicable to all conflict situations.
If the Organization is to be more effective in its
action, we must refine the tools that we have been
using for the past 50 years. We must incorporate
elements that will enable us to more precisely measure
progress in the implementation of mandates. What is
more, we must establish peacekeeping operations with
a clear plan setting out successive stages that will
enable us to lay the groundwork for an exit strategy
and avoid precipitous withdrawal, which could oblige
us to return later and remain indefinitely on the ground.
We must act bearing in mind the need to strengthen
local institutions so that local authorities can assume
responsibility for their own security at the appropriate
time.
Here, it is important to recognize the fact that,
nearly 10 years after it was issued, the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809) remains valid. We should recall that
among its principal recommendations is the necessity
that mandates be appropriate and realistic and that they
include provisions for the security of personnel and
civilians, with solid rules of engagement.

18

Sufficient financing for operations and the
centrality of training of personnel continue to be
absolutely essential factors. In that regard, I wish to
emphasize that, in Argentina at the national level, we
have two training centres for personnel participating in
United Nations peacekeeping operations — one for
police officers and the other for military personnel.
Likewise, in 2007, convinced of the need to strengthen
cooperation in the training of personnel participating in
peacekeeping operations, we established a network in
the region comprising the training centres of Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Guatemala, Peru and Uruguay.
In addition, my country believes that in order to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations action, it
is necessary to improve the communication and
coordination between the members of the Security
Council, who formulate the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, and the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries, which must carry out
those mandates on the ground.
Argentina is a member of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, together with other countries in the region and
various members of the Council. The Group of Friends
of Haiti is a clear example of the importance of this
kind of informal mechanisms. By considering the draft
resolutions that, inter alia, renew the mandate of the
mission in Haiti, the Group helps to maintain the
support of Member States for the mission, ensuring
both the continuity of efforts and the unity of
objectives.
Permit me to conclude by highlighting the fact
that in 2008 my country celebrated 50 years of
uninterrupted participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Currently, nearly 900 troops
deployed in six missions throughout the world continue
to demonstrate Argentina’s clear commitment to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of the United Kingdom for initiating
this timely discussion on United Nations peacekeeping
operations and for the valuable ideas and insights
contained in the concept paper. Under-SecretariesGeneral Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana Malcorra
and General Martin Agwai have enriched the debate
with their invaluable statements, and we are grateful to
them.

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

Representing a major troop contributor with an
unflinching
commitment
to
United
Nations
peacekeeping, the Nigerian delegation welcomes the
intensified and concerted efforts to address the major
challenges confronting United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We appreciate the efforts of the Security
Council towards sustained dialogue, oversight and
evaluation with regard to peacekeeping operations. We
also acknowledge the New Horizon non-paper, an
insightful and reflective work calling for further
appraisal and the unrelenting engagement of all
stakeholders.
The Nigerian delegation believes that reform of
United Nations peacekeeping is inevitable, given its
rapid expansion, complexity and multidimensional
scope. However, such reform must be anchored in
concrete actions that address the problems of
inadequate logistics, lack of political will and
insufficient funding. It must also address gaps in
mandates, fluid exit strategies and the imprecise
relationship among the troop-contributing countries,
the Secretariat and the Security Council.
Indeed, the protection and welfare of
peacekeepers should be at the core of such efforts.
Even more significant, reform must preserve the
fundamental guiding principles on the basis of which
peacekeeping, as a tool for the preservation of
international peace and security, was developed.
Nigeria underscores the importance of enhanced
and transparent triangular cooperation among the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and the Secretariat. While the responsibility for
planning and mandating operations lies with the
Council, the TCCs must be active participants in the
planning, review, drawdown and closure of operations.
Indeed, they should be involved in the determination
and review of mandates.
Today, it has become increasingly necessary to
broaden the base of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, my delegation believes that
Member States should not only cultivate, but also
demonstrate, greater political will to share the burden
of peacekeeping operations, particularly the provision
of logistics and personnel.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding are coterminous.
As the Council mandates a peacekeeping operation, it
should also establish a peacebuilding mission as a vital
component of a well-conceived exit strategy. No less

09-44473

critical is the strengthening of international, regional
and local conflict resolution mechanisms, particularly
the mediation mechanism advocated in the Prodi
report. Indeed, peacekeeping must be complemented by
predictable funding, unrelenting political bargaining
and social and economic reconstruction. The reform
efforts should also be directed at strengthening the
relationship between the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other
subregional bodies on the continent.
Nigeria unequivocally supports the protection of
civilians in all peacekeeping situations and calls for the
provision of adequate logistics capacity, including air
power and information, to discharge that responsibility
effectively.
Perhaps the time is ripe for a robust approach to
United Nations peacekeeping. Robust peacekeeping
means more than an enforcement mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter. It implies the total and
unimpeded commitment of resources and a credible
demonstration of political will to ensure the success of
all operations.
The President: I call next on the representative
of Thailand.
Mrs. Chaimongkol (Thailand): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, upon your assumption
of the Council presidency for the month of August and
for convening this timely debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. My appreciation also goes to
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, for his leadership as the President of the
Council for the month of July.
The debate today is very important and relevant,
as United Nations peacekeeping operations are at
present facing many critical challenges, having to do
more with less while operating in conflicts whose
natures and environments are changing rapidly and
becoming more demanding.
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Alain
Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Susana Malcorra, UnderSecretary-General for Field Support, for their
comprehensive briefings today and for the non-paper
“A New Partnership Agenda: Charting a New Horizon
for United Nations Peacekeeping”, which highlights a
number of important points and provides valuable
recommendations for Member States to deliberate. My

19

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

delegation would also like to thank General Martin
Luther Agwai, Force Commander of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, for
his insightful briefing today and for his leadership on
the ground.
Thailand associates itself with the statement
made by the delegation of Morocco on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We would like to take this
opportunity to highlight a few points that, we believe,
merit serious consideration.
First, there is a strong need to establish a better
and more effective coordinating system within the
United Nations system for peacekeeping operations.
Thailand is of the view that regular and inclusive
dialogue between the Council and relevant
stakeholders,
especially
the
troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), before and throughout the
deployment process — from the drafting of the
mandate to the exit and termination of the operation —
is necessary to ensure credibility of a mandate and
success of a peacekeeping operation. Thailand
appreciates the effort of the Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, led by Japan, to
reach out and seek views of various stakeholders on the
current state of peacekeeping operations.
Secondly, Thailand supports the ongoing
evolution of peacekeeping towards an operation more
integrated in outlook and mandate, which would enable
operations to effectively combine both peacekeeping
and peacebuilding elements and bridge the critical gap
between cessation of fighting and durable peace. In this
connection, there should be greater emphasis on
sustainable peace, security and development as well as
on national ownership, with a clear strategy for a
seamless transition.
United Nations peacekeeping can contribute
tremendously to the early recovery of a country in the
aftermath of conflict. Capitalizing on its presence in
the early stage of a peace process, it can help to bring
about safety and security, support political processes
and energize economic recovery, which will lead to a
quick and smooth transition into the peacebuilding
phase. Early engagement in peacebuilding activity is a
window of opportunity to restore livelihoods, create an
atmosphere of trust and confidence and bring about
sustainable peace. In short, peacekeepers can be early
peacebuilders.

20

Thirdly, effective partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations are vital.
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations should be mutually reinforcing to
achieve a win-win situation for all partners. In many
cases, regional organizations have comparative
advantages and better understanding of challenges in
their respective regions. The United Nations could help
strengthen the capacity of regional organizations so
that they can better support the United Nations
peacekeeping operations in their regions.
The blue beret of United Nations peacekeepers
has become an iconic image of the United Nations in
the eyes of peoples around the world. The success and
dedication of courageous men and women under the
United Nations flag in various conflict zones have
given the ideals and principles of the United Nations
Charter a real and tangible meaning.
Thailand — as a strong and consistent supporter
of United Nations peacekeeping for decades and as a
country that has put our peacekeepers under the United
Nations flag in various missions — has a stake in the
evolution and reform of United Nations peacekeeping.
Therefore we will closely and with interest follow the
discussions on this issue, on various tracks, and look
forward to actively contributing to the process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Ovales-Santos (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate on
peacekeeping operations.
Our delegation associates itself with the
statement made earlier on this issue on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). Venezuela would like
to highlight some aspects that have already been
mentioned but which are nonetheless important and
essential for the preservation of the credibility and
legitimacy of an instrument set out in the United
Nations Charter for international peace and security.
First of all, United Nations peacekeeping
operations must not be a substitute by which to avoid
the need to address the real causes of conflicts. On
various occasions, international conflicts are fermented
by actors whose interests are foreign to those of the
parties involved, interests certainly linked to the real
powers running the global industrial war machine.

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, it is
essential that in conducting peacekeeping operations,
the purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter be strictly observed and that
peacekeeping be guided by its basic principles: the
consent of the parties involved, non-use of force except
in legitimate defence, and impartiality. The
introduction of the concept of defence in the mandate
should not be placed on the same level as that of the
three guiding principles, as its application is limited to
operational and tactical levels.
We also agree with NAM’s understanding
concerning respect for the principles of sovereignty,
political independence and the territorial integrity of all
States and non-interference in matters that are
essentially of internal jurisdiction. Such understanding
must be maintained. We also agree with the Movement
that United Nations peacekeeping operations must
from the outset enjoy the necessary support in terms of
resources. They especially need credibility in the
authorized mandates, which depends on their clarity
and feasibility.
We are convinced of the need to unify all
initiatives and processes to ensure continuity in one
coherent direction towards peace.
Lastly, like other delegations, we believe that the
role of the committee is extremely important. Here it is
essential that the recommendations and measures
adopted by the General Assembly and its Special
Committee charged with reviewing all aspects of
peacekeeping operations have a greater impact in the
Security Council and the Secretariat, which will benefit
the collective goals needed to achieve peace.
The President: I give the floor to our final
speaker, the Permanent Representative of Nepal.
Mr. Acharya (Nepal): As the last speaker, I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month and to welcome your initiative on this timely
debate on peacekeeping operations. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretaries-General, Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra, for their valuable presentations on the
subject this morning.
As a troop-contributing country, Nepal attaches
strong significance to matters related to peacekeeping
operations, especially the strengthening of operational
and managerial efficiency in the context of the

09-44473

challenges and strains presented by the increasingly
complex environments that these operations are facing.
Peacekeeping is a dynamic concept and a tool for
maintaining international peace and security and
resolving conflicts, as well as a strategy for filling gaps
in failed or failing States and transitional societies. The
current practice of doctrine, mandating, budgeting for
and supporting peacekeeping operations and their links
to peacebuilding clearly needs a strategic review. In
this context, we welcome the New Horizon and
Support Strategy non-papers as the fastest steps
towards discussion and building broader consensus on
the way forward to effective, efficient and prudent
peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeeping is an endeavour carried out in
partnership among the Security Council, finance and
troop contributors, regional organizations and the host
country. We are pleased that the new non-paper has
been designated “A New Partnership Agenda”. This
presents a new opportunity to strengthen peacekeeping
operations in the face of new challenges, especially
since a comprehensive review was made as recently as
2000 in the Brahimi report (S/2000/809). Some of the
core recommendations of that report — concerning,
inter alia, the need for political support and strategic
direction, rapid deployment and standby arrangements,
operational planning and support, the need for robust
doctrine, realistic mandates and practical rules of
engagement, improved mission guidance and leadership
and the need to involve troop-contributing countries in
important decisions — are still valid and should
continue to be implemented even in the face of current
challenges.
Similarly, the steps outlined in Peace Operations
2010 — especially in the five key areas of personnel,
doctrine, partnerships, resources and organization —
remain important and should be implemented.
It is a fact that even after 60 years of experience,
we are conducting every peacekeeping mission from
scratch, dealing with each mission separately, giving
each a separate budget and having to jump over the
same old hurdles each time. This situation can certainly
be improved with streamlined, anticipatory budgeting,
operational flexibility between different missions and
broadened planning horizons for existing and new
missions.
Peacekeeping cannot succeed without meaningful
engagement and involvement of troop- and police-

21

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

contributing countries every step of the way, including
in planning, mandating and determining political
strategy. Troop contributors should be given
operational flexibility and involvement in developing
rules of engagement according to individual situations.
The increasing demands of deployment
experienced by troop contributors, particularly with
regard to the complex logistical requirements of
contingent-owned equipment, could be remedied by
providing to the troop contributors support for
contingent equipment and training. Missions should
also be equipped with matching resources,
commensurate with the tasks in the field. Mandates
should be clear, unambiguous and achievable.
The
transition
from
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding to socio-economic development is very
important. We welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/304), which highlights key
challenges in peacebuilding, including the need for
national ownership, international leadership and
coherent support and delivery. The same should apply
to peacekeeping operations as well. There is a need to
improve recruitment and retention of qualified people
in order to reduce the high vacancy rates in missions,
as well as the modalities of partnerships with regional
organizations. While the current practice of holding
thematic debates on issues such as the protection of
women and children, the protection of civilians, rule of
law, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform, transitional justice and the role
of regional cooperation is important, these subjects
cannot be treated in isolation and should be built into a
comprehensive strategy.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that during
the review process, the core values of United Nations
peacekeeping operations — such as adherence to the
Charter, consent of the parties, non-interference in the
affairs of sovereign States, non-use of force except in
self-defence, and security and safety of personnel —
should be strictly applied. Such principles should not
be compromised even in the context of robust
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I thank all those who have
contributed to this very full debate today. Thank you
very much for your participation and above all for the
continued attendance and focus that the UnderSecretaries-General have applied throughout the day.

22

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following rather long statement on behalf of the
Council. I quote:
“The Security Council reaffirms the
recommendations made in its resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001) and in the statements of
its President dated 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/1994/22),
4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62), 28 March
1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), 31 January 2001
(S/PRST/2001/3)
and
17
May
2004
(S/PRST/2004/16) and the note by its President
of 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) and confirms its
intention to strengthen further efforts to
implement fully these recommendations. The
Council recalls in particular from its statement of
its President of 3 May 1994 the appropriate
factors that should be taken into account when
the establishment of a new peacekeeping
operation is under consideration.
“The Security Council believes that United
Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership that draws together the contributions
and commitment of the entire United Nations
system. The Council is committed to strengthening
this partnership. The Council recognizes the
important work conducted by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly and the United Nations Secretariat to
ensure that peacekeeping efforts provide the best
possible results.
“The Security Council has endeavoured in
the past six months to improve its dialogue with
the Secretariat and with troop- and policecontributing countries on the collective oversight
of peacekeeping operations and to develop the
following practices:
(i) Regular dialogue with the Secretariat
on the general challenges of peacekeeping;
(ii) Efforts to deepen consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries,
including through the Security Council’s
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and the debates organized on 23 January
and 29 June 2009;

09-44473

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

(iii) Organization
of
political-military
meetings on specific operations to improve
the shared analysis of operational challenges;

mission deployment on the military, police,
justice, rule of law and peacebuilding
dimensions of an operation;

(iv) Encouraging regular updating of
planning documents by the Secretariat to
ensure consistency with mandates;

(iv) Earlier
and
more
meaningful
engagement with troop- and policecontributing countries before the renewal or
modification of the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation. The Council
welcomes practical suggestions to deepen
such consultations. It recognizes that
through their experience and expertise,
troop- and police-contributing countries can
greatly contribute to effective planning,
decision-making
and
deployment
of
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the interim report of the
Security
Council
Working
Group
(S/2009/398) and encourages it to continue
to address the issue of cooperation with
troop- and police-contributing countries and
other stakeholders. The Council commits to
making progress on this issue, and to
reviewing its progress in 2010;

(v) Improved monitoring and evaluation,
through the use of benchmarks, as and
where appropriate, that enable progress to
be charted against a comprehensive and
integrated strategy.
“The Security Council has identified several
areas where further reflection is required to
improve the preparation, planning, monitoring
and evaluation, and completion of peacekeeping
operations:
(i) Ensuring
that
mandates
for
peacekeeping operations are clear, credible
and achievable and matched by appropriate
resources. The Council stresses the need
regularly to assess, in consultation with
other stakeholders, the strength, mandate
and composition of peacekeeping operations
with a view to making the necessary
adjustments where appropriate, according to
progress achieved or changing circumstances
on the ground;
(ii) Better information sharing, particularly
on the military operational challenges,
through, inter alia, systematic consultation
by the Secretariat with Member States in
advance of deployment of a technical
assessment mission on its objectives and
broad parameters and debriefing on its main
findings on return. The Council encourages
the practice of holding meetings between
Council members and the Secretariat at
political-military expert level prior to
discussion of mandate renewals. The
Council recognizes the need to improve its
access to military advice, and intends to
pursue its work on mechanisms to that
effect. The Council will continue to review
the role of the Military Staff Committee;
(iii) The Council intends to increase its
interaction with the Secretariat in the early
phase of mandate drafting and throughout

09-44473

(v) Greater awareness in the Security
Council of the resource and field support
implications of its decisions. The Council
requests that where a new peacekeeping
mission is proposed, or where significant
change to a mandate is envisaged, an
estimate of the resource implications for the
mission be provided to it;
(vi) Enhanced awareness in the Security
Council of the strategic challenges faced
across peacekeeping operations. The Council
welcomes the briefings to that effect received
from the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field
Support since January 2009, which should
continue on a regular basis.
“The Council recognizes the need to weigh
the full range of responses when addressing a
situation which may endanger international peace
and security, and to deploy United Nations
peacekeeping missions only as an accompaniment,
not as an alternative, to a political strategy. The
Council recognizes the importance of mobilizing
and maintaining the political and operational
support of all stakeholders.

23

S/PV.6178 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council recognizes the urgent
need to increase the pool of available troop and
police contributors and welcomes efforts of
Member States to coordinate bilateral assistance
to them. The Council supports efforts to improve
cooperation and coordination through the life of a
mission with relevant regional and subregional
organizations and other partners. The Council
recognizes the priority of strengthening the
capacity of the African Union, and the role of
regional and subregional organizations, in
maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts by
the Secretariat to review peacekeeping operations
and to provide enhanced planning and support,
and encourages the Secretariat to deepen these
efforts. In this regard, the Council takes note of
the assessments and recommendations provided
in their non-paper ‘A New Partnership Agenda:
Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping’ and the support strategy contained
therein, and intends to give them careful
consideration.
“The Security Council recognizes that
further debate is required among Member States,
including in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, to develop a wider
consensus on a range of issues, including the
robust approach to peacekeeping and the

24

implementation of protection of civilians
mandates. The Council reaffirms the relevant
provisions of its resolution 1674 (2006), and in
this regard, looks forward to reviewing the
implementation of protection of civilians
mandates later this year.
“The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 22 July 2009 (S/PRST/2009/23)
on peacebuilding and in particular re-emphasizes
the need for coherence between, and integration
of, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development to achieve an effective response
to post-conflict situations from the outset. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to provide
in his reports on specific missions an indication
of progress towards achieving a coordinated
United Nations approach in-country, and in
particular on critical gaps to achieving
peacebuilding objectives alongside the mission.
“The Security Council remains committed
to improving further the overall performance of
United Nations peacekeeping and will conduct a
further review in early 2010.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/24.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

09-44473
