18

General Assembly-Twelfth session

1162 (XII). Participation of women in community development

The General Assembly,
Having noted with satisfaction that community development programmes are being carried out or are
being planned on a long-term basis with international
collaboration,
Recognizing that, in order to accelerate community
development, which depends basically on the human
element, women should be encouraged to play an even
greater and more effective part in it, both in their
own interest and in the interest of the community,
Noting that the reports on this question do not state
to what extent women are participating in community
development programmes,
I. Recommends to Member States in which community development programmes are being carried out
that they should, by every means in their power, encourage the full participation of women in the development of their respective communities;
2. Recommends to the Secretary-General and the
specialized agencies concerned that, in giving assistance
to Governments, they should collaborate with those
Governments in achieving this purpose;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his
future reports to the Economic and Social Council on
the progress of community development, a brief description of the methods used to achieve this purpose,
the results obtained and the progress made as regards
the participation of women in community development.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1163 (XII).

Seminars on the status of women

The General Assembly,
Taking note of chapter VII, section XI, of the report
of the Economic- and Social Council,3
Noting with appreciation the work of the Commission on the Status of Women and the progress achieved
in the field of women's rights,
Noting also with satisfaction the success of the seminar held in August 1957 at Bangkok (Thailand) on
the civic responsibilities and increased participation of
Asian women in public life,
1. Invites the Commission on the Status of \Vomen
to pursue its efforts aimed at the improvement of the
status of women throughout the world, in accordance
with its terms of reference,
2. Expresses the hope that seminars on the status
of women will be held as frequently as possible in the
future under the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1164 (XII). Development of international cooperation in the fields of science, culture
and education

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1043 (XI) of 21 February
1957 on international cultural and scientific co-operation,
• Ibid., Supplement No. 3 (A/3613).

Having regard to Economic and Social Council resolution 663 I (XXIV) of 31 July 1957 urging the extension of international co-operation in the social field
through the development of personal contacts and the
exchange of experience among experts,
Attaching great importance to a further development
and expansion of relations in the fields of science, including applied science, culture and education, which
will assist the promotion of economic and social welfare as well as better mutual understanding among nations and the maintenance of peace,
Noting with satisfaction the results already achieved
in the development of such international co-operation
and considering it desirable that there should be opportunities for further development in this respect,
Recognizing the positive contribution in this matter
by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and other specialized agencies and
by other international bodies,
l. Reiterates the view expressed in its resolution
1043 (XI) of 21 February 1957 that wider international cultural and scientific co-operation should be
promoted by mutual agreements or by other means, and
that no effort should be spared in trying to achieve
the implementation of these peaceful objectives;
2. Urges all States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies to develop
further all measures for the encouragement of exchanges and co-operation among peoples in the fields of
science, culture and education, which is one of the
basic purposes of the United Nations;
3. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the other specialized
agencies concerned to include in their annual reports
to the Economic and Social Council a statement of their
views and activities and any information which they
may have as to the views and activities of Governments
in the field of international educational, scientific and
cultural co-operation;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
give special attention at its twenty-sixth session to the
above-mentioned statements of the specialized agencies,
and to include, in its report to the General Assembly
at its thirteenth session, a section on this subject for
consideration by the Assembly.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.
1165 (XII). Prolongation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having taken note of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,4
Having regard to its resolution 727 (VIII) of 23
October 1953 in which it decided to review, not later
than at its twelfth session, the arrangements for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees with a view to determining whether the
Office should be continued beyond 31 December 1958,
Considering the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner both
• Ibid., Supplement No. 11 (A/3585/Rev.l).

Resolutions adopted on the reportl of the Third Commit.tee

~n providing international protection for refugees and
m promoting permanent solutions for their problems,
Noting with appreciation the effective manner in
which the Office of the High Commissioner has been
dealing with special emergencies,
Noting the recommendation adopted by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 650 B (XXIV) of
24 July 1957,
1. Decides to continue the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a period
of five years from 1 January 1959 on the basis of the
Statute of the Office ;11
2. Decides that the election of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, for a period of five
years from 1 January 1959, shall take place at the
thirteenth session of the General Assembly;
3. Decides to review, not later than at its seventeenth session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining
whether the Office should be further continued beyond
31 December 1936.
723rd plenary meeting,
26 November 1957.

1166 (Xll). International assistance to refugees
within the mandate of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees
The General Assembly,
_H~ving considered the problem of those refugees
withm the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees who are the concern of the
United Nations Refugee Fund (UNREF),
Noting with approval that the United Nations
Refugee Fund programme, if it receives the necessary
funds, will, by 31 December 1958, have reduced the
number of non-settled refugees under the programme
to the point where most countries of asylum should be
abl~ to support these refugees without international
assistance,
Recognizing that, after 31 December 1958 there will
be a residual need for international aid in ce~tain countrie~, and particularly among certain groups and categories of these refugees,
. B~aring iti mind ~hat new refugee situations requirtng mternattonal assistance have arisen to augment the
problem since the establishment of the Fund, and that
?ther s~ch situa~ions may arise in the future wherein
mternat10nal assistance may be appropriate,
Bearing in mind that, under the Statute of his Office 5
the High Commissioner is charged with the duty df
seeking solutions for the problems of refugees through
voluntary repatriation, resettlement and integration,
Rec~lling ~ts resolution 538 B (VI) of 2 February
1952, m which the General Assembly authorized the
High Commissioner to issue an appeal for funds for
the purpose of enabling emergency aid to be given to
the most needy groups among refugees within his
mandate,
. Rec_alli1;g its res_olution 832 (IX) of 21 October 1954,
m which 1t authorized the High Commissioner to undertake a . programme to be deyoted principally to the
promot10n of permanent solut10ns for certain refugees
• Ibid., Fifth Session, Supplement No. 20, resolution 428 (V),

annex.

19

coming within his mandate and also to permit emergency assistance to the most needy cases among these
refugees, and to appeal for voluntary contributions
towards a fund set up for the purpose of this programme and incorporating the fund authorized by the
General Assembly in resolution 538 B (VI),
F1trther recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 565 (XIX) of 31 March 1955, by which the
Council reconstituted the High Commissioner's Advisory Committee on Refugees as an Executive Committee,
Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 650 (XXIV) of 24 July 1957,
1. Approves the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 650 (XXIV) of
24 July 1957, and accordingly:
(a) Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to intensify the United Nations
Refugee Fund programme to the fullest extent possible
in order to achieve permanent solutions for the maximum number of refugees remaining in camps, without
losing sight of the need to continue to seek solutions for
the problems of refugees outside camps;
( b) Authorizes the High Commissioner to appeal
to States Members of the United Nations or members
of the specialized agencies for the purpose of raising
the additional funds needed for closing the refugee
camps;
2. Reaffirms the basic principle laid down in paragraph 1 of the Statute of the High Commissioner's
Office regarding forms of permanent solution of the
problems of refugees, by actions designed to "facilitate
the voluntary repatriation of such refugees, or their
assimilation within new national communities";
3. Decides that the operations under the United Nations Refugee Fund shall not be continued after 31
December 1958 except as provided for in paragraph 4
below;
4. Requests the High Commissioner to supervise the
orderly completion of projects financed from the United
Nations Refugee Fund which were started but not
completed before 31 December 1958, and to carry out
the liquidation of the Fund in accordance with paragraph 5 (a) below ;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
establish, not later than at its twenty-sixth session, an
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme to consist of representatives of from twenty
to twenty-five States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies, to be
elected by the Council on the widest possible geographical basis from those States with a demonstrated interest in, and devotion to, the solution of the refugee
problem, this Committee to take the place of the
UNREF Executive Committee and to be entrusted with
the terms of reference set forth below:
(a) To give directives to the High Commissioner
for the liquidation of tJ,e United Nations Refugee
Fund;
( b) To advise the High Commissioner, at his request, in the exercise of his functions under the Statute
of his Office ;
( c) To advise the High Commissioner as to whether
it is appropriate for international assistance to be provided through his Office in order to help solve specific
refugee problems remaining unsolved after 31 December 1958 or arising after that date;
