A /75/PV.21*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

21st plenary meeting

Thursday, 5 November 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda items 9 and 14
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(A/75/3 Part I and Part II)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/75/575)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
The President: In connection with agenda item 9, I
would like to recall that, pursuant to resolution 58/316,
of 1 July 2004, the Assembly, on the recommendation
of the General Committee, decided, at its 2nd plenary
meeting, on 18 September, to consider agenda item 9
in its entirety in plenary, on the understanding that
the administrative, programme and budgetary aspects
should be dealt with by the Fifth Committee.
At the same meeting, the Assembly took note of the
clarification that, in implementing resolution 58/316 to
consider item 9 in its entirety in plenary, the relevant
parts of chapter I of the report (A/75/3) that are under
agenda items already allocated to the Main Committees
will be considered by the Committee concerned for
final action by the General Assembly.
In connection with agenda item 14, members will
recall that, pursuant to resolution 57/270 B, of 23 June
2003, the Assembly decided to consider, under the

item, the chapters of the annual report of the Economic
and Social Council relevant to the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits, including through the participation of the
President of the Council in its discussions.
I now give the floor to the President of the Economic
and Social Council for the 2020 session, Her Excellency
Ms. Mona Juul, to introduce the report of the Council
on its 2020 session.
Ms. Juul (Norway): It is my pleasure to introduce
to the General Assembly the 2020 report of the
Economic and Social Council (A/75/3 Parts I and II)
on its 2020 session. As the report shows, in the midst
of the pandemic, the Economic and Social Council was
able to act swiftly to reorganize its work and that of
its subsidiary bodies. We readjusted our focus to assess
and respond to the economic, social and environmental
impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Although we had to modify our plans, we were always
moving ahead and getting the work done for the people
and the planet.
I thank all Member States for their patience and
support shown to the Bureau and myself during this
time. I also wish to thank the Secretariat and staff
all over the world for their hard work in an extremely
challenging working environment. Together, we showed
the world that the work of the United Nations, including
the Economic and Social Council, does not stop even
when it seems that everything else is being brought to
a halt.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-30034 (E)

*2030034*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 29 April 2021

A/75/PV.21

Owing to the impact of COVID-19, many forums and
events of the Economic and Social Council were scaled
down or modified, but we managed to forge ahead with
a large proportion of our work. That included the forum
on financing for development in April. We quickly
adapted our modalities and used innovative ways to
conduct our negotiations and meetings virtually. The
forum held two meetings to address the immediate
needs and the longer-term impacts of the pandemic.
That convened the United Nations system and other
international bodies, which collectively provided
more than $1.2 trillion for the countries most in need.
The meetings helped Member States to gain a better
understanding of the concrete policy and financing
options available to tackle the global crisis and build
back better. The Forum on Financing for Development
resulted in the first agreed policy guidance on financing
the COVID-19 response and recovery.
Also, as part of the financing for development
agenda, I was proud to work together with the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session
to create the High-Level Panel on International
Financial Accountability, Transparency and Integrity
for Achieving the 2030 Agenda, whose report is due
in February 2021. We look forward to it informing the
continuing discussions on financing for development
and helping to guide the United Nations and its Member
States towards a future with more transparent and
accountable financial and economic systems that truly
serve our aims of sustainable development.
In May, the operational activities for development
segment delivered on its mandate as the prime oversight
and accountability platform of the United Nations
development system’s support to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The segment reviewed
four years of progress in implementing the guidance
provided by the General Assembly on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of the operational
activities of the United Nations system (QCPR), along
with progress on implementing the repositioning of
the United Nations development system. The segment
paved the way for negotiations on the new resolution
on the QCPR (resolution 74/297), which will guide the
system during the next four years. It also discussed the
critical response to COVID-19 at the country level,
the funding of operational activities for development,
progress on transparency and accountability, the
revamped Resident Coordinator system, the new
generation of United Nations country teams and the
2/27

05/11/2020

Secretary-General’s recommendations on the regional
and the multi-country office reviews.
Following the segment, the Economic and
Social Council adopted resolution 2020/23, on the
implementation of the QCPR, which welcomes the
progress achieved by the United Nations development
system and notes the challenges remaining. It also
provides a mandate to the Secretary-General to
take forward the multi-country office review and
the repositioning of the regional assets of the United
Nations development system.
During the humanitarian affairs segment, the
international community came together virtually
to address pressing issues and innovations for
strengthening humanitarian action, especially in the
face of responding to COVID-19. The Chair of the
segment launched a call to action in support of the
humanitarian response in fighting the COVID-19
pandemic, which was joined by 173 delegations, along
with the African Union and the European Union. In
a series of high-level panels, humanitarian partners
highlighted key areas for further action, including
the complexity of health challenges in humanitarian
contexts and early, fair and equitable access to vaccines
and therapeutics. The segment further focused on the
role of new technology and innovation in improving
humanitarian effectiveness, along with the challenge
of protracted internal displacement, with a focus on
mobilizing action on longer-term solutions for the more
than 50 million internally displaced persons globally.
The segment also held a high-level event on
combating and preventing sexual and gender-based
violence in humanitarian crises, which considered the
heightened protection challenges posed by the pandemic,
while emphasizing the essential role of women in the
fight against COVID-19 and the importance of their
inclusion in decision-making and in building responses.
The integration segment also convened virtually
and discussed analysis and policy proposals from the
Economic and Social Council’s subsidiary bodies
and the United Nations system on the Council’s
2020 theme and the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development. The discussions confirmed
that silo thinking and approaches continue to hinder
progress on not only the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) but also the
COVID-19 responses.
20-30034

05/11/2020

The High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development, under the auspices of the Economic and
Social Council, convened in July in a virtual format and
included a three-day ministerial segment. The Forum
brought together Heads of State and Government
and ministerial-level officials, together with senior
representatives of the United Nations system and
other international bodies and stakeholders. It was
particularly welcome that 47 countries also proceeded
with presenting their voluntary national reviews despite
the challenges posed by COVID-19.
The deliberations of the High-level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development focused on delivering
the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs during this decade of
action and delivery in the new context of the COVID-19
pandemic. Governments engaged in discussions
with renowned experts and stakeholders on how the
international community can demonstrate solidarity
and international cooperation in responding to the
pandemic and how to adopt responses that can put us back
on track to achieve the SDGs and accelerate progress
during the decade of action. The meeting produced key
messages and concrete guidance for policymakers and
practitioners. Participants emphasized that the world
was already not on track to deliver the Goals before
the pandemic, and now years of progress are being
reversed and the road ahead is steeper. However, they
also delivered the firm message that the 2030 Agenda
is our road map for recovering from COVID-19 and
that the pandemic offers the opportunity to introduce
the transformative changes that we need to realize the
2030 Agenda.

A/75/PV.21

During the 2019-2020 cycle of the Economic
and Social Council, I was also proud to continue to
reinforce and build on the Council’s cooperation with
other United Nations bodies — a process instigated by
my predecessor, Ambassador Rhonda King of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines. I worked closely with
the President of the General Assembly of the seventyfourth session, particularly in ensuring a joined-up/
coherent approach to the work of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council during the
disruptions created by the pandemic. The Economic
and Social Council also held joint meetings with the
Second Committee and the Peacebuilding Commission,
and I was proud to brief both the Security Council and
the Human Rights Council on complementary areas
of work of the Economic and Social Council. I look
forward to that strong cooperation across the United
Nations system continuing during this cycle of the
Economic and Social Council and beyond.
The Economic and Social Council also continued
to play a facilitating role for civil society, including by
granting consultative status to 274 non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). It is also noteworthy that
189 NGOs in consultative status presented written
statements to the Council’s high-level segment in
July, which is a record number. That testifies to the
determination of civil society to continue to contribute
to the Council’s work despite the obstacles to in-person
participation presented by the pandemic. As the
restrictions on participation persist, we must continue
to find creative ways to include their much-needed
voices in our work.

We also discussed the importance of solidarity
and foresight on financing, and increasing investment
in, public services, including social protection, health
systems, education, water, sanitation and digital
connectivity, as well as pursuing a recovery that builds a
more inclusive, gender-responsive and environmentally
sound economy.

I also would like to acknowledge the contributions
of the science and technology communities on the
SDGs and COVID-19 responses, in particular, the work
of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism, the United
Nations 10-Member Group to support the Mechanism
and the United Nations inter-agency task team on
science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals.

During its high-level segment, the Economic
and Social Council convened a discussion on
multilateralism after COVID-19 as a contribution to the
UN75 commemorations. It issued a firm commitment
to multilateralism, with countries and stakeholders
from all regions strongly reaffirming the need to invest
in inclusive multilateralism with the United Nations,
including a revitalized Economic and Social Council,
at its core.

With the support of the Council’s Bureau and
membership, the Economic and Social Council
continued its important work despite all the challenges
during its 2020 session, fulfilling our core mission to
bring people and issues together to promote collective
action for a sustainable world, In these challenging
times, the Council has fully demonstrated its unique
strength as an inclusive platform to engage and mobilize
Governments, local authorities, the United Nations

20-300343/27

A/75/PV.21

05/11/2020

system, international finance institutions, the scientific
community, civil society and young people around the
world, and I am proud of our achievements towards the
priority areas that I set out one year ago (see A/74/PV.29),
including on advancing financing for development,
making the Economic and Social Council ecosystem
as relevant and efficient as possible, ensuring that the
Council plays its part in the implementation of United
Nations reform and bringing a gender perspective to all
aspects of our work.

through the joint mandate of the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council, participated
by chairing the Group of Friends of the Voluntary
National Reviews. We encouraged substantive
interaction and the sharing of experiences and lessons
learned. In that way, we ensured that all countries
that presented their voluntary national reviews were
able to interact effectively with other Member States.
That demonstrates that the Economic and Social
Council was able to successfully fulfil its mandates.

Despite the added obstacles that lie ahead, it is
clear that the Economic and Social Council is needed
now more than ever in order to continue to promote
inclusive multilateralism, with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development as our guiding pathway to a
sustainable future for all.

However, challenges remain to ensure that
the pandemic is not an obstacle to strengthening
multilateralism when we need it most. The resilience of
the Organization has never been more important. One
such challenge was of course the lack of a ministerial
declaration of the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development. It could not be agreed
unanimously, and therefore could not be adopted,
since we, the Member States, were not able to agree
on a virtual voting process. We will have to continue
exploring possibilities to adapt the working methods
ahead of the High-level Political Forum in 2021.

Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the presentation of the
report of the Economic and Social Council (A/75/3)
and, in particular, the leadership of Norway and
Ambassador Mona Juul. The report comes at a decisive
time in the implementation of the reform of the United
Nations development system, in which we hope the
Economic and Social Council will play a key role.
The Economic and Social Council, like the Organization
as a whole, had to significantly modify its working
methods in order to be able to deliver on its mandates
during 2020. Mexico believes that the Council has been
successful in meeting its objectives in many areas.
My country actively participated in the Economic
and Social Council’s deliberations. As Vice-President,
we had the privilege of presiding over the operational
activities for development segment, to which
Ambassador Juul referred. The operational activities
segment represents the ideal space for accountability
and the monitoring of activities on the ground in
support of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We hope that the
segment can be further strengthened and made more
interactive to facilitate communication between the
funds, agencies and programmes and Member States.
The operational activities segment was the first
segment of the Economic and Social Council to be held
in a virtual format, and its importance and significance
were particularly noteworthy this year. The success of
the segment could be replicated in subsequent ones.
We welcome the success of the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development, in which Mexico,
4/27

Mexico believes that another pending issue
is progress on the aligning of United Nations
intergovernmental forums with the 2030 Agenda. We
cannot lose sight of the importance of that universal
and indivisible agenda. Moreover, we are discussing a
road map for recovery from the pandemic. Since 2016,
co-facilitators have been appointed to advance that
process. Mexico regrets the fact that, five years after the
adoption of the most ambitious development framework,
we are still trying to adapt our intergovernmental
spaces to the 2030 Agenda, its goals and its indicators.
We believe that there are solid foundations on which
we must work and make progress, in accordance with
the mapping exercises. We call for an assessment of
duplications and gaps in order to achieve an agreement
that goes beyond rhetoric. In that way, the agendas of
the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council will not only be updated to our current policy
frameworks but also able to respond to the current
needs of our populations. The consistency that we have
requested the Secretariat to ensure in its must also
apply to that of our principal organs.
We have entered the decade of action for the
Sustainable Development Goals. We must act now
so as not to allow events to overtake us. We are
confident that the Economic and Social Council
and the Organization will rise to the challenge.
20-30034

05/11/2020

In Mexico, the membership will find a constructive
partner in all forums, always open to dialogue, and
convinced of our collective capacity to provide global
solutions to shared problems.
Mr. Butt (Pakistan): I would like to begin by
thanking Ambassador Mona Juul for her leadership
of the Economic and Social Council during these
extraordinary times. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Juul for presenting the Council’s report for
the 2020 session/cycle (A/75/3).
The work of the Economic and Social Council is
indeed vital to promoting better standards of life and
greater freedoms. Never before has the fulfilment
of that mandate been more challenging or more
imperative than it is today. The various forums and
platforms of the Economic and Social Council provide
useful opportunities to review our progress and renew
our commitments. The Economic and Social Council
forum on financing for development and the Highlevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development are
such examples. I believe that under Ambassador Juul’s
leadership the Council was steered in the right direction
to achieve its mandate. Despite the difficulties, the
Economic and Social Council was able to adopt
the first-ever outcome document on financing for
development through virtual negotiations. I recall the
establishment of the High-level Panel on International
Financial Accountability, Transparency and Integrity
for Achieving the 2030 Agenda as another important
achievement of her presidency.
I would also like to mention that my own delegation,
Pakistan, was part of the Bureau of the Economic and
Social Council as the Vice-President responsible for the
management segment. In that capacity, Ambassador
Munir Akram convened three virtual meetings of the
management segment to fulfil the mandated activities.
Allow me to congratulate Ambassador Juul on
her successful stint as President of the Economic and
Social Council.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
inscribed for the joint debate. We have therefore
concluded the debate on agenda items 9 and 14.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes
note of the report of the Economic and Social Council,
contained in document A/75/3 parts 1 and 2?
It was so decided.

A/75/PV.21

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 9 and 14.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider agenda item 122, entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”, to hold a specific
meeting focused on development, in accordance with
its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006.
I have been informed that no Member State has
requested to take the floor.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 122.
Agenda item 128
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/75/L.8)
Draft amendments (A/75/L.12 and A/75/L.13)
The President: I would like to remind members
that the debate on agenda item 128 and its sub-items is
scheduled for Tuesday, 1 December 2020.
I am pleased to preside over the meeting today for
the adoption of this much-anticipated draft resolution
on the modalities for the thirty-first special session
of the General Assembly convened in response to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic (draft
resolution A/75/L.8). At the outset, I would like to thank
the co-facilitators of the draft resolution, His Excellency
Mr. Yashar T. Aliyev, Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan, and Her Excellency Ms. Louise Blais,
Deputy Permanent Representative of Canada, for
their able leadership and extensive engagement with
Member States.
The draft resolution is the result of multiple rounds
of consultations, which concluded last month, having
spanned the seventy-fourth session and continued into
seventy-fifth session. I commend all Member States
for their dedication to those deliberations and for their
commitment to dialogue and a spirit of compromise.
The draft text is intended to find common ground
and ensure the broadest possible support. The adoption
of the draft resolution will send a clear signal to the
world that the General Assembly is a catalyst for action

20-300345/27

A/75/PV.21

by Member States, including coordinated efforts in
response to the pandemic.
The special session of General Assembly on the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is a
historic moment and a test for multilateralism. It will
be defined by our collective action on one of the most
critical issues of our time.
It is vital that the special session provide an
inclusive platform that has the capacity to hear from,
and address, the concerns of Member States and other
stakeholders, including civil society, academia and
private-sector experts pioneering the development
of vaccines. To that end, the second day will feature
interactive multi-stakeholder dialogue panels on
different aspects of COVID-19. I am confident that we
will all benefit from a deep and diverse exchange of
information and views, which will enable us to take
stock of efforts to date, identify policy and operational
gaps and forge a path forward.
In order to ensure that all voices are heard, I am
counting on the Assembly’s support and cooperation in
adhering to the time limits for video messages and set
out in the draft resolution. While we have allotted the
maximum time permissible for both days of the session,
we each have a responsibility to respect the time of
every speaker.
As I have repeatedly stated, the urgency of this
pandemic requires us to hold this special session as soon
as possible. The special session is not the culmination
of our action on this global pandemic. If anything, it is a
belated first step, and discussions will catalyse further
actions on various aspects of the pandemic. We cannot
afford to stand idly by, for the consequences of this
pandemic are far-reaching and will impact generations
to come.
Make no mistake, this time is a time for
action — action in memory of the souls lost to
COVID-19, action to protect the most vulnerable people
who are depending on us and action to safeguard our
futures. Let us not forget that none of us is safe until we
are all safe. Therefore, I ask Member States to support
this draft resolution and enable the General Assembly
to hold its critical special session on 3 and 4 December.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): Through you, Mr. President,
6/27

05/11/2020

I wish to inform members that a correct version of draft
resolution A/75/L.8 is being uploaded on ODS, based
on what was circulated in the letter from the President
of the General Assembly dated 29 October 2020. The
correction relates to paragraphs 3 (c) and 4 (a).
In the correct version, paragraph 3 (c) will read,
as was originally circulated by the President of the
General Assembly, “The general debate shall take
place on the first day of the special session and shall
include statements by Member and Observer States, the
European Union ...”. Paragraph 4 (a) shall read, as was
announced by the President of the General Assembly in
his letter of 29 October, “each Member State, Observer
State ...” And I was just informed that the correct
version of the draft resolution (A/75/L.8) has been now
uploaded to ODS, so this is what the General Assembly
has before it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative Armenia to introduce the draft
amendment contained in document A/75/L.12.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I have taken the floor
to introduce draft amendment A/75/L.12, submitted
by the delegation of Armenia to paragraph 3 (b) of
draft resolution A/75/L.8, on the special session of
the General Assembly in response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Armenia proposes to amend the paragraph to
include a statement by the head of the World Health
Organization (WHO) in the opening of the special
session. Throughout the consultations on the modalities
of the special session, Armenia has approached the
initiative of the special session from the perspective of
ensuring its added value and practical contribution to
the response and recovery efforts of the international
community. Bearing in mind that the global crisis that
the world is currently undergoing is first and foremost a
health crisis, we believe that the opening segment of the
special session should give priority to the intervention
of the Head of the WHO.
As the directing and coordinating authority
on international health work, the World Health
Organization plays a key role in coordinating the
efforts of the international community in fighting
COVID-19. We would like to recall also the leadership
role of the WHO within the broader United Nations
system response.
20-30034

05/11/2020

We hope that the draft amendment, which places
emphasis on the central role of the United Nations
specialized agency in coordinating the global pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response, will be
acceptable to Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel to introduce the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.13.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
permanent representative of Azerbaijan, Ambassador
Aliyev, and the Deputy Permanent Representative of
Canada, Ambassador Blais, for their leadership as the
co-facilitators of the modality draft resolution on the
special session of the General Assembly (A/75/L.13)
in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic.
The co-facilitators exerted every effort to encourage
compromise on difficult issues. We thank them for this
and for overseeing the entire process. That said, from
the very first informal meeting, we made our position
clear regarding the participation formula for the special
session. The first draft of the draft resolution used the
agreed language of Member States and observers of the
General Assembly, which is the most inclusive language
that allows for the widest participation. We supported
this formulation and were disappointed when, owing
to political pressure, the second draft departed from
the agreed language, but we continued nonetheless to
engage in the negotiation on the draft resolution in
good faith.
We were willing to accept the carefully drafted
balance compromise text for paragraphs 3 and 4,
proposed by the co-facilitators on 13 October, regarding
both the participation formula and civil society
participation, and were disappointed to see no will to
compromise from some other delegations.
The text circulated under a silence procedure on
October 26 derogated from the compromise proposal,
and we therefore broke silence. Regrettably, the final
text of the draft resolution, as circulated for adoption on
29 October, did not take our concern into consideration
and did not include the compromise text suggested by
the co-facilitators earlier in the process. We therefore
propose an amendment to the draft resolution with the
purpose of reverting to the agreed language from the
first draft.

A/75/PV.21

Israel’s amendment, which was circulated yesterday
as document A/75/L.13, reads as follows:
“In operative paragraph 3 (c), replace the
words ‘Member and Observer States, the European
Union’, and, in operative paragraph 4 (a), replace
the words ‘each Member State, Observer State,
and the European Union’ with the words ‘Member
States and observers of the General Assembly’”.
I would like to note that the oral update that was
announced by the Secretariat this morning does not
change our call for amending the text. We still ask
that, in both paragraphs 3 (c) and 4 (a), the language be
used from the first draft of this draft resolution, that is,
“Member States and observers of the General Assembly”.
We believe that this amendment more properly reflects
the agreed language of previous resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States to introduce an oral
amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.8.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
delegation of the United States would like to propose an
oral amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.8 as follows.
In the fourth preambular paragraph, we propose to
delete the language that reads “including the crucial
role played by the World Health Organization”, so that
the fourth preambular paragraph would then read,
“Reaffirming its commitment to international
cooperation and multilateralism and noting the
fundamental role of the United Nations system
in the comprehensive global response to the
COVID-19 pandemic and the crucial efforts of
Member States therein”.
The United States offers this amendment to the
fourth preambular paragraph in order to restore the
crucial balance to the treatment of United Nations
agencies in the text. Our response to the global pandemic
must include a whole-of-United-Nations-system
approach — one that acknowledges the important role
numerous United Nations agencies have in addressing
the multidimensional nature of the pandemic. Language
that elevates the role of one United Nations agency
above others is antithetical to a collective and concerted
approach by the entire United Nations system.
The pandemic is not only a test of the multilateral
system; it is a test of the United Nations system as a
whole. We encourage all members to vote “yes” in
support of this amendment.

20-300347/27

A/75/PV.21

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.8, the draft amendments
contained in A/75/L.12 and A/75/L.13 and the proposed
oral amendment. In that connection, I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement is
made in the context of rule 153 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, which states that no draft
resolution involving expenditure shall be recommended
by a committee for approval by the General Assembly
unless it is accompanied by an estimate of expenditures
prepared by the Secretary-General. No draft resolution
in respect of which expenditures are anticipated by
the Secretary-General shall be voted by the General
Assembly until the Administrative and Budgetary
Committee (Fifth Committee) has had an opportunity
to state the effect of the proposal upon the budget
estimates of the United Nations.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1 and 10 of draft
resolution A/75/L.8, which was technically corrected
and uploaded on Official Document System, the
General Assembly would decide that the special
session of the General Assembly in response to the
coronavirus disease pandemic at the level of Heads
of State and Government will be held for two days,
from 3 to 4 December 2020, from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m., at
United Nations Headquarters in New York; and decide
that the special session would be conducted within
existing resources.
In order to implement paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/75/L.8, additional expenditures would need to be
incurred by the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management, in the amount of $77,800 in
2020, for interpretation services and verbatim record
production in six languages and overtime. However,
the additional requirements in the amount of $77,800
would be met from within existing resources.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/75/L.8, no additional requirements
would arise under the programme budget for the
year 2020.
The statement that I just read out will be made
available in The Journal of the United Nations under
the e-statements link for this meeting.
The President: Before we take decisions on draft
resolution A/75/L.8, the draft amendments contained in
8/27

05/11/2020

documents A/75/L.12 and A/75/L.13 and the proposed
oral amendment by the United States, the Assembly
will hear from delegations wishing to make a statement
in the explanation of vote before the voting on the draft
resolution, the draft amendments and/or the proposed
oral amendments, in one intervention.
Before giving the floor speakers in explanation of
vote before the voting, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): As the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to accelerate
globally, with over 48 million reported cases of
infection and, as of today, 1,232,000 deaths, prompt and
adequate response by the international community is
required more than ever before. The General Assembly
is uniquely positioned and bears the responsibility
to address the multidimensional threat posed by
the pandemic.
The initiative to convene the special session in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic was put forward
on 13 May on behalf of the member States of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The initiative
was supported by the majority of the States Members
of the United Nations, as required by the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, and the session
was convened on 10 July.
Under the current emergency and extraordinary
situation, it is critical to strengthen solidarity,
cooperation and multilateralism and highlight the
central position of the United Nations system. The
request to convene the special session of the General
Assembly serves those objectives through providing
an opportunity for open and transparent discussions
among Member States, observer States, observers,
relevant United Nations agencies and bodies and
other stakeholders.
During the six rounds of informal consultations,
draft resolution A/75/L.8 was negotiated in an open,
transparent and meaningful manner. The purpose of
the draft resolution is to decide on the modalities of the
special session, including its scope, format, date and
possible outcome.
The amendment made by the delegation of Armenia
to paragraph 3 (b) of the draft resolution, contained in
document A/75/L.12, consists of two components. The
first one is the deletion of the original phrase “Chair
20-30034

05/11/2020

of the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries” and
the insertion of the new phrase “Head of the World
Health Organization”. It is apparent that this amendment
is not a demonstration of care about the World Health
Organization (WHO).
It should be particularly noted that the crucial role
of WHO is duly reflected in the draft resolution before
us, and the Head of the organization will lead a special
presentation and an interactive dialogue during the
special session, as stipulated in paragraph 3 (a) (iii) of
the draft resolution.
Moreover, the participation of the Chair of the
Non-Aligned Movement in the opening segment is
based on past practice. That was the case in 1974, when
the holding of the sixth special session of the General
Assembly, on raw materials and development, was
initiated by the Non Aligned Movement.
It is evident that the sole objective of the
amendment is to politicize the situation, totally exclude
the representation of the Non-Aligned Movement
at the opening segment of the special session,
undermine the integrity of the draft resolution and
challenge the delicate balance achieved as a result of
comprehensive negotiations.
It should also be noted that, during all six rounds
of negotiations on the draft resolution on modalities,
not a single delegation, except Armenia, questioned
the participation of the Chair of the Movement of the
Non-Aligned Countries in the opening segment of
the thirty-first special session. That demonstrated the
common general understanding — and we take it as
agreement — regarding the necessity for the Chair of
the Non-Aligned Movement to address the General
Assembly in the opening segment on behalf of the 120
members of the Non-Aligned Movement, the initiator of
this very special session. Furthermore, it is abundantly
clear that the Non-Aligned Movement and the World
Health Organization are not alternatives to one another.
Given everything I mentioned, our delegation
requests a recorded vote and calls on Members States to
vote “no”, thereby rejecting the amendment contained
in document A/75/L.12.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): I requested the floor to
express my delegation’s views on the amendment to
draft resolution A/75/L.8, contained in document
A/75/L.12.

A/75/PV.21

The proposal for convening the special session of
the General Assembly in response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic was put forward on
behalf of the member States of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and has been supported by a
majority of States Members of the United Nations. In the
wake of the unprecedented health and economic crises
unleashed by the pandemic, my delegation attaches
immense importance to the convening of the special
session as a practical demonstration of international
solidarity, cooperation and multilateralism, as well
as to enforce the call for global action to address
multidimensional impacts of the pandemic.
Draft resolution A/75/L.8, entitled “Special session
of the General Assembly in response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic”, was negotiated during
multiple rounds of consultations in an open transparent
and constructive manner. Inter alia, it notes the
fundamental role of the United Nations, including the
important role played by World Health Organization.
In that regard, we appreciate the role played by the
co-facilitators, Ambassador Aliyev of Azerbaijan
and Ambassador Blais of Canada, in elaborating the
text through consultations and engagement with the
Member States in a thorough and transparent manner.
The text before us represents the broadest agreement
among Member States on the modalities of the special
session, including its scope, format, date and outcome,
and manages to achieve a balance following several
rounds of negotiations. The amendment contained in
document A/75/L.12 does not encapsulate the essential
elements that had been a source of discord among several
Member States during the course of six consultations
on the draft resolution, in particular the recognition of
the role of the Non-Aligned Movement in initiating this
proposal. We are therefore not in a position to support
the draft amendment.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Before we proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.8, in accordance with rule 90 of
the rules of procedure, the Assembly shall first take
a decision on the draft amendments contained in
documents A/75/L.12 and A/75/L.13 and on the oral
amendment proposed by the representative of the
United States, one by one.

20-300349/27

A/75/PV.21

We turn first to the draft amendment contained
in document A/75/L.12. A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Armenia, Cyprus
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Canada,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Peru, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United States of America,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Chile,
China, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Sao
Tome and Principe, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Uruguay
Draft amendment A/75/L.12 was rejected by 2 votes
to 74, with 62 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Nepal and
Turkmenistan informed the Secretariat that they
10/27

05/11/2020

had intended to vote against; the delegations of
Austria and Estonia had intended to abstain.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft amendment contained in document
A/75/L.13.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Brazil, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guatemala,
Honduras, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Sao Tome
and Principe, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Togo
20-30034

05/11/2020

The draft amendment was rejected by 118 votes to
7, with 11 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Nepal and Togo
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote against.]
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the oral amendment proposed by the
representative of the United States of America.
I give the floor to the representative of the Russian
Federation, who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We believe that the World Health Organization
has played a major role in addressing the consequences
of the pandemic, and that the way in which this is
reflected in the text that you, Mr. President, disseminated
accurately reflects reality. Therefore, we do not agree
with the proposal made by the United States of America
to amend the text of draft resolution A/75/L.8, which
was agreed in very difficult circumstances and which
preserves a very fragile balance.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Côte d’Ivoire, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Pakistan, Panama,

A/75/PV.21

Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Botswana, Brazil, Ghana, Guatemala, Papua New
Guinea, Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone
The oral amendment was rejected by 125 votes to 2,
with 7 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Nepal informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]
The President: Since the draft amendments
contained in document A/75/L.12 and A/75/L.13 and
the oral amendment proposed by the United States of
America have not been adopted, we shall proceed to
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.8, entitled
“Special session of the General Assembly in response
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Albania,
Algeria,
Argentina,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,

20-3003411/27

A/75/PV.21

Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Armenia, Israel, United States of America
Draft resolution A/75/L.8 was adopted by 150 votes
to none, with 3 abstentions (resolution 75/4).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Botswana and
Nepal informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote against.]
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
for explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Goebel (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the European
Free Trade Association country Liechtenstein, member
of the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this explanation of vote.
We welcome today’s adoption of resolution 75/4,
on the modalities for the special session of the
General Assembly in response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We would like to
thank the President of the General Assembly and
12/27

05/11/2020

the co-facilitators, Azerbaijan and Canada, for all
their efforts.
Agreeing on the General Assembly special session
modalities today was necessary so that we can proceed
to hold the session on 3 and 4 December. In view of the
universal impact of COVID-19, which affects all our
citizens, we need a united, inclusive response on the
part of the General Assembly stressing the central role
of the United Nations system not only in responding
to the pandemic and its immediate consequences, but
also in recovering and rebuilding better, including
international cooperation in the face of such global
threats. We want the special session to contribute to
this undertaking.
For that reason, we strongly welcome the focus
of the interactive dialogue on the inter-agency
coordination efforts of United Nations entities to
address the COVID-19 pandemic. As we did throughout
the negotiations, we insist on bringing human rights and
the humanitarian dimension into this discussion, hence
the importance of the participation of the Emergency
Relief Coordinator and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in the interactive
dialogue. For us this is a must.
Let me turn to the importance of civil-society
participation in this special session, another high priority
for the European Union. Throughout these negotiations,
we have insisted that without the full contribution of
civil society, our objectives in the response to COVID-19
cannot be attained. The involvement of civil society is
crucial. For that reason, we call for the full participation
of the relevant stakeholders, including civil society, in
the General Assembly special session, both during the
general debate and in the interactive dialogue.
Moreover, any objections to organizations being
included on the list must be made in a transparent
manner and be well explained. We regret that despite
our flexibility and attempts at providing different
language proposals, we continue to have an opaque text
that lacks transparency and accountability.
The EU and its member States, together with
other delegations, have raised concerns with the way
in which previous non-objection clauses have been
abused. Let me be clear: we do not deny the right to
object per se, but we feel that it cannot be exercised
in an arbitrary manner. Concrete reasons must be
provided for objecting to the participation of civilsociety organizations in our discussions. We therefore
20-30034

05/11/2020

continue to insist on a better approach. For us, the final
decision on the list of civil-society organizations must
be taken by the General Assembly itself, not by a single
Member State. However, let me also add, Mr. President,
that we have full trust in the fact that you will do your
best to ensure that Member States will use their right to
object in good faith and in full transparency.
Finally, we want to insist on the importance of equal
involvement by all participants throughout the General
Assembly special session. We would have preferred to
limit statements in the opening segment of the session
to those by United Nations institutions, with priority
given to the most pertinent actors within the United
Nations system on this occasion.
In addition to the aforementioned, the European
Union and its member States stress that we continue
to consider that it was necessary to include in the draft
before us a reference to Security Council resolution
2532 (2020), adopted unanimously on 1 July 2020.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom thanks you, Mr. President, and the
co-facilitators, Azerbaijan and Canada, for the work
done on this modalities resolution over the past
two months.
The United Kingdom voted in favour of resolution
75/4, and we believe that we must now turn our attention
to what the General Assembly special session can
deliver. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues
to impact us all, and it is important that Member States,
United Nations entities, civil society and other relevant
stakeholders come together to discuss coordination
efforts to address the impact of this pandemic.

A/75/PV.21

Mr. President, you have said that you would involve
civil society in a meaningful way, so that a diverse
range of voices are heard in the General Assembly
Hall. The United Kingdom fully supports you in that
endeavour. But meaningful participation requires
expansive language on civil-society participation
in modalities resolutions, and that rhetoric must be
translated into action.
We therefore ask you, Mr. President, to fully
reaffirm that civil society and other relevant
stakeholders will be able to participate in both sessions
of this special session on COVID-19. We also ask for
your assurances that the right to object is not abused by
Member States. We must remember that civil society
has played and continues to play a crucial role in the
fight against COVID-19. We must ensure that their
voices are included in important discussions on the
United Nations response to the pandemic and that the
efforts of those who wish to silence them are prevented.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Russia supported the initiative of the
Chair of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries to
convene a special session of the General Assembly on
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We
are convinced that the time has come for a focused
discussion in the interests of strengthening the joint
efforts of the international community to combat the
negative impacts of the outbreak of this dangerous
disease. Guided by this, our delegation voted in favour
of adopting resolution 75/4.

However, the United Kingdom was disappointed
that despite engaging closely in the negotiation process,
our concerns regarding language on civil-society
participation were not addressed in the text. As set out
in our letter to you, Mr. President, dated 28 October
2020, this language does not include the transparency
that we asked for in return for accepting a reference to
the non-objection clause. On the contrary, this language
paves the way for the abuse of the non-objection clause,
as Member States do not have to provide a concrete
basis for their objections.

Nevertheless, we cannot but express our
disappointment at the fact that the negotiating process
on the draft document at the final stage was not
sufficiently transparent or balanced. We note that despite
the support of an absolute majority of Member States,
the Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO) will not be able to speak at the opening of the
general debate of the special session for reasons that
are of a political nature. Changing previously agreed
wording about the role of WHO in the fight against the
coronavirus pandemic is also regrettable. In general, we
oppose the politicization of the special session, which is
supposed to help intensify international cooperation to
combat the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences.

We have witnessed this on a number of occasions,
with arbitrary barriers placed on the participation
of non-governmental organizations at United
Nations events.

We are convinced that changing the provisions for
the participation in the special session of observers from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that do not
have consultative status with the Economic and Social

20-3003413/27

A/75/PV.21

Council is not justified. We underscore that here we
are not talking about ignoring the useful and important
contribution of representatives of civil society in the
work of the United Nations; no one has any doubt about
that. Nor is it about the lack of transparency in selecting
the NGOs that participate, although the principles for
drawing up those lists are opaque. Rather, this is about a
number of delegations using the subject of the COVID-19
pandemic to impose upon the General Assembly
changes to working methods that have been crafted
over many years and which were adopted unanimously
five months ago. This is being done as part of a broader
policy to undermine the role of national delegations in
the work of intergovernmental organizations. We are
therefore forced to dissociate from the current wording
of footnote 2 of the resolution. We underscore that we
do not see it as a precedent for the subsequent work
of the General Assembly or other United Nations
organs. We trust that the fruitful discussions during the
special session, in which we intend to constructively
participate, will help the world get a handle on the
COVID-19 pandemic as soon as possible.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): The coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic is affecting people and countries
all over the world and is having a devastating effect on
us all. It is therefore appropriate for the United Nations
to hold a special session of the General Assembly in
response to the coronavirus disease.
Israel regrets having had to abstain on the modalities
resolution today (resolution 75/4). We would have
preferred to vote in favour but could not do so due to
the political pressure that prevented the resolution from
using the agreed participation formula. We therefore
dissociate from operative paragraphs 3(c) and 4(a).
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico voted against the amendment
submitted by the representative of Israel amending
the phrase contained in operative paragraphs 3(c) and
4(a) pertaining to observer States. The modalities
resolutions for the most recent special session of the
General Assembly, that is, the one held in 2016 on the
world drug problem, included observer States. Their
exclusion would be a step backwards. A special session
of the General Assembly must involve all delegations
under the principle of legal equality, which governs
regular sessions. Consequently, Mexico believes that
this practice should remain in place.
14/27

05/11/2020

However, Mexico wishes to make it clear that it is
important that in future we also include observers of the
General Assembly that do not have the legal character
of being a State in order to be more inclusive in terms
of the participation of relevant stakeholders.
The fact that Mexico abstained in the voting on the
draft amendment contained in document A/75/L.13,
submitted by Armenia, should not be in any way
interpreted as opposition to the participation of the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
(WHO). On the contrary, Mexico has repeatedly stated
during the consultation that it is in favour of his being
involved. We believe that his participation is important
at the opening of the session, because it would be
illogical for the specialized agency of the United Nations
on effective responses to global health challenges to be
absent from a special session such as this.
However, the draft amendment presented omits
mention of participation by the Chair of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, rather than simply adding
the Director-General of WHO. That goes against the
spirit that prevailed in consultations. The participation
of the session’s conveners at its opening should also be in
line with the practice established by the Assembly. We
deplore the fact that it was not possible to include both.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): I wish to
thank Azerbaijan and Canada for their able leadership
in co-facilitating the intergovernmental negotiations
on the modalities for the special session of the General
Assembly in response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
As we strive to defeat COVID-19 around the world,
the United States remains committed to working
collaboratively with the international community to
take the necessary steps to prevent such a catastrophic
pandemic from ever happening again. The United States
constructively engaged throughout the negotiations
and showed the utmost flexibility on several issues of
concern. We were willing to accept the co-facilitators’
compromise text, including with regard to civil-society
participation in the special session, and the reference
to the role of the World Health Organization in the
modalities text.
We were disappointed to see that the reference to
those and other issues in the final version of the text
departed from the co-facilitators’ carefully crafted
compromise language. For that reason, we broke
silence on the 26 October version of the text and
20-30034

05/11/2020

asked the President of the General Assembly to take
our proposals into account in a revised version that
would allow the special session to enjoy the greatest
Member State support possible. We sent an additional
letter to the President of the General Assembly that was
also disregarded, and, unfortunately, those concerns
were not met. This introduction of new language not
reached through the normal processes and methods of
transparent negotiation undermines the co-facilitators’
role and, indeed, the integrity of the process of
negotiation by Member States. As a result, we regret
that the United States could not join consensus on
resolution 75/4.
The United States dissociates from the fourth
preambular paragraph due to the reference to the
World Health Organization. Our response to the
global pandemic must include a whole-of-UnitedNations approach that acknowledges the important role
that acknowledges the important role that numerous
United Nations agencies have in addressing the
multidimensional nature of the pandemic. Language
that elevates the role of one United Nations agency
above others is therefore unacceptable to the United
States. For the same reason, we cannot accept the new
language on WHO proposed by Armenia in operative
paragraph 3(b) and voted against it.
However, throughout the negotiations on the
resolution, the United States underscored the
important role that non-governmental and civilsociety organizations, including those that do not have
Economic and Social Council consultative status,
should play through their participation in the special
session. The role that civil-society organizations play
in our collective response to the global COVID-19
pandemic is fundamental and invaluable. The process
of admission for those organizations to participate must
be completely transparent.
We reiterate our strong concern at the use of the
non-objection basis clause in operative paragraph
3 (e), which has, unfortunately, been used to prevent
the participation of some civil-society organizations
in United Nations meetings and conferences. It is
important that we restore an approach that appropriately
balances the leadership role of the President of the
General Assembly with feedback from Member States
and will help us move towards greater transparency,
predictability and inclusivity.

A/75/PV.21

The co-facilitators had proposed compromise
language that simply commits Member States to letting
the Office of the President of the General Assembly
know the concrete basis for objections they may have
to the participation of civil-society organizations in
United Nations conferences and meetings. If there
are objections to integrating civil-society voices into
discussions throughout the planning for important
United Nations processes, these objections should not
be made a secret. That should be the minimum that
we offer our important partners. We should continue
our efforts to develop and refine clear and transparent
procedures to facilitate the full participation of
civil society in high level United Nations meetings
and processes.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): I am taking the floor to provide an
explanation of vote regarding the draft amendment
presented by Armenia (A/75/L.12) and particularly on
resolution 75/4, on the special session of the General
Assembly in response to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
At the outset, El Salvador wishes to record the fact
that we acknowledge the laudable work of the World
Health Organization, particularly in a context that is
highly challenging for all countries, as is the fight
against COVID-19. However, we abstained in the voting
on the amendment submitted for operative paragraph
3(b), given that we believe that the participation of
the Chair of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
should be guaranteed in the light of his leading role in
convening this special session of the General Assembly.
Ideally, El Salvador would have preferred to
include the participation of both the Chairman of the
Movement and the Director-General of the World
Health Organization, without having to decide on the
participation of one as opposed to the other.
With regard to resolution 75/4, which we have
just adopted, El Salvador recognizes the importance
of holding a special session of the General Assembly
to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly
given the fact that this unprecedented phenomenon
requires that more effective measures be taken by
the international community and the strengthening
of multilateralism to that end. With that in mind, my
delegation believes that the resolution was highly
pertinent, and it actively participated in the negotiation
process leading thereto.

20-3003415/27

A/75/PV.21

As we have set forth in our previous statements,
the Republic of El Salvador hopes that the holding of
the special session will generate a concrete result with
an action-oriented approach, thereby demonstrating
how the United Nations system, its Member States
and other relevant actors are capable of carrying out
measures that lead to a specific outcome that addresses
the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
In the light of the foregoing, my delegation has
expressed its ongoing concern with respect to paragraph
8 of the text. We strongly believe that if an effort
on this scale is to be undertaken in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, then it must be done with a view
to achieving a concrete outcome that aligns multilateral
efforts and related follow-ups that combat the pandemic
and help us to recover from it. That is why, during the
last session of negotiations, my delegation expressed its
full support for the delegation of Mexico’s alternative
proposal, keeping in mind that a practical summary is
more in line with the position that we have held since
the beginning of this important process.
Finally, we reaffirm the importance of all relevant
actors inclusively participating in this special session,
including those in the scientific field, which will allow
us to find a comprehensive solution to combat and
overcome the adversities resulting from the pandemic.
Mr. Fiallo Karolys (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation takes the floor to explain its vote on
draft amendment A/75/L.12 and on resolution 75/4 as
a whole.
During the informal consultations, Ecuador
supported the inclusion of the Executive Director of
the World Health Organization in the opening segment
of the thirty-first special session of the United Nations
General Assembly in response to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and we regret that
resolution 75/4, which we just adopted, does not contain
that provision. My delegation nevertheless wishes
to record its support for that point in the record of
this meeting.
Furthermore, as a member of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM), Ecuador voted against the draft
amendment contained in document A/75/L.12 because
it excluded of the Chair of NAM from the opening
segment. In this regard, it is worth recalling the principal
role that NAM and its member countries, including
Ecuador, played in convening of the thirty-first special
session of the General Assembly on COVID-19. It is for
16/27

05/11/2020

this reason also that Ecuador voted today in favour of
resolution 75/4 in its entirety.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting. We have also heard
the last speaker on this agenda item.
The General Assembly has just adopted a decision
to proceed with a special session on the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic four weeks from now
(resolution 75/4). We have never before convened a
special session of the General Assembly on a pandemic,
but, since the Organization was founded 75 years ago,
there has never been a pandemic as far reaching and
devastating as COVID-19, touching every one of our
countries and economies.
I recognize that there remain different views among
the membership on certain issues and principles, several
of which are long-standing, in this Hall. But we should
not lose sight of the forest for the trees. I encourage
Members — in fact, I implore them — to set aside these
differences, pull together and contribute to the success
of the special session. The people the delegations
represent expect no less. Let us use this opportunity
to deliver for them and in the process demonstrate
through our words and our deeds that multilateralism
is essential to confronting this virus and overcoming it.
I would also like to express my sincere thanks
to the representative of Azerbaijan, Mr. Yashar T.
Aliyev, and the representative of Canada, Ms. Louise
Blais, the facilitators of the informal consultations,
who demonstrated great ability and patience in their
conduct of the discussion and complex negotiations on
resolution 75/4. I also thank Member States for their
valuable contributions to reaching an agreement on the
resolution. I also thank the Secretariat for its efforts
at a time of financial constraint to support Member
States in their desire to proceed with this important
special session.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 128.
20-30034

05/11/2020

Agenda item 137
Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War
Draft resolution (A/75/L.4)
Draft amendments (A/75/L.6 and A/75/L.10)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.4.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to take the floor to
introduce draft resolution A/75/L.4 on behalf of the
following sponsoring States: Armenia, Azerbaijan, the
Republic of Belarus, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic,
China, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Algeria,
Angola, Benin, Burundi, Cambodia, the Central
African Republic, Cuba, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, the Sudan,
Syria, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe and
my country, the Russian Federation.
The previous and current sessions of the General
Assembly are directly linked to two great anniversaries:
the seventy-fifth anniversaries of the end of the Second
World War and of the establishment of the United
Nations. These are dates that unite us all.
The very term “the United Nations” emerged during
the years of the Second World War. The establishment
of the Organization and the adoption of the Charter of
the United Nations legally enshrined in law the victory
won over Nazism. This war, unprecedented in its scale
and ferocity, was a colossal tragedy for the peoples
of the entire world. The threat to the fundamental
principles of civilization was averted at the cost of vast
joint efforts and heavy losses.
We do not have the right to forget history. We have
a duty to honour the memory of the victims of that war.
The draft resolution presented by the sponsors and
contained in document A/75/L.4 provides in particular
for the holding of a special solemn meeting of the
General Assembly on 1 December. In the past, the
General Assembly has held such a meeting every five
years on the eve of Victory Day, in May. This year the
pandemic unfortunately altered our plans. We call for
this draft resolution to be adopted and a solemn meeting

A/75/PV.21

to be held to honour the greatness and memory of the
millions of innocent victims, including the victims of
various theories of racial or ethnic supremacy and of
horrendous war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We also wish to honour the memory of those who have
fought for us.
Two amendments to the draft resolution have been
submitted (A/75/L.6 and A/75/L.10). I will call for a vote
on one of them (A/75/L.10) and request the floor a second
time after the introduction of the draft amendment on
the fifth preambular paragraph (A/75/L.6), which has
been submitted by a group of countries.
As for the draft amendment to the second preambular
paragraph (A/75/L.10), proposed by the United States,
I have the honour to report that, on behalf of the initial
sponsors of draft resolution A/75.L.4, the language
of the draft amendment is acceptable for inclusion in
the main draft resolution. It can therefore be reflected
in the text of A/75/L.4 without a vote by way of an
oral amendment. We are grateful to the delegation of the
United States of America for its constructive proposal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany to introduce the draft
amendment contained in document A/75/L.6.
Mrs. Heusgen (Germany): On behalf of the
sponsors, I would like to introduce the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.6. We strongly support
the aim of the draft resolution A/75/L.4, which is to
commemorate the victims of the Second World War
with a special solemn meeting at the General Assembly.
However, we are gravely concerned that the draft
resolution, which was adopted by consensus in the
past, was politicized this year through the introduction
of new, non-negotiated and controversial language in
the fifth preambular paragraph. This language is highly
sensitive for many Member States, as the Second World
War brought about painful divisions in Europe and
far beyond.
From the beginning of the negotiations of the draft
resolution, we engaged constructively but our calls to
address this issue were ignored and the penholders
were unwilling to engage in transparent consultations
or find a compromise. For these reasons, we have been
forced to introduce the draft amendment contained in
document A/75/L. 6, which, if adopted, would delete
the fifth preambular paragraph and bring the text
back to its agreed form of 2015, which was adopted

20-3003417/27

A/75/PV.21

by consensus at the seventieth session of the General
Assembly (resolution 69/267).

05/11/2020

We will vote in favour of this draft amendment and
kindly ask Member States to support us and vote in
favour of A/75/L.6 in order to avoid major divisions in
the General Assembly on an issue that is so important
for the international community as a whole.

With regard to action on the draft resolution A/75/L.4
and the proposed amendments, Canada supports the
commemoration of this anniversary in a consensus
manner, along the lines of agreed language from 2015,
when the General Assembly last commemorated the
end of the Second World War (resolution 69/267). We
join Member States in submitting draft amendments to
this end.

Mr. Ngoyi (United States of America): Given the
oral amendment made by the Russian Federation, the
United States of America withdraws its proposed draft
amendment (A/75/L.10). We also want to thank the
sponsor for accepting this change.

Over a million Canadians fought in the Second
World War, 45,000 of whom gave their lives and
55,000 more of whom sustained injuries. We honour
their sacrifice today, as we will for Veterans Day and
Remembrance Day.

The President: I note that draft amendment
A/75/L.10 has been withdrawn.

The Second World War began in 1939 to halt
aggression and expansionism that threatened Europe
and the wider world. But as the conflict widened
and was prolonged, Franklin Roosevelt and Winston
Churchill signed the Atlantic Charter off the coast
of Newfoundland, which is now part of Canada, and
committed themselves to such principles as the rule of
law and the right of self-determination. The Atlantic
Charter was subsequently signed by many others,
including Canada. Entire nations and peoples joined the
fight against aggression and tyranny, but they were also
fighting in pursuit of essential freedoms to establish the
foundations upon which a new and better world would
be built.

I now give the floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): Belarus is
disappointed that a group of countries has introduced
an amendment to draft resolution A/75/L.4, entitled
“ Seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War “, contained in document A/75/L.6.
The year 2020 marks the anniversary of the end
of the bloodiest and most destructive war in history,
which took the lives of many millions of people and
caused enormous suffering for all of humankind. This
historic event set the stage for the founding of the
United Nations, which was designed to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of military conflict.
Preserving the memory of the war is our shared
duty and a priority for all of us. It is therefore puzzling
that a number of countries are trying to delete from
the draft resolution the paragraph on the importance
of preserving and not desecrating or destroying
monuments erected to the memory of those who fought
on the side of the United Nations in that war.
We regret that we are starting preparations for a
special solemn meeting of the General Assembly in
commemoration of all victims of the war, the holding
of which is stipulated in draft resolution A/75/L.4, with
this unnecessary vote. We call on all countries to vote
against the draft amendment contained in document
A/75/L.6.
Ms. Blais (Canada): I am honoured to speak at this
plenary meeting on the agenda item entitled “Seventyfifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War”.
18/27

When the war ended, in 1945, many of these
countries came together in San Francisco determined to
build this better world. We enshrined our commitment
to doing so in the Charter of the United Nations, and
we made clear that shared values, faith in human rights,
dignity, equality, justice and respect for obligations and
social progress would light our path.
(spoke in French)
These values are as intangible as they are universal.
They have guided us through remarkable processes of
decolonization and economic and social transformation
over the past 75 years. The Charter has therefore been
a victory for more than just the countries that were
involved in the conflict. The Charter has been a victory
for all of us, for all countries, large and small — for we
the peoples of the United Nations.
(spoke in English)
This is why we must respect and defend the Charter
and all that it stands for and continue to build with its
spirit in our hearts and in our minds. This is true now
20-30034

05/11/2020

A/75/PV.21

more than ever. The coronavirus disease is one of the
most challenging global crises since the Second World
War, and the pandemic has struck as the global order
and people around the world were already facing the
challenges of poverty and growing inequality as well
as threats to their hard-won civil and political rights.
These troubling trends have tended to be revealed and
even magnified by the pandemic.

The egregious inclusion of the fifth preambular
paragraph in A/75/L.4 is particularly galling, but
it is emblematic of a wider problem: an attempt by
the penholders to use this text to pursue historic
revisionism. Indeed, our colleague from the Russian
delegation told us just now that we do not have the right
to forget history. Well, the United Kingdom maintains
that we do not have the right to rewrite history either.

Our challenge therefore is this: to meet the problems
before us with the same commitment to realizing a better
world as those who met that challenge in San Francisco
had in 1945 — to choose solidarity over isolationism,
human rights over oppression, equality and social
justice over discrimination and narrow nationalism.

We will therefore vote in favour of the draft
amendment, and we kindly ask Member States to
support us and vote in favour of A/75/L.6.

May we all remember the sacrifices that were made
for us, to be better able to make the right choices. May
we all rise to this challenge together.

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/75/L.4, as orally revised to incorporate draft
amendment A/75/L.10, and to consider draft amendment
A/75/L.6. Delegations wishing to make statements
in explanation of vote before the voting on the draft
resolution and/or the draft amendment are invited to do
so now in one intervention.

Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): It is difficult to
follow the powerful words from my friend from the
Canadian delegation. I thank her for those.
We simply wish to join Germany in supporting its
proposed deletion of the fifth preambular paragraph
contained in A/75/L.6.
The United Kingdom also strongly supports the
aim of the draft resolution contained in document
A/75/L.4. The intent of the resolution is, as others have
said, to commemorate the victims of the Second World
War with a special solemn meeting. However, we echo
the concerns raised by Germany over the addition of
politicized and controversial language in the fifth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/75/L.4.

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.

Before giving the floor in explanations of vote before
the vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I listened closely to the representative of
Germany, who spoke on behalf of a group of States.
Speaking on behalf of that group, Germany
proposes deleting from draft resolution A/75/L.4 the
following words:

We pay tribute to the historic role of the Allied
forces and their sacrifices in the defeat of Nazism
during the Second World War. Nevertheless, we should
likewise recognize that it is for Member States to choose
how to remember and celebrate their national histories,
including through the creation, preservation and, if
appropriate, disposal or moving of monuments. The
United Kingdom believes that this is a matter for each
Member State to decide, and therefore it is inconsistent
with the fifth preambular paragraph as it stands.

(spoke in English)

Since the beginning of the negotiations on this
text, in March, we and our likeminded colleagues, have
engaged constructively on this draft resolution. There
was ample time to address the concerns that we and
others repeatedly raised. Unfortunately, our calls were
ignored, as was compromise.

Why is a group of countries co-sponsoring the
draft amendment openly and unabashedly saying that
this language is unacceptable? Allow me to explain.
Today in some European countries a fully-fledged
war has been declared on monuments to those who
fought against Nazism. Heroes are now often held

“Emphasizing that the Victory in the Second World
War is the common legacy of all Member States of
the United Nations, and noting in this regard the
importance of preservation and inadmissibility of
desecration or destruction of monuments erected in
remembrance of those who fought in that war on
the side of the United Nations.”
(spoke in Russian)

20-3003419/27

A/75/PV.21

up as criminals who fought on the side of the Hitler
coalition or collaborated with the Nazis. Even 10 or 15
years ago, such a shameful phenomenon would have
been unthinkable.
What we call rewriting the history of the Second
World War is gaining disastrous momentum and taking
absolutely ugly forms. It is surprising and distressing to
see among the sponsors of the draft amendment States
whose heroic peoples made such a sizeable contribution
to the defeat of Nazism. But it is especially painful to
see Georgia and Ukraine among those supporting the
draft amendment. Hundreds of thousands of Georgians
and Ukrainians gave their lives fighting selflessly as
part of the Red Army against Nazism. Their memory is
sacred. The idea behind the draft amendment is nothing
other than a betrayal of their grandparents who died on
the battlefields. I cannot describe it in any other way.
We are the last generation that will see those who
participated in this war alive. There are very few of
those participants left and more of them leave us with
each passing year. The Soviet Union bore the greatest
losses — 27 million lives — and made a most substantial
contribution to the overall victory in the Second World
War. Just imagine — there is not a single family in
Russia that did not lose family members in the war.
Detractors say that Russia is supposedly trying
to monopolize the victory, but the truth is quite
the opposite. Let us take a look at the content of the
fifth preambular paragraph, which draft amendment
A/75/L.6 invites members to delete. It says that the
victory is the common heritage of all States Members
of the United Nations and that monuments to those who
fought against Nazism are a worldwide memorial to
humankind. We are proud of that history and we are
ready to share that pride with everyone.

05/11/2020

Our duty is to carefully preserve and pass on the
legacy of truth about the most terrible war in human
history. We strongly believe that the international
community must remember the lessons of the Second
World War and work to promote the preservation of the
historical memory of peoples. It is our common duty to
preserve and firmly defend historical truth and honour
the lessons of the Second World War and the memory
of its victims and of all who fought against Nazism
and fascism.
It is especially important to honour the memory
of people who died during the Second World War
and maintain military graves and monuments in good
condition. In this regard, along with the other sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.4, the Kyrgyz Republic
opposes the amendment to delete the fifth preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution, and we appeal to all
States to support our position during the voting.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.
Before we proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.4, as orally revised, in accordance
with rule 90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly
shall first take a decision on the draft amendment
contained in document A/75/L.6.
We turn first to the draft amendment contained in
document A/75/L.6.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft amendment,
and in addition to the delegations listed, New Zealand
and Norway have also become sponsors of document
A/75/L.6.

I therefore call on everyone to vote against draft
amendment A/75/L.6.

The President: A recorded vote has been requested.

Mr. Utebaev (Kyrgyzstan): This year we celebrate
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the end of the Second
World War, the greatest tragedy of the twentieth
century for the peoples of the world. The war took the
lives of more than 70 million people, and almost half
of them — 27 million people — were Soviet citizens.
The peoples of the Soviet Union, including Kyrgyzstan,
sacrificed their lives to safeguard the future of
humankind and world civilization.

In favour
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,

20/27

A recorded vote was taken.

20-30034

05/11/2020

A/75/PV.21

North Macedonia, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America

Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Mongolia,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Serbia, Singapore, South Africa, the Sudan, Suriname,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.

Against
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
China, Congo, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Eritrea, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Russian
Federation, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.4, as orally
revised and amended?

Abstaining
Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Guatemala, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Maldives,
Mexico, Nepal, Panama, Paraguay, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay, Yemen
The draft amendment contained in document
A/75/L.6 was adopted by 54 votes to 40, with
45 abstentions.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.4, as orally
revised and amended.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed, the following
countries have also become sponsors of A/75/L.4, as
orally revised and as amended: Algeria, Angola, Benin,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, the Central African
Republic, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Fiji,

Draft resolution A/75/L.4, as orally revised and
amended, was adopted (resolution 75/5).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): We simply wish
to say at this point that resolutions commemorating
important anniversaries to mark the end of the Second
World War have been negotiated by the Assembly for a
long time. In this instance, we engaged constructively
from the beginning of the process, repeatedly raising
our concerns as I have done previously, about the
addition of what we considered to be politicized
language. However, our requests of the penholder
were unanswered.
We are pleased that, ultimately, resolution
75/5 has been amended to enable consensus and
preserve international unity. We look forward to the
commemorative event on 1 December.
Ms. Goebel (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of all 27 member States of the European
Union (EU), as well as the following countries: Albania,
Australia, Canada, Georgia, Iceland, the Republic
of North Macedonia, New Zealand, Ukraine and the
United Kingdom.
Resolution 75/5, commemorating the seventyfifth anniversary of the end of the Second World War,
was negotiated for a long time. The EU has engaged
constructively from the beginning. However, our calls
went unheard for the longest time and the penholder
was unwilling to engage on certain elements.
We appreciate the fact that, in the end, the resolution
was amended in a way that enabled its consensus-based
adoption, thereby preserving the usual unity of the
international community on the subject. In that regard,

20-3003421/27

A/75/PV.21

we look forward to the commemorative event to be held
on 1 December.
Mr. Situmorang (Indonesia): Indonesia wishes to
take the floor to explain its abstention in the voting on
the amendment to the fifth preambular paragraph to the
former draft resolution A/75/L.4 (resolution 75/5), as
contained in document A/75/L.6.
Indonesia continues to lend its full support to the
resolution, as a whole, as a sponsor of the text presented
by the Russian Federation, as we have done in previous
years. We share the importance of the historic occasion
of the end of the Second World War, with its impetus
for the founding of the United Nations and therefore has
hope for a consensus on the resolution.
Resolution 75/5 plays an important role for
the States Members of the United Nations as they
reminisce on the history and are mindful of its lessons,
while recognizing the mistakes of the past and learning
to approach situations differently. We have to move
forward. We must work together in a much better
way and help create an enduring environment that is
conducive to and promotes international peace and
security, development and human rights. In short, we
must deliver to we, the peoples.
At the same time, Indonesia notes the complexity
of the history related to the end of the Second World
War and its various interpretations and perceptions. In
that regard, countries may have different perspectives
on the events and preservation of the valuable history
and lessons learned. Together we learned from that
important chapter of our history that we have to advance
peaceful solutions to our differences.
Indonesia therefore underscores the importance
of dialogue in bridging the differences in our future
deliberations of the resolution, with a view to
finding a compromise for the text to be adopted by
consensus. Rest assured of our delegation’s readiness
to engage constructively with all Member States on this
indispensable part of world history.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to explain
my delegation’s position on resolution 75/5, which was
just adopted.
During the Second World War, Ukrainians made
sacrifices and an enormous contribution to the victory
over Nazism by demonstrating exemplary heroism in
the struggle for the liberation of their native soil and the
countries of Europe. It is also obvious that the efforts
22/27

05/11/2020

and sacrifice of the United Nations to end the Second
World War laid the groundwork for our Organization 75
years ago. My country is proud to be one of its founders.
Unfortunately, the penholder’s real attitude to
the Charter of the United Nation is well-known.
The drafting process of resolution 75/5, on such an
important occasion for all of us, was far from ideal. The
initial language used in the draft, as presented by the
main sponsor, blatantly sought to manipulate history,
endeavoured to monopolize the victory over Nazism
and shrank the essence of the last resolution adopted by
consensus — resolution 69/267. Therefore, we welcome
the fact that the essential language from the previous
resolution on refraining in international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State was finally
restored in the draft.
We also very much appreciated and supported the
adoption of the amendment presented by the European
Union, which made the text clear from a historical point
of view. Although we believe that history should be left
to historians, I would like to note that on 23 August
1939, the secret Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact was signed.
It delineated the spheres of interests between the Nazi
regime and the Soviet Union under communist rule
and led to further division in Europe for decades. The
Pact led to aggression and occupation, unprecedented
human suffering and crimes against humanity.
In 1939, the Nazi regime invaded Poland. Two
weeks later, Stalin also invaded Poland and followed
up with the occupation of parts of Finland and the
annexation of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and parts of
Romania. The question of why and who started the
bloodiest war in the history of mankind is by and large
a rhetorical one. Both regimes had a lot in common.
There was neither democracy nor respect for human
rights, which gave rise to authoritarianism and served
as a trigger for aggression against sovereign States. The
crackdown on democracy in contemporary Russia and
its ongoing aggression against Ukraine only prove that
that interlink remains valid .
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that Ukraine
condemns all cynical attempts of the Russian Federation
to present itself as a champion of combating Nazism,
while glorifying Stalinism and following his methods
by committing similar war crimes and crimes against
humanity in the temporarily occupied territories
of Ukraine.
20-30034

05/11/2020

Mr. Ngoyi (United States of America): The United
States disassociates itself from the consensus on the
fourth preambular paragraph. Resolution 75/5 includes
references to decolonization, which are not related
to the topic at hand. While the United Nations has
played a role in a decolonization process, the United
States believes that decolonization is an effort better
determined by a territory and its administering Power
than by a United Nations body.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its concentration of agenda item 137.
Agenda item 67
Report of the Human Rights Council (A/75/53 and
A/75/53/Add.1)
The President: I would like to recall that the
General Assembly, at its second plenary meeting on
18 September, decided to consider agenda item 67 in
plenary meeting and in the Third Committee, pursuant
to resolution 65/281 of 17 June 2011.
In accordance with decision 75/506 of 13 October
2020, I now introduce the pre-recorded statement of Her
Excellency Ms. Elisabeth Tichy-Fisslberger, President
of the Human Rights Council.
A pre-recorded video statement was shown in the
General Assembly Hall (see A/75/825).
The President: It is my pleasure to welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Elisabeth Tichy-Fisslberger. Due to
restrictions resulting from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the President could not be
here in person. However, the link between the United
Nations campuses in Geneva and New York remains
indestructible. We are therefore one United Nations
and the annual presentation of the report (A/75/53
and A/75/53/Add.1) of the Human Rights Council to
the General Assembly is important evidence of this
bond. We are all working in the image of the founders
of the Organization, who 75 years ago declared in the
first paragraph of the Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations,
“We the peoples of the United Nations determined
to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person, in the

A/75/PV.21

equal rights of men and women, and of nations
large and small…”
These words were drafted to safeguard humankind
against future challenges.
As we tackle the COVID-19 pandemic, they remain
profoundly relevant. For the COVID-19 pandemic
is not just a health crisis. It is a human rights crisis.
In an era of inequalities, the challenge is even more
acute for the most vulnerable people around the world.
The coronavirus pandemic is revealing structural
inequalities and obstacles to the full enjoyment of
human rights.
I therefore commend the President of the Human
Rights Council for her leadership in swiftly reconvening
the Human Rights Council. Indeed, the Council was
the first intergovernmental body to resume its work
in-person and exercised flexibility in procedure by
adopting a new hybrid model of in-person meetings with
remote participation. That enabled the Council to hold
three sessions and meetings, enabling the membership
to deal with a large volume of thematic and country
issues, which are of critical importance.
In order to uphold our collective dignity, it is
essential that our responses to the COVID-19 pandemic
promote protection and do not exceed necessary
limitations. Indeed, human rights can assist States
in responding to the pandemic and limiting adverse
ramifications. Public services must always be delivered
with human rights at the forefront. Our response to the
crisis must be shaped by, and uphold respect for, human
rights. Responses must be universal, open, transparent,
accountable and inclusive.
Civil society, the private sector and all stakeholders
must be able to participate and provide feedback. This
is essential not only for protecting our population
today, but also for identifying who is suffering the
most; why that has transpired; how we can protect these
communities at the moment; and when we will face the
next global challenge. That is because another crisis of
this magnitude will come, and we will have to meet it
when it does.
None of us is safe from COVID-19 until we are
all safe. None of us is free until we can all fully enjoy
the freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. We cannot neglect our duties to the
people whom we serve at this time of crisis, when it
is even more important. We must work towards lasting

20-3003423/27

A/75/PV.21

peace, sustainable development and the protection of
human rights if we are to create the future we want.
Parties to conflict must facilitate rapid, safe and
unimpeded access of humanitarian assistance, including
for the most vulnerable groups. The decade of action
and delivery to implement sustainable development
must become the decade of recovery.
The gains we have made on gender equality cannot
become derailed by the pandemic. Prior to the outbreak
of COVID-19, more girls were in school than ever before.
We must ensure that those girls return to education and
are equipped to live a life of their choosing, free from
fear and violence. Twenty-five years after the adoption
of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, it
is simply unconscionable that there has been a rise in
gender-based violence during this period.
It is up to all of us, as the membership of the General
Assembly, in particular those who are the members
of the Human Rights Council, and all individuals to
ensure that gender equality is at the fore of our work
and lives. Gender equality is a key priority of mine for
the General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session, and I
trust that the President of the Human Rights Council, as
only the second-ever female President of the Council,
will continue to champion gender equality for the
remainder of her term in Geneva.
We simply cannot allow discrimination or
intolerance to prevail in any form. Looking ahead
to the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action in 2021,
I welcome the work of the Human Rights Council
towards the elimination of racial discrimination
and xenophobia.
This meeting offers us an opportunity to listen
to the President of the Council and learn from our
sisters and brothers across the Atlantic, who like us are
working tirelessly to create a better world for the people
whom we serve.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Ms. Castan (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The European Union would like to warmly thank
the President of the Human Rights Council (HRC),
Ambassador Tichy-Fisslberger, for presenting the
Council’s annual report (A/75/53 and A/75/53/Add.1) to
24/27

05/11/2020

the General Assembly and her able stewardship of the
work of the Council in 2020.
The EU is convinced that the Human Rights Council
and its mechanisms, as well as the Third Committee,
have a crucial role to play in ensuring respect for human
rights. Unless we fulfil our international obligations to
respect, protect and fulfil all human rights and gender
equality, there can be no lasting peace, reconciliation,
security, stability or enduring development and
prosperity. Ensuring the full realization of those
mandates requires sufficient financial resources.
The EU calls on all United Nations Member States
to fulfil their obligations. Cuts to the United Nations
general budget should not disproportionately affect the
functioning of the United Nations human rights bodies
and mechanisms.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has exposed how persisting inequalities and the failure
to fulfil human rights negatively impact on our ability
to respond to global challenges. When addressing the
Third Committee three weeks ago, High Commissioner
Bachelet underlined that any recovery that fails to
address the root causes of inequality, political and
economic instability and displacement condemns us to
future crises.
The work of the Human Rights Council and its
special procedures during these times has proven to
be key in developing and suggesting comprehensive
approaches to address the crisis in a way that effectively
delivers for everyone. Despite this year’s challenging
circumstances, the Human Rights Council has
continued to address pressing issues across all regions,
including through urgent debates on racism and the
human rights situation in Belarus.
The EU strongly supports the full and effective
implementation of the Secretary-General’s Call to
Action for Human Rights with adequate resources
and stands ready to contribute to its implementation
through its initiatives in Geneva, New York and
elsewhere. In that respect, the EU will continue to call
for justice, condemning human rights violations and
abuses, wherever they are committed, and standing for
accountability and the fight against impunity, as we
have done in Geneva this year, including in the cases of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Myanmar,
Syria, Burundi and Belarus.
Resolutions, debates, the Universal Periodic
Review and presidential statements supplement one
20-30034

05/11/2020

another. All of them should be used to improve the
human rights situation in Member States. Following
the recent election of the new members of the Human
Rights Council, we reiterate that all United Nations
Members should take effective actions to implement,
uphold and promote the highest human rights standards
and that they have a special responsibility in that regard
when they are elected to the Human Rights Council.
The EU supports increased transparency of HRC
elections and accountability of the latter’s members.
An important step in the election process would be
organizing an open debate convened by the President
of the General Assembly.
No State has a perfect human rights record, but we
particularly expect from the newly elected members that
they engage in the work of the Human Rights Council
and its mechanisms in a spirit of self-reflection with
a view to improving their own human rights situation
and addressing all human rights concerns that come
before the Council on their merits. We also strongly
encourage all States and other stakeholders to cooperate
with the special procedures as a means to enhance the
protection and promotion of human rights. We take this
opportunity to call on all States that have not done so to
extend a standing invitation to all special procedures.
Civil society and human rights defenders are the
eyes and ears of the Human Rights Council. They play
an essential role in strengthening the connection among
the real issues affecting people every day and the work
of the United Nations, thereby ensuring that the Council
effectively delivers. The EU urges all States, including
the members of the HRC, to respect and protect civil
society and human rights defenders cooperating with
the United Nations system. We call for accountability
for and condemn all forms of intimidation, harassment
and reprisals both offline and online in this regard.
This year marks the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. Yet we
have seen that the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated
gender inequalities and globally increased sexual and
gender-based violence, including domestic violence.
Moreover, access to education and employment is
challenged and the gender poverty gap is expected to
widen. Those rights are not a given, and we need to fight
for them every day and everywhere. We welcome the
work done by the Human Rights Council to strengthen

A/75/PV.21

the existing framework with the adoption of several
strong resolutions aiming to promote women and girls’
full enjoyment of human rights and gender equality.
Last but not least, 2020 also marks the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations. On this occasion, in
the margins of the forty-fourth session of the Human
Rights Council, the EU advocated for the adoption
of a resolution in order to reaffirm the importance of
the United Nations, multilateralism and respect for all
human rights and fundamental freedoms in addressing
global challenges.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to thank Ms. Tichy-Fisslberger, President of
the Human Rights Council, for introducing its annual
report (A/75/53 and A/75/53/Add.1) and for her efforts
in leading the Council’s work.
The State of Qatar believes in the important role
played by the Human Rights Council, based on its
faith in the importance of international cooperation
and universal respect for the values and principles
of human rights and fundamental freedoms without
discrimination, and in addressing flagrant violations
effectively. The State of Qatar was one of the first
States to support the United Nations initiatives in our
region. Since 2009, we have hosted in Doha the United
Nations Training and Documentation Centre on Human
Rights for South-West Asia and the Arab Region. The
Centre plays an important role in building human
rights capacities.
The State of Qatar is proud to conclude our term as
a member of the Human Rights Council this year. We
have fulfilled our national and international obligations
and look forward to continuing our constructive
contributions by announcing our candidacy for a seat
in the Human Rights Council for 2022-2024.
We are also pleased to announce from this rostrum
that the State of Qatar has taken an important role
in the context of our national initiatives to promote
national legislative institutions, keep working towards
modernization and strengthen the rule of law. His
Highness the Emir of the State of Qatar announced at the
forty-ninth session of the Shura Council on 3 November
the holding of elections to the Council in October 2021.
This is an important step towards promoting the Shura

20-3003425/27

A/75/PV.21

tradition and enabling the citizens to participate more
broadly in drafting legislation.
The report of the Human Rights Council before us
refers to several important issues that are priorities for
the State of Qatar.
First, with a view to strengthening and protecting
the right to education, the State of Qatar submitted
draft resolution A/74/L.66, which was adopted by the
General Assembly on 28 May as resolution 74/275,
proclaiming 9 September the International Day to
Protect Education from Attack. We are confident
that celebrating this international day every year will
help to ensure respect for educational institutions and
students’ education worldwide.
Secondly, with regard to promoting human rights
through sports to all societal categories without
discrimination, the State of Qatar attaches great
importance to the Generation Amazing programme,
which is one of the main initiatives of the Supreme
Organizing Committee for the World Cup in 2022. Its
aim is to harness football for the sake of promoting
social skills, empowering young people and integrating
them in societies around the world.
Thirdly, the State of Qatar was one of the countries
which submitted a resolution to the Human Rights
Council on the fifteenth anniversary of the principle
of the Responsibility to Protect. That was in line with
the policy of the State of Qatar to protect civilians and
prevent collective atrocities and with our partnership
in the presidency of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect in New York, along with
Denmark and Costa Rica. We are proud that the principle
of the Responsibility to Protect has made great progress
over the past 15 years through a significant number of
United Nations Member States joining it in support of
this important humanitarian principle.
The report of the Human Rights Council also refers
to the negative impact of unilateral coercive measures
with regard to human rights. For more than three years,
the State of Qatar has endured an unjust blockade
and illegal unilateral measures, resulting in flagrant
violations of human rights. The National Human Rights
Committee of the State of Qatar has recorded more
than 4,275 human rights violations by the blockade
countries, including the rights to freedom of movement,
residency, property, education, health, employment
and justice. Those measures have also affected family
reunification, freedom of expression and opinion,
26/27

05/11/2020

and led to arbitrary arrests, forced disappearances,
incitement to hatred and violence, and violations of the
right to freedom of religion.
Judgments and decisions have been adopted by
international bodies for the benefit of the State of Qatar,
at the forefront of which is the International Court of
Justice and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination. This has proved that the blockade is
contrary to international law and legal commitments
pertaining to human rights. There is therefore a need
to end it and subject its violations to accountability.
We stress that the negative consequences of the unjust
blockade have not discouraged the State of Qatar from
implementing its national and international obligations
to protect and promote human rights. I would like
also to mention the efforts made by the State of Qatar
to address COVID-19 at the national, regional and
international levels within an approach that focuses on
respecting human rights.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar reiterates its
commitment to continuing its active contributions to
the Human Rights Council so that it will be able to
carry out its mandate in order to promote and protect
human rights.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): The Human Rights
Council has shown its responsiveness throughout
these difficult times to the significant fall-out of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic on the
promotion and protection of human rights. We thank
its President, Ambassador Tichy-Fisslberger, for her
determination and leadership in guiding the Human
Rights Council at this time.
The holding of two urgent debates in 2020 on
systemic racism and police brutality and on the human
rights situation in Belarus demonstrated that the
Human Rights Council continues to be in a position to
address human rights situations of concern in a timely
and effective manner. Liechtenstein strongly supports
the work of the Council, its evolving body of special
procedures and its strong civil society dimension, as
well as the Universal Periodic Review, the integrity and
universality of which are important achievements that
must be preserved.
Those mechanisms are all the more relevant
in times when human rights are under attack. The
COVID-19 pandemic, the wider inequality gap and
the resulting economic impact have further increased
vulnerability to human trafficking and modern slavery.
20-30034

05/11/2020

With the transition to an increased amount of online
activities as a response to the pandemic, traffickers
are increasingly using online technology to recruit and
exploit victims, which makes the crime and combating
it even more complex.
Liechtenstein has contributed to the fight with a
public-private partnership initiative — Finance against
slavery and trafficking — and its blueprint for financial
actors to help eradicate slavery, such as through the
promotion of sustainable and innovative financing
and responsible lending and investment, as well as
compliance and regulation. In addition to the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, the Human Rights Council can play an
important role in disseminating the blueprint. We are
grateful for the support of the Special Rapporteurs on
contemporary forms of slavery and on trafficking in
persons in this regard.
While this debate is an important annual
opportunity for the General Assembly to engage with
the Human Rights Council on its substantive work, it
also provides a good platform to evaluate the Council’s
institutional role within the framework of the United
Nations. The latest review of the Human Rights Council
has brought useful clarification to the Council’s
relationship with the General Assembly, including the
Third and Fifth Committees.
We are concerned about the severe and ongoing
liquidity crisis of the United Nations, which also
negatively affects the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Human Rights Council and has led to a situation
in which not all mandated activities for the year could
be carried out. While we welcome the pragmatic
solution that the Human Rights Council has found by
postponing the activities concerned until next year, that
should be an exceptional case. In that regard, we call
on all States to fully comply in a timely manner with
their financial obligations towards the United Nations
and call for more resources to be allocated to the human
rights pillar.
The work of the Human Rights Council is
essential in cases of human rights emergencies and
grave violations, and the Council is indeed often the
only United Nations body to address such situations.
In this regard, we welcome the adoption of followup resolution 45/31, on the role of the Human Rights

A/75/PV.21

Council in the prevention of human rights violations
at its forty-fifth session. The measures decided upon
provide a valuable opportunity to further strengthen
the Council’s role with regard to the prevention of
human rights violations. In particular, we welcome
efforts to apply the responsibility to protect principle in
the framework of the Council’s work.
We continue to be concerned about grave human
rights violations, including in Myanmar and the
Syrian Arab Republic, as documented in the Council’s
special procedures and accountability mechanisms.
Liechtenstein welcomes the Council’s support for
accountability efforts, including the important steps
taken by the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
the context of forced deportation and the International
Court of Justice under the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, in its
resolution 43/26. At the same time, we regret that the
Security Council continues to ignore calls from States,
the United Nations system and the victims themselves
for a referral to the ICC.
There is no doubt that there is room for
improvement regarding the mandate of the Human
Rights Council to promote the effective coordination
and the mainstreaming of human rights within the
United Nations system. This calls for stronger and
more consistent links between Geneva and New York,
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and a more robust cooperation between
the Human Rights Council and the other relevant
main bodies of the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council.
The work of the Human Rights Council and many
of its special procedure mandate holders is, in many
instances, relevant to discussions in the Security
Council, yet consistently disregarded by the latter. We
call on the Security Council to take up the offer of the
Human Rights Council to engage more on substantive
matters, use the best available factual basis for
decision-making and not limit its work to an extensively
narrow concept of security.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item at this meeting. We
shall hear the remaining speakers this afternoon at
3 p.m. in this Hall.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

20-3003427/27
