United Nations

S/PV.3722

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-first Year

3722nd Meeting
Wednesday, 11 December 1996, 5.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fulci . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Botswana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Honduras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Legwaila
Mr. Larrain
Mr. Qin Huasun
Mr. Awaad
Mr. Ladsous
Mr. Henze
Mr. Lopes da Rosa
Mr. Martínez Blanco
Mr. Wibisono
Mr. Matuszewski
Mr. Choi
Mr. Fedotov
Mr. Gomersall
Mr. Inderfurth

Agenda
The situation in Angola
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III)
(S/1996/1000)

96-87058 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
The meeting was called to order at 5.25 p.m.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
submitted by Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) (S/1996/1000)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Brazil, Lesotho, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Namibia, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, South Africa,
the United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Members of the Council have received photocopies
of the letter dated 11 December 1996 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/1996/1029.
The first speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Angola, on whom I now call.
Mr. Van Dunem “Mbinda” (Angola): The ViceMinister without Portfolio of Angola, Mr. Higino
Carneiro, cannot address the Council, and he has asked
me to do so in his stead. With his permission, therefore,
allow me to express our pleasure at addressing the
Security Council at a moment in which the peace process
in my country is reaching a decisive stage.
Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Republic of Angola and my own, on your
election to preside over the activities of this body in the
month of December.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van-Dunem
“Mbinda” (Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Mochochoko (Lesotho), Mr.
Chimimba (Malawi), Mr. Wan Chat Kwong
(Mauritius), Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique), Mr.
Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Catarino (Portugal), Mr.
Ferreira (Sao Tome and Principe), Mr. Jele (South
Africa), Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of
Tanzania), Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) and Mr.
Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III),
document S/1996/1000. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/1996/1026, which contains the text
of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations, on the basis of the draft resolution

2

Allow me also to extend our congratulations to your
predecessor, His Excellency Nugroho Wisnumurti,
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, for the efficient
manner in which he presided over our activities last
month.
This meeting has been convened to review the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to consider
measures that will lead to a successful conclusion of the
Angolan peace process within a reasonable period of
time.
Despite well-known difficulties, there has been
substantial progress in the implementation of key
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. That leads the
Government of Angola to believe that we are now very
close to its conclusion.
Obviously, this step, as well as the incorporation of
UNITA generals into the Angolan Armed Forces, is
heavily dependent upon the statement expected from the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III).
We are now awaiting most sincerely and anxiously
this moment in the peace process. His Excellency the

Security Council
Fifty-first year
President of Angola has instructed the Vice-Minister
without Portfolio to inform the members of the Security
Council that hours ago he signed the official appointment
orders of the nine UNITA generals, incorporating them into
the Armed Forces. The Security Council has received for its
consideration the communiqué of the coordination body of
the peace process.
We are all very concerned with the reintegration of the
demobilized soldiers into civilian society, and it could not
be otherwise, because the success of that task is essential to
the future stability of Angola.
On the basis of its present capabilities, the
Government of Angola is making an enormous financial
effort to ensure not only the reintegration of the
demobilized soldiers but also to finance the costs of
transporting them, their weapons and the UNITA soldiers
to the quartering areas.
On behalf of peace, we have been shouldering alone
these expenditures, which should be shared by UNITA
itself and by UNAVEM III. We hereby appeal to all donor
nations to honour their commitments resulting from the
September 1995 Brussels Round Table Conference.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
generals provided by UNITA into the Angolan Armed
Forces. They are indeed crucial steps for the further
progress of the peace process.
Nevertheless, we consider that the overall pace of
the peace process is still very slow. Several important
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol remain unfulfilled, and
both parties should implement fully and as soon as
possible the following tasks: first, the integration of
selected personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces;
secondly, the effective conclusion of the demobilization
process; thirdly, the dismantlement of all illegal
checkpoints; and, lastly, the extension of the State
administration throughout the territory of Angola.
Only a few days ago, the Deputy Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Portugal, Mr. José Lamego, during his recent
trip to Angola, strongly urged both parties to fulfil those
tasks.

Please allow me again to thank the Governments,
United Nations organizations and governmental and nongovernmental humanitarian organizations for the assistance
they have provided to the Angolan people.

We now look forward to firm initiatives from the
Government of Angola and UNITA towards national
reconciliation, and we hope to see very soon the
assumption by UNITA deputies of their seats in the
National Assembly, the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation and the determination
of a special status for the President of UNITA. Those
measures will lead to the reinforcement of mutual
confidence between the parties, which is essential for a
lasting peace in Angola.

The Government of Angola also wishes to express its
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations; to his Special
Representative in Angola, Mr. Beye; and to the troika of
observer States for the contributions they have made and
are making to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

It is also urgent and imperative that freedom of
movement of people and goods be guaranteed throughout
Angola in order to boost confidence among the population
and foster national reconciliation. We are therefore
concerned by reports we have received of increasing acts
of banditry in the country.

The President: I thank the Permanent Representative
of Angola for his kind words addressed to me.

Portugal favours the phased withdrawal of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) by the Security Council following the
recommendation of the Secretary-General. We believe the
Government of Angola and UNITA must realize that they
are responsible for the successful implementation of the
peace process and that the presence of UNAVEM III
cannot continue indefinitely.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Portugal. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Catarino (Portugal): Steps have been taken
recently in Angola by both the Government and UNITA
towards the fulfilment of important military tasks under the
Lusaka Protocol. We welcome the fact that UNITA has
made a formal declaration on the quartering of its troops
and the delivery of its armaments and other matériel and
that the Government of Angola has incorporated the nine

However, it is crucial that the pace of withdrawal be
determined by the progress achieved in the different
phases of the peace process. A strong presence of
UNAVEM III in Angola has shown itself to be of key
importance to the implementation of the process, which

3

Security Council
Fifty-first year
indicates a need to take a cautious approach to the
withdrawal of United Nations forces.
The good work of the men and women of UNAVEM
III, currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation, has been, and will continue to be, vital to the
success of the international community’s efforts to bring
peace to Angola.
Portugal, one of the troika of observer States to the
peace process, fully supports the work of UNAVEM III,
and wishes here to praise heartily the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Blondin Beye.
The international community has shown, as it is
showing today, its confidence in the Angolan peace process
and, as we have said before, the Angolan parties, who are
ultimately responsible for the successful implementation of
the peace process, must show clear signs that they are
worthy of such confidence.
We want to believe that after so many positive
achievements towards the consolidation of peace, the
signatories of the Lusaka Protocol will honour the efforts of
the international community and the commitments they
themselves have made, and place above all the interests of
Angola and its people.
We wish to renew here our appeal to the international
community to continue to support the peace process in
Angola. In particular, we would like to stress the urgency
of making the necessary financial resources available for
the demobilization and social reintegration of excombatants.
Let us hope that the draft resolution to be adopted
today will constitute an encouragement for the Government
of Angola and UNITA to accelerate their fulfilment of all
the tasks necessary for a long-lasting peace and national
reconciliation, so much desired and deserved by the
Angolan people.
The President: It is my understanding that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the vote.

4

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): For almost two years
now, the international community has been assisting the
people of Angola, through the instrumentality of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III), to carry out the process of rebuilding and
transforming a country ravaged by war into one
committed to beating swords into ploughshares.
UNAVEM III has played and continues to play an
important role in making it possible for the people of
Angola to realize that peace is not an option, not a matter
of life or death, but rather a question of live and let live.
We firmly believe that the acceptance by the Government
of Angola and UNITA of the fact that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in their country was an
important first step on the road to peace and democracy
in Angola. Today, the international community can bear
witness to the long and difficult road which the two
parties have travelled together so far. There can be no
doubt that while the peace process remains fragile and
reversible, the fact remains that never before in the
history of the Angolan conflict has so much been
achieved to establish a lasting political solution. Botswana
therefore strongly hopes that the Government of Angola
and UNITA will not waste this historic opportunity to
make peace for their country and people a living reality.
The implementation of the Lusaka Protocol was
never intended to be an unending process. There are
greater challenges which await the people of Angola, such
as the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the national
economy. Some of the urgent tasks which have to be
tackled expeditiously are the resettlement of the more
than one million internally displaced persons, demining
and road rehabilitation, demobilization and social
reintegration of the ex-combatants and the disarming of
the civilian population, to mention but a few. These are
monumental tasks which must be addressed adequately as
they have a direct bearing on the sustainability of the
peace process.
Botswana fully supports the Secretary-General’s
appeal to the Government of Angola and UNITA to
establish the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation before 1 January 1997. We are convinced
that the formation of the Government would enable the
Government of Angola and UNITA to focus their
attention on the issues that unite rather than divide them.
The socio-economic aspects of the situation in Angola, as
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General, clearly
indicate that the parties have no choice but to seek
common ground in addressing the problems which
confront their country. This is the basis of our optimism

Security Council
Fifty-first year
that the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation
would serve as a catalyst in resolving outstanding political
issues.
My delegation is satisfied with the understanding that
the withdrawal of UNAVEM III formed military units
should not be carried out in a manner that might endanger
the peace process. The draft resolution also makes it
sufficiently clear to the parties that the international
community expects them to honour and to complete the
implementation of their commitments under the Lusaka
Protocol. In this respect, the commencement of the
withdrawal of UNAVEM III should not be misinterpreted
as an opportunity to slow down the implementation of the
outstanding issues and ultimately to renege on commitments
and obligations already agreed. The Security Council is
united in its determination to ensure that the peace process
is not put in jeopardy. A follow-on United Nations
presence, as set out in operative paragraph 20 of the draft
resolution, would therefore play a crucial role to this end.
Clearly, the international community has no intention to
abandon the people of Angola.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Botswana’s strong support for
the proposal to send a Security Council mission to Angola
before the expiry of the mandate of UNAVEM III. The
mission would offer members of the Council a rare
opportunity to observe at first hand and on the ground the
peace process in action and to make specific
recommendations on the support necessary for post-conflict
peace-building.
Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
The French delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution now before us for action. This draft resolution
provides first of all for further extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) until 28 February 1997. It will also mark the agreement
of the Security Council regarding the plan for phased
withdrawal of the United Nations force after the expiry of
its mandate in accordance with the Secretary-General’s
proposals.
Above all, the draft resolution will once again recall
to the Angolan parties, and in particular to UNITA, that
they have a responsibility to make the final essential efforts
to implement the Lusaka Protocol. Indeed, two years have
now passed since this Agreement was signed. The attitude
of UNITA has resulted in the loss of a great deal of time.
However, progress has been made thanks to the continued
pressure exerted by the Council and to the tenacity of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
Blondin Beye. France shares the view expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report of 2 December 1996 that
the accords as a whole could be implemented before the
end of December.
A long road still lies ahead for Angola after the 20
years of war which have destroyed the economy of the
country, despite its unquestionable potential for success.
France is ready to provide assistance to the Angolan
people to regain the road of development and progress. At
the meeting in Brussels in September 1995, France stated
that it was ready to make available 570 million francs —
that is, more than $110 million — for programmes for the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Angola. Discussions
are now under way within a bilateral framework with the
Angolan authorities so that this promised aid can rapidly
take concrete form. The French aid will be focused on
reconstruction projects, but it will also obviously have an
impact on the reintegration of demobilized combatants.
The French Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hervé
de Charette, went to Angola less than two weeks ago. As
a result of the contacts he was able to establish in Luanda
with President Dos Santos, he was able to assure the
Government of Angola of Frances full support in the
pursuit of the peace process.
It is now up to the Security Council to see to it that
all the efforts that we have made for nearly four years
towards the restoration of peace bear fruit soon. We also
hope that the institutions for national reconciliation will
be able to begin to function as soon as possible. These
necessary stages will allow Angola fully to resume its
place in southern Africa and to rejoin the group of
democratic African countries of that part of the continent
which have undergone radical and exemplary changes
since 1989.
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The question of Angola, having dragged on for
so long, has finally entered into a phase of positive
change that is worthy of celebration. We have always
believed that at the core of the question of Angola is the
lack of mutual trust between the parties concerned,
particularly on the part of UNITA. This requires the two
parties, especially UNITA, to make unremitting efforts to
achieve genuine national reconciliation.
We note with satisfaction that, in recent days, the
Angola Government and UNITA have at last made
important progress in implementing the Lusaka Protocol
and in fulfilling the tasks enumerated in the consolidated

5

Security Council
Fifty-first year
timetable. We note in particular that the goals set in the
military area are gradually being realized. We hope that
both parties will consolidate and maintain the positive
momentum in the peace process and eliminate their
differences through candid consultations.
We are pleased to learn that UNITA has completed the
quartering of its troops. We hope that the work of
demobilization will start as soon as possible. We hope to
see a fifth meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi and expect the Angolan Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation and a single parliament to be
established soon, allowing Angola finally to embark upon
the path towards peace and reconciliation.
Since its establishment, the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) has made important
contributions to the monitoring of the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and to assistance in the restoration of
peace and the realization of national reconciliation in
Angola. We believe that, as the Angolan peace process
develops and UNAVEM III gradually fulfils its tasks, it
will be necessary to make appropriate adjustments to this
Mission, which is currently the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation. In the meantime, at this critical
juncture in the Angolan peace process, the continued
presence of UNAVEM III is essential to the complete
fulfilment of various tasks set out in the Lusaka Protocol
and to the final realization of peace in Angola.
In view of this, the Chinese delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III and will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.
In accordance with Security Council resolution 976
(1995), the mission of UNAVEM III will be concluded next
February. After that, whether and how to maintain a United
Nations presence in Angola is a question of concern. Years
of war and conflict have left Angola in ruins and the task
of reconstruction is very arduous. The Chinese delegation
believes that the international community, including the
United Nations, should continue to focus on and support the
cause of peace and reconstruction in Angola.
The Chinese Government recently donated a cargo of
goods to the Government of Angola in support of the peace
process in that country. In the future we shall, within the
limit of our capabilities and together with the rest of the
international community, continue to make our contribution
to the peace and reconstruction of Angola.

6

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland): The United Kingdom welcomes
the draft resolution and intends to vote in favour of it. We
pay tribute to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III), to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative and to all the others who have
helped the parties in Angola to get to this point in the
realization of the Lusaka Protocol.
The Council, in agreeing to a further final period for
UNAVEM III, makes it as clear as ever that the
responsibility for consolidating the peace rests on the
shoulders of the Government of Angola and of UNITA
themselves. Both parties must work to form a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation. We
welcome the fact that UNITA has taken the final,
symbolic step of declaring the quartering of all its troops
and given up its weapons.
We also welcome reports that the Government will
proceed immediately to incorporate the nine UNITA
generals currently in Luanda into the Angolan Armed
Forces. Both sides must now complete the process of
demobilization of former combatants.
If these two tasks are completed, the international
community and my Government will continue to help
Angola to secure its future within the community of
southern African nations. There is much the United
Nations can and should do to assist Angola in dealing
with the challenges of reconstruction, rehabilitation and
national reconciliation. A continuing United Nations
presence following the departure of UNAVEM III, as the
Secretary-General has proposed, will also probably have
an important role to play.
Finally, despite the slow progress in getting to this
point, we believe that this is a good example of why the
maintenance and, indeed, the strengthening of the political
and material resources of the United Nations conflictresolution and peacekeeping capabilities are vitally
important.
Mr. Henze (Germany): Germany welcomes the
recent progress made by the parties to the Angolan peace
process in implementing the relevant provisions of the
Lusaka Protocol. The international community has
invested significant resources in the Angolan peace
process during the last couple of years and has a strong
vested interest to see it concluded successfully. In his
latest report, however, the Secretary-General rightly points

Security Council
Fifty-first year
out that the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol proceeds
only “in fits and starts” (S/1996/1000, para. 28).
We note with great satisfaction that UNITA today
issued a formal written declaration that all UNITA soldiers,
with the exception of 453 police officers, have been
quartered. Thus, one of the major military aspects of the
Lusaka Protocol has been successfully implemented.
We also welcome the letter of the Permanent
Representative of Angola, Ambassador Van Dunem
“Mbinda”, and the communiqué stating that the nine
UNITA generals have received their commissions and
specific assignments in the regular Angolan Armed Forces.
We very much hope that the integration of the regular
UNITA soldiers will now start and be accomplished soon.
The political issues still have to be addressed. We urge
the Angolan Government and the leadership of UNITA to
resolve before the beginning of next year, as requested in
the draft resolution being put to a vote today, the
outstanding issues and to arrange a meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in Angola to
determine the special status of the President of UNITA, to
extend State administration throughout the territory of
Angola, to return all elected Deputies to the National
Assembly, to form a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and to establish the free circulation of people
and goods.
Time is short. The mandate of UNAVEM III will
finally expire in February 1997.
I wish to underline the importance my Government
attaches to the problem of successfully demobilizing excombatants and reintegrating them, along with internally
displaced persons, into civil society. I agree with the report
of the Secretary-General that this is one of the most critical
challenges under the Lusaka Protocol. Germany, as a major
donor country, feels a particular responsibility in this field.
By this summer, my Government had already launched a
pilot project for the demobilization and socio-economic
reintegration of ex-combatants and internally displaced
persons, in cooperation with the Angolan Government, local
authorities and United Nations agencies. Germany has
already pledged DM 1 million, about $650,000, for this
project. The success of this pilot project has encouraged my
Government to initiate concrete planning for the launching
of this major project for the demobilization and socioeconomic reintegration of ex-combatants and internally
displaced persons as of 1 January next year. The German
Government stands ready in principle to pledge additional

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
funds, amounting to DM 6 million, or approximately $4
million. Furthermore, my Government has contributed
significantly to the efforts made by the international
community in the field of humanitarian assistance, and
will continue to do so.
We are also continuing to pay particular attention to
the grave problem of landmines in Angola and to the
need for effective demining. Germany has provided up to
nine demining experts as inspectors for demining
activities within UNAVEM III to support the United
Nations-contracted demining company MECHEM in its
efforts, which have resulted in the clearing of more than
4,000 kilometres of roads of landmines. In addition, two
German non-governmental organizations are carrying out
mine-clearing activities in the field. Assistance to the
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance
of the Department of Humanitarian Affairs is another
aspect of our activities in Angola.
In concluding I wish to reiterate that despite all the
efforts made by the international community to assist the
peace process in Angola, the ultimate responsibility for
peace and tranquillity in that country lies with the parties
to the Angolan peace process themselves. The fate of the
people of Angola is in their hands. It is our hope that
they will act in accordance with that responsibility.
In the light of those considerations, Germany will
vote in favour of the draft resolution on Angola before
the Council today.
Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): The Polish delegation
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
extend the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) until 28 February
1997, and will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before the Security Council to that effect.
We are fully aware of the mixed experiences that the
peace process in Angola has brought to all involved in
promoting it, including the Security Council. However,
we take some courage from the latest report of the
Secretary-General, in which he points to the recent
progress in the situation in Angola and stresses the fact
that, despite all the obstacles it is faced with, the peace
process is moving ahead.
With most of the objectives achieved, a number of
important issues remain to be properly attended to and
resolved. That is the case with the demobilization of
quartered UNITA troops, the disarmament of the civilian

7

Security Council
Fifty-first year
population and the completion of the selection of the
UNITA troops to be incorporated into the Angolan Armed
Forces. There is a clear link between the successful
fulfilment of these tasks and the creation of the favourable
climate necessary for taking up outstanding political
problems, including the return of UNITA deputies to the
National Assembly, the founding of a constitutional basis
for the transitional plan in Angola, the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and the
achievement of an agreement on the special status of Mr.
Savimbi as the leader of the largest opposition party.
We expect each party not to make their compliance
with their obligations conditional upon the performance of
the other side. This is important if the peace process in
Angola is to advance further. It is also important from the
point of view of the international community, the
continuing involvement of which in Angolan affairs will be
feasible only with both parties faithfully fulfilling their
commitments.
Speaking today, as the Security Council meets to
consider the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III,
currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping operation,
I would like to pay tribute to the personnel of the Mission
for having contributed significantly to peace, stabilization
and security in Angola.
Let me also express my delegation’s gratitude to the
States observers of the Angolan peace process for their
efforts, including those that they made to prepare the draft
resolution before us.
Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): On
the basis of the report of the Secretary-General and the
debate in the Security Council, we can conclude that there
are two main challenges facing the Angolan peace process:
a UNITA announcement regarding the quartering and
disarmament of its troops in line with the timetable adopted
by the Joint Commission on 31 October 1996, and
agreement by all parties regarding major pending political
tasks. We believe that meeting these challenges will make
it possible to bring peace to Angola. If they are not met,
the political situation will remain fragile.
Further, we believe that any delay in implementing the
Lusaka Protocol and the agreed timetable will diminish the
credibility of the peace process and will make it impossible
to achieve the necessary confidence for the new phase on
which the people of Angola are embarking. Military
questions must be settled, and this requires the cooperation
of both parties. These questions include the incorporation

8

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
of some 26,300 UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces and the re-establishment of Government authority
over the whole national territory. We hope that President
Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will meet inside Angola and
that such a meeting will lead to a solution of pending
questions including Mr. Savimbi’s special status as the
leader of the largest opposition party, the inclusion of
UNITA leaders in the new Cabinet, and participation by
UNITA in the legislature and national, regional and local
administration. This requires that UNITA become a
political party that functions with complete legitimacy and
legality.
My delegation remains convinced that the
demobilization of some 100,000 soldiers from both sides
and their reintegration into civil society is one of the
major challenges under the Lusaka Protocol. We support
the Secretary-General’s comments in paragraph 20 of his
report regarding participation by the United Nations
Development Programme in the rehabilitation of excombatants with a view to facilitating their reintegration.
These programmes are particularly vital in a country
where, according to the report, the unemployment rate is
45 per cent and the inflation rate is more than 3,000 per
cent. We hope that the donor countries will continue to
provide financial and technical assistance to implement
these programmes without delay in this fraternal country.
Egypt supports the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral to continue the phased withdrawal of UNAVEM
III military units through August 1997. We are convinced
that in the coming period the political aspects of the
settlements will be emphasized more than the military
aspects, which have almost been settled between the two
parties.
Angola will surely continue to need the United
Nations, but the importance and nature of the United
Nations presence will of course be different. The
opportunities now available to the Angolan parties
because of the presence of the largest United Nations
Mission should not be lost. Extending the Mission’s
mandate in the absence of real progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol would be difficult
to agree to, in view of the United Nations financial crisis.
The responsibility incumbent on the parties in
Angola is twofold: they must avail themselves of the
international presence in Angolan territory in order to
encourage the international community to continue to

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996

provide humanitarian, economic and technical assistance to
the Angolan people in the future.

guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
humanitarian supplies throughout the country.

The Egyptian delegation supports the extension of the
mandate of the Mission in Angola until 28 February 1997.
We support the draft resolution before the Council.

The completion of the military tasks will allow the
peace process to focus on the key outstanding political
issues. My delegation continues to encourage direct talks
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi, which,
in our view, would promote confidence and mutual
understanding between the parties in order to move
towards achieving national reconciliation. Thus, my
delegation hopes that the parties will resolve the problem
of the return to Luanda of UNITA deputies to the
National Assembly, the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation, the reaching of an
agreement on the status of the President of UNITA before
31 December 1996 and the extension of the State
administration throughout the country. In this regard, my
delegation is pleased to note that these have already been
reflected in operative paragraphs 9 and 10 of the draft
resolution now before the Council.

Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like to begin by
extending the Indonesian delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on the latest developments
in the implementation of the peace accords in Angola and
on the operation of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III). The report clearly shows that the
process of implementation of most of the military tasks set
out in the peace accords has begun. However, they have not
yet been finalized. While my delegation welcomes the
positive developments and the initiatives taken by the
parties, as well as their willingness to work cooperatively,
the pace of the peace process remains slow. It is in this
respect that my delegation reaffirms how important it is for
the Government of Angola and UNITA to fulfil promptly
their obligations in accordance with the “Acordos de Paz”,
the Lusaka Protocol and all relevant Security Council
resolutions.
My delegation is furthermore cognizant of the close
links between the military and political aspects of the peace
process. It is therefore imperative for both parties to make
progress in the military aspects, in order to provide the
necessary impetus for the political aspect to move forward.
We are of the opinion that, once the first stages of the
military tasks have been implemented, the parties concerned
should faithfully begin the process of demobilizing former
combatants, vacating them from the quartering areas and
reintegrating them into civilian society. Those steps, which
are prerequisites for ensuring stability and consolidation of
the peace process, require close cooperation between the
parties and assistance from the international community.
My delegation has taken note that ceasefire violations
have declined. Nonetheless, we also note that the security
situation in the country remains volatile, and many areas
are still unsafe. In this context, we would like to urge both
parties, particularly UNITA, to remove all illegal
checkpoints that obstruct the free circulation of people and
goods throughout the country. The report attests that over
1 million internally displaced persons continue to rely on
humanitarian assistance instead of being able to return to
their homes to lead productive and independent lives.
Moreover, my delegation considers it very important and
necessary to ensure the safety of United Nations and other
international personnel and premises, as well as to

Parallel to the political initiatives necessary to
reconcile the country, much still needs to be done on the
economic front to reconstruct Angola. In this respect, my
delegation is cognizant of the work carried out by
UNAVEM III and other United Nations agencies in
establishing programmes to permit Angola to rid itself of
the remnants of war and to rebuild itself. My delegation
is of the view that the international community should
fulfil expeditiously its pledges in providing assistance for
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country’s
economy in order to consolidate the gains achieved in the
peace process, as expressed in paragraph 19.
The issue of mine clearance in Angola is, indeed, an
important matter. The impact of mines affects all facets
of national life and hinders society’s return to normal life.
The disastrous effects of landmines can be curbed through
technical and financial assistance. In this regard, we fully
support operative paragraph 17 of the draft resolution.
This demining programme, which includes mine clearance
and road rehabilitation efforts, human rights education
campaigns, the formation of a national police force and
the Community Rehabilitation Programme, are all
testimony to the United Nation’s dedication to seeing
peace last in Angola.
Finally, with regard to the future role of the United
Nations, we fully share the Secretary-General’s
observation, contained in paragraph 33 of the report, that
the withdrawal of UNAVEM III’s formed military units
should be conducted gradually, commensurate with the

9

Security Council
Fifty-first year
progress achieved in the peace process. This is precisely
because of UNAVEM III’s positive influence on the
military and political situation in the country. We take note
of the Secretary-General’s recommendation for a new form
of mandate, focused more on political, police, human rights
and humanitarian activities, including mine clearance, once
the military components are no longer needed. This
mandate would permit follow-up and continuity, with the
United Nations presence, to consolidate the gains made in
the peace process, thus ensuring a lasting peace in Angola.
On the basis of these observations, my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution extending the mandate
of UNAVEM III until 28 February 1997.
Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): The second anniversary of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol was commemorated on 20 November
1996. This Protocol became the basis of the peace process
in Angola, opening up real prospects to the people of
Angola for the restoration of long-awaited peace, stability
and national reconciliation.
The Russian Federation, one of the troika of observers
to the Angolan settlement, is sincerely interested in the
successful development and speedy conclusion of the peace
process and is sparing no effort to achieve that goal. Ending
the conflict in Angola, which has lasted for many years,
would be not only the greatest boon to the people of that
friendly country, but also a major success for the
peacekeeping activities of the United Nations and of the
international community as a whole.
Unfortunately, the peace process in Angola, despite
considerable achievements, is developing very unevenly and
often requires pressure on the sides; in particular, on
UNITA, to overcome the obstacles that arise. Nevertheless,
the Angolan settlement is moving forward step by step,
bringing us closer to the desired threshold where the peace
process will become irreversible.
Today a major success was achieved in this regard.
The leadership of UNITA has finally made an official
statement that it has concluded the quartering of all its
military personnel and police, with the exception of 453
persons to be quartered in the next few days. It has also
handed over all of its weapons to the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). In turn, the
Government of Angola has announced its decision to
incorporate nine UNITA generals into the Angolan Armed
Forces.

10

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
These important steps open up the opportunity to
finalize the settlement of the core military issues and to
focus on the outstanding political questions. Of high
priority here are the return to Luanda of the UNITA
deputies of the National Assembly, the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, and an
agreement on the status of the President of UNITA. These
tasks must be resolved by the end of the year and should
allow for the establishment of effective structures of State
administration throughout the territory of the country,
which could ensure the political and social stability
without which the restoration of peace and normal life for
Angolans is impossible.
Procrastination in the implementation of these
aspects of the settlement is unacceptable and could have
a very negative impact on the peace process as a whole.
It is important to strengthen the political base in every
possible way in order to hasten the peace process, which,
in our view, would be promoted by the speedy convening
of a fifth meeting in Angola between President Dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi.
Of exceptional importance, too, are the issues of
establishing unified armed forces and the Angolan
National Police and accelerated demobilization of
ex-combatants. Although quite a few complex and largescale tasks lie ahead, the peace process in Angola is
moving unswervingly into its final phase: the expiry of
UNAVEM III’s mandate in little more than a month and
a half.
It is obvious that what is now the largest United
Nations peacekeeping operation cannot be shut down
overnight. We are in favour of this process being thought
through carefully, implemented gradually and sufficiently
flexibly, without unjustified delays, but also on the basis
of the real status of the peace process. In that context, we
believe it would be useful for the Security Council, before
the end of February 1997, to send its mission to Angola,
which would allow us to draft an adjusted strategy and
tactics for UNAVEM III in its final phase and to define
a position on the basic parameters for a continued United
Nations presence in that country.
In the view of the Russian delegation, the draft
resolution on Angola submitted for consideration today by
the Security Council is up to the key tasks of the current
stage of the peace settlement. We believe that this draft
resolution will send a serious signal to the Angolan
parties on the need to speed up implementation of the

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996

commitments they have undertaken and to take the peace
process to the finish line.

efforts made by the Angolan parties and the international
community have indeed been necessary and worthwhile.

Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
The international community is very interested in seeing
real progress in the political process in Angola, recognizing
the fact that Angola is working for the social and economic
development of its population, which has suffered the
ravages of war.

Among recent developments, we welcome the fact
that today UNITA formally declared the completion of
the ever-pressing task of quartering all its troops and that
the Government has initiated the actual incorporation of
UNITA troops, beginning with the nine generals currently
residing in Luanda.

To this end, Government and UNITA leaders must
continue to implement the commitments entered into at
Lusaka two years ago as well as the consolidated timetable
for all outstanding tasks that was approved on 31 October
by the Joint Commission.

We would like to underline, however, that the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and other
commitments between the Angolan parties have yet to be
finalized. With the completion of the mission of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) two months away, as envisaged in Security Council
resolution 976 (1995), it is time for the Angolan parties
to build on past achievements and further accelerate
efforts to complete the final stages of the peace process.
We sincerely hope that the implementation of crucial
military tasks will mark the initiation of genuine
reconciliation through political negotiation between the
Angolan parties.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General, the
situation in Angola has remained stable, although tense. The
ceasefire violations and the harassment of the troops of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) are causes for regret. However, the Secretary-General’s
report gives us hope that the parties are finally managing to
create a climate that will allow the country to secure peace
and to begin the tremendous development tasks ahead of it.
The formal announcement by UNITA that it has
concluded the quartering of its troops and the declaration by
the Angolan Government that nine UNITA Generals are
joining the Angolan Armed Forces are very encouraging
and important developments and which will contribute to
increased confidence between the parties at this crucial
time.
As regards the current situation, we agree with the
Secretary-General that the mandate of UNAVEM III must
be extended to 28 February of next year. Therefore, my
delegation supports the draft resolution before us.
I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to pay
a tribute, on behalf of Chile, to all of the civilian, military
and police personnel of UNAVEM III, as well as to the
staff of the humanitarian programmes and agencies of the
United Nations and of non-governmental organizations.
They all have something in common — they are fighting to
consolidate peace in Angola.
Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): Angola has trodden
the rocky road of peacemaking for the past two years,
following the signing of the Lusaka Protocol in November
1994. Although we cannot be totally satisfied with the slow
pace of the peace process during this period, or with its
pattern of intermittent fits and starts, we believe that the

As the military commitments are being fulfilled, the
political aspects of the peace process will loom larger in
the coming months. The establishment of a Government
of National Unity and Reconciliation is the next crucial
step in the long- overdue peace process. Needless to say,
success can be guaranteed only when the Government and
UNITA mutually cooperate and compromise.
While the establishment of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation is not to be linked with
other political issues, we believe that all outstanding
political issues can be best and most expeditiously settled
through a tête-à-tête between the President of Angola and
the leader of UNITA. We urge both parties to show a
spirit of maximum cooperation and flexibility for the
realization of this meeting and the settlement of all
outstanding political issues. In this regard, we place
special emphasis on paragraphs 10 through 12 of the draft
resolution before the Council.
At the same time, we are not oblivious to the everincreasing need for socio-economic stability in Angola.
The pressing and costly tasks of demobilizing and
reintegrating the 10,000 ex-combatants, and relieving and
rehabilitating over a million displaced persons, will have
to be addressed through hard work by the Government,
with the help of the international community. Angola is
also facing many other challenges in the areas of State

11

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996

governance, public accountability, and law and order. The
consolidation of peace in Angola cannot be forthcoming
without the Government and the international community
continuing to make their best efforts to tackle these issues.
We believe, therefore, that close scrutiny of the situation on
the ground will be necessary to help consolidate peace in
Angola with the adequately restructured presence and
assistance of the international community. We
wholeheartedly welcome, in this regard, the idea of sending
a Security Council mission to Angola at an appropriate time
to assess the situation and better decide on the pace of
withdrawal of UNAVEM III and the modalities of a followon United Nations presence.

recent weeks to strengthen the peace process, which we
believe to be extremely positive. Just a few hours ago the
Security Council received a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Angola transmitting a communiqué
from his Government announcing the incorporation of a
UNITA general into the Angolan Armed Forces. We
believe that these actions deserve to be fully encouraged
by the international community. At this crucial stage in
negotiations, Angola needs more than ever the support
and contributions of all in order to consolidate the
achievements that have been made. The many delays in
the full implementation of the Lusaka obligations remain
a source of concern.

In conclusion, we support the extension of the
mandate of UNAVEM III until the end of February 1997
and its subsequent reduction, as suggested in the draft
resolution on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
recommendation. Therefore, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council.

As we have said repeatedly, it cannot be denied that
important and substantial progress has been achieved, the
most important aspect being the maintenance of the
ceasefire. Other obstacles, without which it will not be
possible to achieve further progress, must be overcome.
The main issue concerns the complete quartering of
UNITA troops and their disarming and demobilization
within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol. The delays
that have occurred in this regard are affecting the
formation of a single military force, the integration of
UNITA officials into the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation, and other activities linked to the
implementation of the Protocol. Once again, we call on
our Angolan brothers to continue to pursue their efforts
with greater political determination, in the same
constructive spirit shown recently, so as to give priority
to the settlement of all obligations of a military character.
Indeed, in order for the outstanding political issues to be
settled, it is imperative that the parties demonstrate firm
political will by adopting concrete steps aimed at helping
the peace process.

Mr. Lopes da Rosa (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation
from French): The fact that the Security Council is once
again considering the situation in Angola attests to the
sustained interest the international community is taking in
the crisis in that country. Over the past 20 years, the
international community has supported efforts aimed at
restoring peace in this fraternal country, and replacing
mistrust and lack of cooperation, which have marked
relations between the parties concerned, with coexistence,
reconciliation and the determination to make sacrifices so
as to build a unified homeland.
In this regard, my delegation wishes to express again
its gratitude to the Secretary-General for the exhaustive and
very enlightening report that he has submitted, which
highlights the latest events concerning the peace process
that is under way. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who is continuing to coordinate
and encourage the process of dialogue with an unmatched
optimism. I should also like to reiterate the appreciation of
my country for the important role played by the troika of
observer States in the quest for peace in Angola.
Guinea-Bissau recognizes that much remains to be
done to achieve all the objectives laid down in the Lusaka
Protocol and to meet the obligations stemming from the
relevant Security Council resolutions in order fully to
implement, and to give real meaning to, the peace process
in Angola. However, we have noted, with great satisfaction,
the observations of the Secretary-General in his latest report
with regard to the steps taken by the Angolan parties over

12

As my country has stated many times, we believe
that peace, security and prosperity in Angola is possible,
and that the Angolan people, with whom we have shared
many years of fraternal history in common, deserves to
enjoy the wealth of its country in peace and to participate
in its reconstruction and socio-economic development. For
all those reasons, Guinea-Bissau believes that the
international community should continue to follow the
situation in Angola closely, while continuing to provide
economic and humanitarian assistance.
With regard to the draft resolution, we are convinced
that the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) still has a role to play in Angola, and that
it must continue to support the peace efforts of the two
parties to the extent that a real will for peace exists. That

Security Council
Fifty-first year
is why we approve the extension of its mandate, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report. In so
doing, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
Mr. Martínez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation views with concern the delays in
the implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
and the commitments undertaken by the Government of
Angola and by the União Nacional para a Independência
Total de Angola (UNITA).
Although we recognize that certain positive
developments have taken place in Angola in relation to the
peace process, such as the maintenance of the ceasefire, the
dismantling of the illegal checkpoints, improvements in the
freedom of movement of persons, continuation of the
programme of disarming the civilian population, and the
completion of the quartering of UNITA troops, there has as
yet been no swift action on matters that are essential for the
peace of the country. In the political sphere, there has not
yet been any tangible progress with respect to the prompt
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, or to reaching an agreement on the special
status of the leader of the largest opposition party, in
accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.
We believe that the parties should make greater efforts
to attain these objectives, and should strictly comply with
their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the commitments
undertaken in Libreville and Franceville. That is why we
urge them to meet as soon as possible, and to adopt
measures that will enable significant progress to be made
towards peace and national reconciliation.
My delegation believes that the achievements so far in
Angola must be consolidated through the assistance of the
international community for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the Angolan economy, which continues to
be in a critical condition. We appeal to the international
community and to donor countries to continue to lend their
support to the peace process in Angola.
My delegation also recognizes that, in order to
complete the tasks provided for in the Lusaka Protocol and
to consolidate the progress achieved, it will be necessary to
maintain a limited United Nations presence in Angola after
the withdrawal of UNAVEM III’s units.
My delegation feels that the presence of UNAVEM III
is necessary at this stage of the peace process in Angola,

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
and will vote in favour of the draft resolution extending
the Mission’s mandate until 28 February 1997.
Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): A short
two months ago, the members of the Security Council
adopted a resolution containing a stern warning to the
parties to break through the mindset that was preventing
them from completing the military tasks agreed to in the
Lusaka Protocol and to get on with the business of
establishing a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. We can now be gratified that our message
was heeded and that we have seen significant progress in
identifying UNITA members for integration into the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA), in quartering UNITA
forces in Cabinda, in dissolving UNITA’s military
command structure and in completing many of the other
tasks we specified in resolution 1075 (1996). Today, we
received word that UNITA has made a formal declaration
on the completion of the quartering process and that the
Government of Angola has made an announcement on the
integration into the FAA of the nine generals provided by
UNITA.
Despite these advances, as of today the military tasks
remain incomplete and we find ourselves once again
considering how to urge or compel the parties to act
swiftly in meeting the obligations they took upon
themselves in Lusaka two years ago. In particular, we are
concerned that the quartering camps remain full of
UNITA troops, even though many have been selected for
integration into the Angolan Armed Forces and many
others are ready to be demobilized and returned to
civilian life.
These quartering camps, guarded by United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) forces, have
played a central role in the peace process. They have
permitted UNITA’s armed forces to stand down gradually
from a state of combat readiness and to begin the
transformation to membership in the Angolan Armed
Forces or the return to civilian life. The success of the
quartering process is owed in large measure to the
presence of the neutral international military forces of
UNAVEM III at the camps.
However, neither the quartering camps nor
UNAVEM III were intended to be permanent. Both were
to be temporary measures, stepping stones from a state of
armed conflict to one of reunification and reconciliation.
The time has come for the camps to close and for
UNAVEM to begin withdrawing. The Government must
work with UNITA to empty the camps rapidly and move

13

Security Council
Fifty-first year
on to the political tasks in order to reintegrate UNITA into
a process in which problems are resolved through
negotiation and compromise, rather than through violence.
The Government and UNITA must take great strides to
train, equip and deploy integrated units to the areas of the
country formerly occupied by UNITA forces so that the
civilian populace in those areas will have the confidence to
move about freely while attending to their daily affairs.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
demobilization and reconciliation in Angola. Furthermore,
the United States plans to contribute in the near future a
further $2,500,000 towards such efforts, if the parties
demonstrate adequate commitment to the peace process.
Additionally, the United States intends to provide, in
1997, $1 million in demining equipment and services to
be used by the United Nations Central Mine Action
Office, the Angolan demining Institute and the UNAVEM
demining School.

UNAVEM III itself must now begin to withdraw. The
two years projected for the duration of UNAVEM III are
coming to an end — two years of relative peace for
Angola. The withdrawal of UNAVEM III means not that
the international community is turning its back on Angola,
but that the time has come for formed military units to be
replaced by a follow-on international presence focused on
assisting Angola in the reconciliation and reconstruction
process that lies ahead.

We urge others seriously to consider committing
additional funding for this critical stage of the peace
process. The representatives of the troika of observers
convened a meeting of potential donor countries in New
York last week to underline the serious need for funding
for the demobilization process, and received positive
responses from the United Kingdom, Sweden and Finland.

The draft resolution we are adopting today takes into
account all of these issues. It calls on the parties to
complete the military tasks and move on to the political
tasks. It authorizes the Secretary-General to begin the
withdrawal of UNAVEM III and to plan for a follow-on
United Nations presence. We expect that the Government
and UNITA have received the message the draft resolution
conveys: that rapid action on their part to integrate UNITA
personnel into the Armed Forces at all levels and to
demobilize those remaining in the camps is of the essence.

The international community, including this Council,
has devoted years of its attention to helping the Angolans
themselves put the hostilities of the past behind them.
United Nations personnel on the ground have shown great
devotion to this goal, some even giving their lives during
their service in UNAVEM III. We honour their service.
We also wish to convey our appreciation to Mr. Beye, to
the Force Commander and to all the troops and staff of
UNAVEM III for their hard work and unstinting
dedication. We hope the Angolans will seize the
opportunity for cementing a lasting peace, which is so
nearly in their grasp.

The resolution is not directed only at the parties and
UNAVEM III. It contains an urgent message for other
Member States as well. This critical stage of the peace
process cannot succeed without immediate funding. The
generosity of donor States has made possible the success of
the peace process to date, but the peace process itself is
being put at risk at this critical moment. The immediate
unmet needs for quartering areas and demobilization exceed
$19 million, according to the Humanitarian Assistance
Coordination Unit (UCAH) projections. The international
community must act urgently to subscribe the required
funds so that demobilization can be completed within the
three months programmed by UCAH. Further delays will
only undermine and undercut the peace process and delay
the drawdown of the UNAVEM III force, increasing the
drain on United Nations and donor resources.
Therefore, in order to strengthen the peace process and
set the stage for the new Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation, the United States announces today its
intention to contribute an additional $3,350,000 to United
Nations and bilateral programmes which support

14

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
Let me begin by saying that the number of speakers
who have spoken or will speak this evening is a genuine
testimony to the international community’s attention to
the situation in Angola and its developments.
I take this opportunity to address my heartfelt thanks
to the Secretary-General and his special representative,
Mr. Blondin Beye, whose unwavering commitment and
diplomatic skills have enabled him to play a crucial and
successful role. The troika of observers of the peace
process, the countries contributing troops to the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) and
the countries of the region have all joined in the search
for a political settlement in Angola. I wish also to pay
tribute to the Permanent Representative of Angola,
Ambassador Afonso van Dunem “Mbinda”, who from
New York has acted untiringly for the cause of peace and
national reconciliation in his country.

Security Council
Fifty-first year
As the Deputy Foreign Minister of Italy, Senator Rino
Serri, observed on his very recent mission to Angola, the
peace process has indeed reached a turning point. The
implementation of the military dimension of the Lusaka
Protocol is nearing completion. Today, UNITA issued a
formal declaration confirming the termination of the
quartering of its troops — except for a limited number of
policemen, who will soon also be quartered — and the
handing over of its weapons to the United Nations.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
For all these reasons, I will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1996/1026.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

The next step is the integration of selected UNITA
troops into the Angolan Armed Forces. We welcome the
acceleration of this very delicate operation. Today, the
Luanda Government has taken another major step by
announcing the incorporation into the Angolan Armed
Forces of the nine UNITA generals residing in Luanda, a
decision widely expected by the international community.
Now, priority is shifting towards the demobilization
and social reintegration of combatants. I would like to
recall here that, to this end, my Government has provided
a financial contribution of approximately $4 million to the
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Unit for Angola.
Italian instructors also participate in training the demining
teams that will fight what is not only a scourge of war, but
a continuous threat to the lives of innocent people,
including children, and to the reconstruction of Angola for
years to come.
The Angolan parties should now focus on the speedy
implementation of the political aspects of the Lusaka
Protocol. The draft resolution before the Council clearly
outlines what needs to be done. The steps to be taken have
so far been postponed, pending a settlement of the military
issues. Now there can be no more procrastination and they
have to be put into effect quickly.
The Italian Government fully supports the paragraphs
of the draft resolution that provide for the drawdown of the
military units of UNAVEM III on the basis of the proposal
made by the Secretary-General. They strike a delicate
balance between the need to ensure the successful
conclusion of the peace process and to avoid prolonging
excessively this most expensive peacekeeping operation.
I conclude by recalling the concern of the Italian
Government and people at the hardship endured by the
innocent Angolan civilians throughout this endless civil
war. In the past five years, Italy has provided
approximately $110 million in assistance. Now that the
prospects for peace are brighter, we will remain steadfast in
our commitment.

In favour:
Botswana, Chile, China, Egypt, France, Germany,
Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, Poland,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1087 (1996).
The Council has thus concluded its voting procedure
and shall hear further statements under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe): Mr. President, I wish
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December 1996.
My delegation is confident that the Council will benefit
immensely from your wide experience and able
leadership.
Allow me also to express my delegation’s gratitude
and appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for the manner in which he
presided over the affairs of the Council last month.
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his
two most informative reports on the situation in Angola,
dated 19 November and 2 December 1996.
My delegation notes with regret and disappointment
that two years have come and gone since the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol and that we still lack the requisite
measure of progress to show that the peace process in

15

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Angola has come of age. When this Council met last time
to consider the situation in Angola, it expressed in strong
terms its concern over the dangerously slow pace of
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and enumerated a
series of requirements which UNITA had promptly to fulfil.
We fully share the critical observation of the
Secretary-General that the peace process in Angola has
continued to progress in “fits and starts”. We remain
particularly disturbed by the fact that, even at this late stage
in the peace process, progress has often come only in
response to increased pressure applied by the international
community, particularly on UNITA.
The peace process in Angola has reached a critical
stage for both the people of that country and the
international community as a whole. Statistics on
cantonment, demobilization and reintegration alone,
important as these processes are, can no longer impress
either the people of Angola or the international community.
Progress in those areas alone, even if it were more
resounding and more satisfactory than it is today, could no
longer serve as an adequate measure or reflection of
progress for the peace process as a whole.
Time is marching on and, at this very critical moment,
we join the people of Angola in demanding and expecting
no less than landmark decisions and measures on the part
of the Government of Angola and UNITA. For the people
of Angola, the disquieting news of the final expiry of the
initial mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) on 28 February 1997 must be
counterbalanced by unprecedented breakthroughs in the
peace process.
In this regard, my delegation joins the SecretaryGeneral in appealing to all who can make a contribution to
facilitating the return to Luanda of UNITA deputies to the
National Assembly, the establishment of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation, and the cooperation of
UNITA in the search for an agreement on the special status
of its leader. We also wish to reiterate our strong view that
a meeting in Angola between President José Eduardo dos
Santos and Mr. Savimbi would be most timely and
appropriate at this stage.
Above all, until today we were going to demand that
UNITA be pressured to make the formal and written
declaration required of it in paragraph 12 (e) of Security
Council resolution 1075 (1996), stating that all UNITA
soldiers had been quartered and that UNITA had no more
weapons and military equipment in its possession, in order

16

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
to remove any obstacles to the extension of State
administration throughout Angola.
We now understand that that declaration has been
belatedly made by UNITA, a typical example of
UNITA’s now-well-known tactic of making a meaningful
move only when the Security Council meets to consider
further steps to be taken to give impetus to the peace
process. We warmly welcome the news of the
incorporation of the nine UNITA generals into the
Angolan Army.
My delegation could not agree more with the
Secretary-General that as we approach the end of the twoyear period foreseen in the initial mandate of
UNAVEM III, the countdown towards the completion of
that operation can only be gradual and progressive. We
also agree, and most unreservedly so, that several crucial
tasks of the peace process are far from complete and that
Angola will continue to need the stabilizing presence of
the United Nations forces.
The peace-loving people of Angola will remain
restless until the respite offered under the Lusaka Protocol
transforms itself into a lasting peace. We in Zimbabwe
and in southern Africa in general join the people of
Angola in holding fast to the dream that led to the
commitments of the Lusaka accord, and in demanding
that those commitments be implemented in order to
normalize the situation in Angola and in the entire
subregion, in the interest of international peace and
security.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
unanimous adoption of the latest resolution, 1087 (1996),
and particularly the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM III to 28 February 1997.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Zimbabwe for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Namibia. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): At the outset, may I
extend to you, Sir, my delegation’s warm congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month. Your experience and diplomatic skill will no
doubt guarantee the success of the Council’s work under
your wise leadership. We also extend our sincere

Security Council
Fifty-first year
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for the remarkable and admirable
way in which he guided the affairs of the Council for the
month of November.
Allow me also to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the
comprehensive report before us today and for his efforts to
further the cause of peace and reconciliation in Angola. The
same sentiments are extended to his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and to the entire personnel of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III). They are carrying out their mandate with
determination under difficult conditions.
We note with satisfaction the initiatives and the
intensive efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, in collaboration with the troika — Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America —
in the search for peace in Angola, which have resulted in
positive developments, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report. We are encouraged that substantial progress has
been made thus far. In this connection, we need to
encourage the Government and UNITA to make additional
efforts and to speed up the pace of implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol.
We warmly welcome the announcement by the
Government of Angola regarding the incorporation of
UNITA generals into the national Army. We are also
pleased to note that UNITA has just made a declaration
regarding the assembling of its troops and the handing over
of its weapons.
Namibia is fully committed to ensuring that lasting
peace and stability are restored in Angola. In his statement
before the fifty-first session of the General Assembly on 30
September 1996, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia said the following:
“Namibia is bound by blood and common destiny to
stand with Angola. That is why our military
contingent attached to UNAVEM III will remain in
Angola until the Mission is satisfactorily concluded.”
(Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first
Session, Plenary Meetings, 14th meeting, p. 8)
Of grave concern to my Government is the desertion
of UNITA troops from the quartering areas and the delay
in settling the outstanding political issues, namely, the
return to Luanda of UNITA deputies to the National
Assembly, the agreement on the status of the leader of

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
UNITA and the establishment of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation. Those issues, among
others, are of paramount importance to the whole peace
process. We trust, therefore, that the parties will continue
to negotiate seriously and reach an agreement. In this
connection, we agree with the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the present mandate of
UNAVEM III to 28 February 1997.
Although we recognize that it is the Angolan people
who bear the ultimate responsibility for their own destiny,
it is imperative for the international community, and the
Security Council in particular, to demonstrate greater
commitment and determination to help the people of
Angola to resolve the outstanding political issues. The
Council must send a clear message to the parties and to
UNITA in particular, bringing to its attention the
consequences of obstructing the peace process in the
country. The time has now come for the UNITA
leadership to know that the people of Angola, especially
the children, need peace, and the country needs
development.
The Secretary-General’s report also states that
Angola continues to be confronted with severe economic
conditions and a serious budget deficit. To address such
economic challenges the country requires the efforts of all
its people, the parties concerned and their leadership.
However, this is not an easy task. Therefore, we call upon
the international community to mobilize all the necessary
resources for the rehabilitation of the economy and the
reintegration of ex-combatants into civilian life. That is
why, despite the severe drought situation confronting
Namibia, we contributed in August of this year $5,000 to
the United Nations consolidated inter-agency appeal for
Angola. We will continue to make our humble
contribution to that fund. In this connection, we join the
Secretary-General at this critical stage to urge the donor
community to fulfil the pledges undertaken at the 1995
Brussels Round Table Conference on Angola.
We warmly welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1087 (1996).
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Namibia for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Representative of Brazil. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

17

Security Council
Fifty-first year
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): May I first of all congratulate
you, Ambassador Fulci, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Under your able and wise guidance the
particularly complex agenda of the Security Council in the
last month of the year will be dealt with with competence
and effectiveness. I wish you success.
I should also like to take this opportunity to express
sincere appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for his very skilful conduct of the
Council’s business during November.
We would like, once more, to pay tribute to the role
played by the Secretary-General, Mr.Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
and by his Special Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye. We
commend the continued endeavours by the troika of
observer States.
We are now approaching the end of the two-year
period foreseen in resolution 976 (1995) for the completion
of the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III). Though substantial progress has
been made in the peace progress since the beginning of this
operation, a lot remains to be done.
In the quartering process, many UNITA troops have
deserted. The quantity and quality of weapons handed over
to UNAVEM III was unsatisfactory. Some of the tasks
enumerated in resolution 1075 (1996) and in the
consolidated timetable approved by the Joint Commission
were not fulfilled by the 15 November deadline.
However, we very much welcome today’s news to the
effect that UNITA has declared that it has completed the
quartering of its troops and that the Government has
proceeded to the integration of nine UNITA generals into
the Angola armed forces. This is a breakthrough that should
lead to progress on all fronts.
In a demonstration of Brazil’s firm commitment to the
peace process, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso visited
Angola last November, having travelled to Cuíto to meet
with the Brazilian troops serving in UNAVEM III.
President Cardozo went to Luanda to confirm that Brazil is
ready to cooperate with Angolans and their Government in
the reconstruction of the country and in the consolidation of
a fair and free society where reconciliation and integration
are the cornerstones of prosperity.
The situation in Angola is at a crucial stage. Unless
serious progress continues to be made in key areas, in the

18

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
short term UNAVEM III will not be able to fulfil all the
tasks assigned to it.
In his report, the Secretary-General outlines a plan
for the withdrawal of UNAVEM’s contingent with which
we agree in principle. However, we should bear in mind
the responsibility of the international community towards
Angola. We believe that the complete withdrawal of the
force should take place only after it becomes clear that
the peace process is irreversible.
The extension of UNAVEM’s mandate until 28
February 1997 will provide the Angolans with an
additional chance to accomplish the remaining military
and political tasks foreseen in the Lusaka Protocol and to
establish the basis for a peaceful, united and prosperous
Angola.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Brazil for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker on my list is the Permanent
Representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): I would like to join my
colleagues who have spoken before me in congratulating
you, Mr President, on the magnificent leadership you are
providing the Council for the month of December. Permit
me also to acknowledge the able manner in which your
predecessor, the Ambassador and Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, presided over the work of
the Security Council last month.
My delegation further thanks the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his detailed report on the
situation in Angola contained in document S/1996/1000
of 2 December 1996.
We are pleased to note the positive assessment by
the Secretary-General of the situation in Angola since the
signing of the Lusaka Protocol on 20 November 1994 —
positive, of course, in the sense that relative peace has
since characterized the situation in that country. The
Government of Angola must, in large measure, be
credited for its considerable patience in the face of
intransigence on the part of UNITA in the peace process.
We also recognize and applaud the work of all the men
and women involved in the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), without whose

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996

presence Angola would have sunk deeper and deeper into
its fratricidal conflict.

presented to address seriously and resolve their many
political problems in the peace process.

When the Lusaka Protocol was signed on 20
November 1994, it was the fervent hope of the international
community that a framework for an effective peace process
had been put in place which, through the implementation of
the Protocol’s provisions, would at last end the war in
Angola and usher in an era of peaceful reconstruction of
the country, thereby opening the way to the consolidation
of peace and stability.

The people of the southern African region put a high
premium on the success of the peace process in Angola,
for we believe that such a peace will bring benefits to the
entire region. Angola will be able to concentrate on
rebuilding its economy so that it can make a better
contribution to the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) as coordinator for the energy sector
in the region. If Angola is to make a meaningful
contribution to the SADC region, it will have to
strengthen its own economy first and foremost. It is in the
light of that that my delegation wishes to applaud the
Government of Angola for initiating last June the “New
Life Programme”, aimed at resuscitating the economy.

Regrettably, the obligations contained in the Lusaka
Protocol have not been fulfilled on time and in accordance
with the timetable originally envisioned. A lot of the
remaining business should have been finished by now. In
the meantime, the time for the phasing out of UNAVEM III
in February 1997 is fast approaching. The international
community cannot continue to breathe life into the peace
process to sustain an unending situation of conflict in
Angola. The people of Angola urgently require a complete
break with the prevailing situation of “no war, no peace”.
The people of Angola have suffered enough and they want
an opportunity to rebuild their lives in conditions of peace
and stability. While the onus is on both sides, it must be
pointed out that UNITA and its leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi,
bear a special responsibility in carrying out their obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol in a timely fashion and without
having to wait for international pressure before fulfilling
these obligations.
There is a lot of unfinished business that has yet to be
addressed. There must be concerted efforts to resolve the
problem of deserters from quartering areas; the tide of
deserting troops must be stemmed immediately. The
incorporation of UNITA forces into the Angolan national
army must be accelerated and other vexing problems
referred to by the Secretary-General in his report also need
urgent attention. These include, of course, the need for
UNITA deputies to return to the National Assembly in
Luanda and the need to resolve the status of the UNITA
leader in the national Government.
However, my delegation is pleased to have learned
this afternoon that UNITA has finally issued the longawaited declaration on completion of the quartering of its
troops and the handing over of their weapons. We are also
pleased to learn of the incorporation of the UNITA generals
into the Angolan national army. What is required now, or
part of what is required now, is for the Government of
Angola and UNITA to seize the opportunity that is

We are pleased also that the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) is taking a keen interest in assisting Angola
to revive its economy. The visit to Angola this year by
the IMF Managing Director, Mr. Michel Camdessus, is a
concrete expression of that interest. This is a timely
intervention by the IMF, which we believe the rest of the
donor community should support.
Finally, my delegation wishes to appeal to the
international community not to lose patience with the
peace process in Angola. Angola is the only country in
southern Africa which is still grappling with an internal
conflict situation. It should be helped to rejoin the rest of
the countries of the region, which are enjoying peace and
stability through good governance.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Zambia for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Mauritius. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Wan Chat Kwong (Mauritius): I would like to
join previous speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council and to
commend you for your very able leadership. My
delegation’s appreciation also goes to your predecessor,
Ambassador Wisnumurti, for his excellent stewardship of
the Council last month.
The Secretary-General has noted in his report that
substantial progress has recently been made in the
implementation of resolution 1075 (1996). Angola

19

Security Council
Fifty-first year
continues to enjoy relative peace since the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol. All of this should have been welcome
news, but unfortunately implementation of the Protocol has
proceeded quite laboriously and any notable progress has
been recorded only when pressure has been brought to bear
on the parties.
There is no doubt who is the main responsible party
in this protracted process. UNITA can only be induced to
take some significant measures when the situation is due to
be reviewed by the Security Council. The report of the
Secretary-General makes this clear when it is states that,
after several weeks of procrastination, UNITA finally
allowed the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) to remove weapons discovered in an arms
cache in Negage.
At last count, more than 69,000 UNITA troops had
been registered in quartering areas, up from 63,000 last
September. The Council may recall that UNITA had
initially declared only 62,500 troops. At the same time,
some 13,000 of these troops subsequently deserted, up from
less than 11,500 last September. Two steps forward and one
step backward. This appears to be another tactic employed
by UNITA to delay or evade the complete respect of its
commitments.
While my delegation welcomes the adoption a few
moments ago of the resolution by the Council, my
delegation holds the view that the Council should perhaps,
at some point, seriously consider applying some of the
measures against UNITA envisaged in its resolution 1075
(1996), notwithstanding UNITA’s declaration today —
which needs to be verified — to the effect that it has
quartered all its troops and surrendered all the weapons and
military equipment in its possession. True, UNITA has
made some positive gestures, but we have to ask ourselves
if its efforts are genuine. The past does not seem,
unfortunately, to vindicate UNITA’s apparent sincerity.
Angola will continue to need the firm support of the
international community during its peace process and long
after it finally achieves normalcy. The tasks enumerated in
the Secretary-General’s report are daunting, including such
challenges as the demobilization of tens of thousands of
troops and their reintegration into civilian society, the
rehabilitation of rural communities and assistance to large
numbers of refugees, displaced persons and ex-soldiers in
resettlement areas. My delegation earnestly hopes that the
donor community will respond generously to the appeal for
continued assistance, in accordance with the pledges made
at the 1995 Brussels Round Table Conference.

20

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
Finally, my delegation would like to pay a warm
tribute to Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye for his dedication
and tireless efforts in the peace process. I would like to
associate this homage to all the members — military,
police and civilian components — of UNAVEM III for
their tremendous devotion to the cause of peace in
Angola.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius for his kind words addressed
to me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Mozambique. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): Allow me to start
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the particularly
important month of December. My delegation remains
ready to collaborate with you as you discharge your noble
duties.
I wish to commend His Excellency Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia for his outstanding performance
last month.
The Secretary-General deserves our appreciation for
his continued commitment to maintaining international
peace and security. His reports on developments in
Angola bear testimony to this fact.
Two months ago, a team of Foreign Ministers from
southern Africa came to this body, mandated by the heads
of State of the region to voice their concern over the slow
progress in the peace process in Angola. They urged the
Council to take appropriate action in order to encourage
a speedy implementation of the “Acordos de Paz”.
After clearly identifying the major obstacles and
their source, the Council, in its wisdom, adopted
resolution 1075 (1996) of 11 October, in which it
expressed deep disappointment with UNITA for delaying
the full implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. The
Council called upon UNITA immediately to fulfil 12
tasks. Among these tasks was the issuance of a formal,
written declaration indicating that all its soldiers had been
quartered and that it had no more weapons and military
equipment, thus removing any obstacles to the extension
of State administration throughout Angola. The Council
considered then the possibility of imposing measures

Security Council
Fifty-first year
against UNITA if it did not comply by 20 November 1996.
Where do we stand today? Are we witnessing serious
signs of commitment on the part of UNITA to comply with
the Council’s decisions? The Secretary-General’s report
indicates some positive developments. However, those are
far from what we expected and we remain deeply
concerned over the slow pace of events.
My delegation believes that UNITA’s full compliance
with the tasks enumerated in the aforementioned resolution
would allow the process to move into the next stage.
We welcome the latest news of substantive progress.
The people of Angola deserve better than what they are
being offered now. They need assurances that they can go
back to their areas of origin and rebuild their villages and
communities without fear of another outbreak of war.
Southern Africa wants an Angola in peace, a strong partner
in the region’s quest for integration and development.
Mozambique shall continue to lend its solidarity and
support, working in concert with the other countries of the
region and the international community until peace becomes
an irreversible reality in Angola.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its
appreciation to all members of the Security Council for
their continued interest and active role in the peace process
in Angola. We therefore welcome the resolution just
adopted extending the mandate of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) until 28
February 1997.
The President: I thank the Permanent Representative
of Mozambique for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
the United Republic of Tanzania. I invite him to take a seat
at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania): At
the outset, my delegation extends its sincere congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. My delegation is convinced that, under
your very able and skillful leadership, the Council will
discharge its responsibilities admirably. At the same time,
my delegation would like to express its appreciation to
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia for his very able
leadership of the Council during the month of November.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
I would like to express my delegation’s sincere
appreciation for being given this opportunity to address
the Council on the situation in Angola.
Once again, the Council is convening to deliberate
on a very pertinent issue: the consolidation of the peace
process in Angola. Since this meeting coincides with the
second anniversary of the signing of the Lusaka Protocol,
it provides us yet another opportunity to remind the
international community and, indeed, the concerned
parties to the conflict that now, more than ever, the
people of Angola deserve peace.
The recent painful and troubled phase in the history
of the Angolan people has lasted for over three decades.
The initial decade witnessed Angolans taking up arms to
fight a bitter anti-colonial war. The end of colonialism,
however, did not bring good news to the country, but
instead a cruel and destructive civil war that caused
untold suffering for the people. Hundreds of thousands of
innocent people died; many more were maimed for life
and, inevitably, thousands of people became either
refugees or internally displaced persons.
As we commemorate the second year of the Lusaka
Protocol, it is heartening to note that the temporary
upward trend in the number of ceasefire violations has
been reversed. While the present report of the SecretaryGeneral, contained in document S/1996/1000, reveals a
volatile security situation in many parts of the country, we
are delighted to learn that there have been no major cases
of harassment of the personnel of the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III). This
positive trend of events needs to be nurtured by all the
relevant parties to the conflict under the skillful and able
supervision of UNAVEM III.
My delegation is equally encouraged by the
quartering process of UNITA troops and the handing-over
of weapons, although, according to the report before us,
the United Nations is still awaiting an official declaration
by UNITA that it has assembled all its troops and handed
over all weapons. We appeal to the Government to
deliberately initiate the actual incorporation of UNITA
troops and generals into the ranks of the Angolan Armed
Forces (FAA), while, at the same time, we welcome
UNITA’s declaration UNITA on its assembled troops and
the weapons status made just today. The international
community will be looking forward to its translation into
action.

21

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996

In the same vein, the demobilization of ex-combatants
from the Government and UNITA must continue to take
place in an appropriate manner. UNITA officials must stop
their repeated violations of soldiers’ right to choose freely
where they would like to be resettled.

to find a lasting solution in Angola. As we approach the
end of the year and the beginning of a new one, my
delegation appeals to the leadership in Angola, in both the
Government and the opposition, to give the Angolan
people a well-deserved peace as a New Year’s gift.

As noted in the report, the expiration of the current
mandate of UNAVEM III should inspire the concerned
parties to carry out dutifully and responsibly all their
obligations in the consolidated mediation timetable. We
thus concur with the Secretary-General in appealing to the
Government and UNITA to resolve the issue of UNITA
deputies who are supposed to return to the capital to
facilitate the establishment of the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation and also to reach agreement on
the special status of the leader of the largest opposition
party before 1 January 1997.

In conclusion, I can do no better than to quote my
President’s address to the General Assembly last October.
President Mkapa said:

Tanzania commends the efforts being undertaken in
the relief and rehabilitation process, especially in returning
internally displaced persons to their original homes.
Although there are a lot of obstacles which continue to
hamper these efforts, my delegation is optimistic that, as
conditions continue to improve, more displaced persons will
be resettled in areas where they originally belonged. To this
end, we also welcome the demining operation currently
taking place under the coordination of the United Nations
Central Mine Action Office.
The socio-economic reforms currently underway in
Angola should be encouraged and beefed up. The launching
of the “New Life Programme” last June was a milestone
move in addressing the economic problems facing the
country. The importance of the envisaged International
Monetary Fund (IMF)-sponsored emergency programme,
supported by an emergency operation fund and, at a later
stage, a three-year structural adjustment programme cannot
be overemphasized. These efforts should be complemented
by the international community, especially the developed
North, which should generously offer grants and soft loans
to bail out the beleaguered Angolan economy.
We welcome and support the thrust of the draft
resolution before the Council, particularly the
recommendation to extend the mandate of UNAVEM III
until 28 February 1997. We also support the gradual
withdrawal of UNAVEM III military units as of next
February over a period of six to seven months.
Lastly, permit me to extend my delegation’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his present and
previous Special Representatives for their relentless efforts

22

“Difficulties remain, but we have crossed the
Rubicon and, with determination, we can maintain a
steady pace towards peace. ... The United Nations
played a key role in this task. It will have to play an
even greater role in consolidating the progress
towards peace.” (Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-first Session, Plenary Meetings,
22nd meeting, p. 5)
The opportunity is there and the time is right. Angola
deserves better.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania for his
kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
Lesotho. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): I would like to begin,
Sir, by echoing the expressions of congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of December. We feel reassured that the
Council will benefit from your well-known diplomatic
skills and experience as we today consider a matter of
fundamental importance to us. We similarly extend
sentiments of appreciation to your predecessor,
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for his able
conduct of the business of the Council last month. Our
commendation also goes to Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his concise and clear report on
the situation in Angola, and to his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and the men and women of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) for their unwavering commitment to the
search for peace in Angola.
Today’s debate takes us back to 2 October 1996,
when the Heads of State and Government of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, deeply concerned about

Security Council
Fifty-first year
the stalemate in the Angola peace process, met in Luanda
with the intention of giving fresh impetus to the process. In
addition to agreeing to convey the region’s position on the
Angolan situation, the Heads of State recommitted
themselves to redouble their efforts to contribute towards
the realization of peace and stability in Angola. The SADC
countries will not falter in their resolve to bring the
Angolan peace process to the front burner in their regional
and international engagements.
The Secretary-General’s report notes several welcome
developments, among which are the decrease in the number
of ceasefire violations, the acceleration of the pace of
incorporation of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces (FAA), the resumption of demobilization, and the
dismantling of illegal checkpoints, which has significantly
contributed to the free movement of people and goods all
over Angola.
We are naturally encouraged by these positive
developments and urge all the parties to spare no effort in
fulfilling all the tasks enumerated in Security Council
resolution 1075 (1996).
Despite the substantial progress made in carrying out
the major tasks outlined in the Council resolution to which
I have just referred, we regret that some sporadic incidents
have continued to slow the peace process. In this regard,
we appeal to all parties to refrain from any acts that may
continue to affect the peace process negatively.
All that we in southern Africa are asking for now is
for peace in Angola to be given a chance. In view of the
positive developments already noted, we wholeheartedly
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that the
present mandate of UNAVEM III be extended until 28
February 1997, and that after that date the residual force
should be drawn down over a period of six months.
Of course, this is only a beginning of a post-conflict
peace-building process which will bring Angola back to
stability. An even more challenging task will be to carry
out the programme of economic reconstruction. We expect
that the United Nations will not abandon Angola and will
play a key role in ensuring the economic reconstruction of
that country and the generation of peace and economic
prosperity.
By extending the mandate of UNAVEM III to 28
February 1997 this afternoon, the Council has demonstrated
that while it is prepared to continue to support the peace
process, it expects the parties to demonstrate their

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
commitment to implement the Lusaka Protocol and
Security Council resolutions fully and without delay.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Lesotho for his kind words addressed to
me.
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of
South Africa. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Jele (South Africa): My delegation commends
the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report on the
progress made towards consolidating the peace process in
Angola. We also commend the ongoing efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
representatives of the troika of observer States and all
parties engaged in efforts towards achieving peace in
Angola.
My delegation is gratified by the observation in the
report that substantial progress has recently been made in
carrying out the major tasks outlined in Security Council
resolution 1075 (1996).
For us in southern Africa, the pain and suffering of
the people of Angola are our pain and suffering. The
peoples of southern Africa believe that the sustaining of
the democratization which is taking place in the region
following the independence of Namibia, the liberation of
South Africa, and peace in Mozambique, depends on the
achievement of durable peace and stability in Angola.
The report covers a number of important issues on
which the Government and UNITA need to reach
agreement in terms of the Lusaka Protocol. The progress
reported on some of the key issues is gratifying. My
delegation is particularly appreciative of the progress
made with regard to disarming the civilian population, the
surrender of weapons by quartered troops, the opening up
for United Nations verification of the phased-out regional
command structures of UNITA, and the dismantling of
illegal checkpoints.
These developments are important and need to be
sustained. However, the reversal of the gains achieved
cannot be discounted as long as the ceasefire continues to
be violated and the country remains volatile because of
attacks on civilians and the perpetration of crimes near
assembly areas.

23

Security Council
Fifty-first year
It is, therefore, worth emphasizing that the
cessation of hostilities by both parties is crucial to the
creation of a climate conducive to the evolution of peace in
Angola.
My delegation believes that a meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi is long overdue. This
meeting would serve as a welcome opportunity for the two
leaders to map their way forward. We note with
appreciation that the Joint Commission will soon consider
the proposals made by the Angolan Government and
UNITA on the special status of the President of UNITA.
These proposals deserve the encouragement of the
international community, as they represent a significant
movement towards progress.
We also welcome the Angolan Government’s
announced readiness to commence the incorporation of the
UNITA generals into the Angolan Armed Forces. We also
welcome UNITA’s declaration that it has assembled some
of its troops and handed over weapons. We believe that this
declaration will facilitate the enhancement of the peace
process. It is our fervent hope that other measures will be
undertaken which are central to the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation.
My delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the mandate of UNAVEM III be
extended until 28 February 1997, and that after the
withdrawal, steps should be taken to ensure that the gains
already achieved remain in place.
We wish to renew our appeal to the international
donor community to continue to contribute generously to
programmes for demobilization, rehabilitation, relief
assistance in quartering areas, mine clearance and road
construction. We believe that this assistance will contribute
greatly to the promotion of peace and stability in Angola.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Malawi. I invite her to take a seat at the
Council table and to make her statement.

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996
all who come from that part of the region. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), as contained
in document S/1996/1000 of 2 December 1996, as well as
the interim report of 19 November 1996 contained in
document S/1996/960.
We are encouraged by the progress achieved since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1075 (1996)
on 11 October 1996. We have no doubt that the clear
message contained in that resolution played an important
catalytic role. It is, however, clear from the two reports
that many aspects of the Lusaka Protocol remain to be
accomplished for peace to be fully established and for the
war-tired people of Angola to resume their normal lives.
Since time is of the essence, the days ahead are critical,
requiring magnanimity and the extra resolve of all the
players concerned. We urge all the parties, particularly
UNITA, to carry out all their obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol, in good faith and within the agreed time
schedules. We also implore them to desist from making
any moves that would affect negatively the gains already
achieved and, indeed, jeopardize the whole peace process.
My delegation is, however, pleased to note the
declaration by UNITA that it has quartered all
combatants, except for a few police officers. We further
welcome the announcement made by the Government of
Angola regarding the formal incorporation of nine UNITA
generals into the national army.
We take note of the plans of the Secretary-General
regarding the downsizing of the UNAVEM III military
units. We find paragraphs 30 to 33 of his report
particularly informative. We have every confidence in the
Secretary-General’s judgement, and look forward to his
further elaboration of these issues in his next report to the
Security Council.

Ms. Thunyani (Malawi): Allow me, Mr. President, to
congratulate you and wish you well on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I also congratulate your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, who was President
for the month of November.

The reports of the Secretary-General are also quite
clear on the resources required to carry out the many
activities aimed at bringing Angola back to normalcy.
While thanking the international community for the
assistance so far rendered to Angola, we join the
Secretary-General in inviting the donor community to
fulfil the pledges made at the 1995 Brussels Round Table
Conference. In the short term, such assistance can only
assist in ensuring that the peace that currently exists in
Angola holds.

We meet once again today to consider the situation in
Angola, a matter of great importance to my delegation and

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 1087 (1996) and support the extension of the

24

Security Council
Fifty-first year

3722nd meeting
11 December 1996

mandate of UNAVEM III to 28 February 1997. We also
wish to acknowledge, and pay tribute to, the untiring efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, the personnel of UNAVEM III,
and all those whose humanitarian work has once again
demonstrated that in togetherness much can be achieved in
the service of peace in Angola.

Protocol have not yet been taken. Without the resolution
of all the military aspects and the question of general
security, the outstanding political issues cannot be
resolved. Such issues include the return of UNITA
deputies to the National Assembly in Luanda, the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and the special status of UNITA’s leader.

The President: I thank the representative of Malawi
for her kind words addressed to me.

These and other issues, such as mine clearance, can
only be settled if all related military questions are
resolved, thereby avoiding the repetition of the sad events
that took place in 1975 and after the democratic election.
With the withdrawal of UNAVEM III in February 1997,
careful consideration and planning will be needed if we
are to extend the small United Nations team beyond that
date and give it a clear mandate.

The last speaker on my list is the representative of Sao
Tome and Principe. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ferreira (Sao Tome and Principe): I wish to
express my satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, as President of
the Security Council for this month, and wish you success
in your work. In speaking today, I should like to take this
great opportunity to express the deep concern and explain
the position of the Government of Sao Tome and Principe
with regard to the question of the peace process and
reconstruction in Angola.
Despite all the gains made so far in the peace process,
the security situation remains volatile in many parts of the
country, and, if Angola’s situation does not improve, that
subregion may face a situation that is not deserved. The
present stage of the implementation of the Lusaka
agreement has reached a point of no return, because too
much effort and hope has been invested by all the parties
involved, and by the international community, in this long
and painful process to build a long-lasting peace and a good
environment for development.
To date, with regard to the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, some of
the main steps in the implementation of the Lusaka

Another critical challenge is the demobilization of
troops and their reintegration into civilian society. We call
this important matter to the attention of all the parties
involved and appeal to donor countries to provide
additional resources to support this vital effort. We would
like to point out that if this reintegration is not done well,
Angola will in future face widespread urban insecurity.
The Council has adopted a resolution that reflects
the reality of the situation in Angola in order to give a
chance to all parties involved in building the peace, so
that one day Angola’s people may enjoy a better life.
I cannot conclude my statement without making a
strong appeal to the Angolan Government, and to UNITA
in particular, to do their utmost to collaborate with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and to
resolve all outstanding political issues within the timeframe adopted by this Council.
The President: I thank the representative of Sao
Tome and Principe for the kind words he addressed to
me.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m.

25
