S/2002/17

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 January 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 3 January 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia covering the period from 1 to 30 November 2001 (see
annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-20133 (E) 040102

*0220133*

S/2002/17

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1-30 November 2001), there were just over 19,000
troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and from 15 non-NATO
countries.
2.
During the period under review, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
remained relatively stable. The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continued its mission to
ensure a safe and secure environment throughout the area.
3.
SFOR troops conducted well over 6,000 ground patrols in the area of
operations during November and continued to monitor compliance by the Entity
armed forces, conduct weapons storage site inspections and consolidations, provide
support to the international organizations in theatre and to local authorities, and
collect weapons and ammunition in the framework of Operation Harvest.
4.
Major activities undertaken by SFOR in November included the promotion of
an information campaign to reassure the population and deter support for terrorist
acts. An operation launched in October to find illegal weapon storage sites, detain
persons suspected of illegal activity and seize documents was completed. Two
underground bunkers containing military equipment and about 20 caches of
ammunition were discovered near Han Pijesak, and one man was arrested by local
police as a result of this operation.
5.
In addition, SFOR organized a three-day exercise in Tuzla involving 23
Bosnian Serb and 29 Federation paramilitary police and 400 SFOR troops. The
exercise, which was observed by representatives of local government, nongovernmental organizations, the armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
media, was the largest integrated training exercise undertaken and ended with a
demonstration of combined civil disturbance control skills.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
6.
The situation in theatre remained relatively calm throughout the reporting
period, with the Entities in substantial compliance with the military provisions of
the Peace Agreement. There were no restrictions on the freedom of movement of
either SFOR troops or the civilian population.
7.
During the period under review, SFOR troops conducted 96 weapons storage
site inspections: 34 Bosnian Serb; 35 Bosniac; 18 Bosnian Croat; and 9 Federation.
8.
SFOR troops monitored 177 training and movement activities during the
reporting period: 72 Bosnian Serb; 90 Bosniac; 4 Bosnian Croat; and 11 Federation.
9.
Over the period, a total of 69 mine-clearing activities were monitored: 23
Bosnian Serb; 40 Bosniac; 4 Bosnian Croat; and 2 Federation.
Cooperation with international organizations
10. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United

2

S/2002/17

Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the international Police Task Force
(IPTF), the Office of the High Representative, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
11. SFOR continues to support the efforts of the Office of the High Representative
by providing patrols to monitor the situation in Dobrinja and provided security
support on 7 November for the provisional Administrator of the Hercegovacka
Banka in Mostar.
12. On 15 November, SFOR held a study day to provide training on the provision
of security for major public events based on experience gained earlier in the year
during important public events. The training exercise involved 30 military staff, two
IPTF officers and two Republika Srpska police officers.
13. Other support provided to IPTF and local police during the reporting period
included escorting to prison in Lukavica the person suspected of being responsible
for weapons caches recently discovered in Han Pjesak; supporting local police
during the reburial in Prijedor of a Catholic priest murdered 1995; and supporting
IPTF and Bosnian multinational police in an operation in Kiseljak which led to the
arrest of four people for possession of illegal materials and explosives.
14. During the period under review, SFOR provided a secure environment to
support the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in its investigations
and exhumations in the areas of Goradze, Foca, Kalinovik, Jakarina Kosa and
Sarajevo. Three hundred and seventy-two bodies of Bosniacs and Croats were
exhumed.
15. SFOR is planning to assist IPTF in training Bosnian police to counter civil
disturbances. The training will take place in two phases: the first will take place in
January 2002 and the second between March and October 2002.
Displaced persons and refugees
16. SFOR continues to support UNHCR as displaced persons return to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The return of displaced persons and refugees to Republika Srpska and
to central Bosnia continues at a slow pace. Tension among ethnic groups,
particularly in these two areas, continues to be a matter of concern to SFOR, with
reports of an increase in the number of inter-ethnic incidents.
Outlook
17. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains under
control.
18. Tension is higher as a result of operations of the United States of America in
Afghanistan. Anti-SFOR, anti-NATO, and anti-United States sentiment is apparent
among radical segments of the population: anti-American or anti-SFOR graffiti has
appeared on buildings in cantons 6 and 10 in Livno and Jaice, and near Kupres and
Suica. SFOR, the local authorities and the State Border Service are paying particular
attention to any signs of terrorist activity in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

3
