II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

War, of 12 August 1949, 72 to all the occupied Palestinian
and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem,
Reiterating all relevant United Nations resolutions which
emphasize that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international Jaw and that Israel must withdraw
unconditionally from all the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
Heajfirming further the imperative necessity of establishing a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region,
based on full respect for the Charter and the principles of
international Jaw,
Gravely concerned also at recent Israeli actions involving
the escalation and expansion of the conflict in the region.
which further violate the principles of international law and
endanger intern_ational peace and security,
Welcoming the Arab peace plan adopted unanimously at
the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held at Fez, Morocco, on 25 November 1981 and 9 September 1982, 79
Bearing in mind the address made, on 26 October 1982,
by His Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco, 80 in his capacity
as President of the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference,
l. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, in
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the principles
of international law and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, and demands the immediate, unconditional
and total withdrawal of Israel from all these occupied
territories;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that the question of Palestine
is the core of the conflict in the Middle East and that no
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region will be
achieved without the full exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable national rights and the immediate, unconditional and total withdrawal of Israel from all the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories;
3. Reaffirms further that a just and comprehensive settlement of the situation in the Middle East cannot be achieved
without the participation on an equal footing of all the parties
to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian people;
4. Declares once more that peace in the Middle East is
indivisible and must be based on a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution of the Middle East problem, under the auspices of the United Nations, which ensures the complete
and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem, and which enables the Palestinian people, under
the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization, to
exercise its inalienable rights, including the right to return
and the right to self-determination, national independence
and the establishment of its independent sovereign State in
Palestine, in accordance with the resolutions of the United
Nations relevant to the question of Palestine, in particular
General Assembly resolutions ES-7/2 of 29 July 1980,
36/120 A to F of 10 December 1981, 37/86 A to D of
10 December 1982 and 37/86 E of 20 December 1982;
5. Rejects all agreements and arrangements in so far as
they violate the recognized rights of the Palestinian people
and contradict the principles of just and comprehensive solutions to the Middle East problem to ensure the establishment of a just peace in the area;
6. Deplores Israel's failure to comply with Security
Council resolutions 476 (1980) of 30 June 1980 and 478
79 See N37/696-S/155IO, annex.
""Official Records of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session,
Plenary Meetings, 44th meeting. paras. 83-92 ·

39

( 1980) of 20 August 1980 and General Assembly resolutions
35/207 of 16 December 1980 and 36/226 A and B of 17
December 1981, determines that Israel's decision to annex
Jerusalem and to declare it as its "capital" as well as the
measures to alter its physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and status are null and void
and demands that they be rescinded immediately, and calls
upon all Member States, the specialized agencies and all
other international organizations to abide by the present
resolution and all other relevant resolutions, including Assembly resolutions 37/86 A to E;
7. Condemns Israel's aggression and practices against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories
and outside these territories, particularly Palestinians in Lebanon, including the expropriation and annexation of territory, the establishment of settlements, assassination attempts
and other terrorist, aggressive and repressive measures, which
are in violation of the Charter and the principles of international law and the relevant international conventions;
8. Strongly condemns the imposition by Israel of its
laws, jurisdiction and administration on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights, its annexationist policies and practices, the
establishment of settlements, the confiscation of lands, the
diversion of water resources and the imposition of Israeli
citizenship on Syrian nationals, and declares that all these
measures are null and void and constitute a violation of the
rules and principles of international law relevant to belligerent occupation, in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
of 12 August 1949;
9. Considers that the agreements on strategic co-operation between the United States of America and Israel signed
on 30 November 1981 would encourage Israel to pursue its
aggressive and expansionist policies and practices in the
Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, would have adverse effects on efforts
for the establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the Middle East and would threaten the security
of the region;
10. Calls upon all States to put an end to the flow to
Israel of any military, economic and financial aid, as well
as of human resources, aimed at encouraging it to pursue
its aggressive policies against the Arab countries and the
Palestinian people;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council periodically on the development of the
situation and to submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-eighth session a comprehensive report covering the
developments in the Middle East in all their aspects.
I I 2th plenary meeting
20 December 1982

37/166.

Assistance to Yemen

The General Assembly,
Fullv aware of the extensive devastation and substantial
loss of life caused by the earthquake which struck several
towns and tens of villages in Yemen on 12 December 1982,
Recognizing the efforts being made by the Government
of Yemen to alleviate the sufferings of the victims of the
earthquake,
Recognizing also that Yemen, being one of the least developed countries, is unable to bear the mounting burden
of the relief efforts, rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
affected areas.
I. Expresses its gratitude to the States and international
and regional organizations that have undertaken efforts to
provide relief assistance to Yemen;

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the necessary material resources in order to help alleviate the sufferings and mitigate the damages inflicted on Yemen as a
result of the earthquake;
3. Appeals to Member States to contribute generously
to the relief efforts, through bilateral and/or multilateral
channels, for the reconstruction of the affected areas in
Yemen;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, through
the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator, his efforts in mobilizing all emergency assistance
to Yemen;
5. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Economic
Commission for Western Asia, the World Bank, the World
Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, the United
Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization-to maintain and expand their
programmes of assistance to Yemen and to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective programme of assistance to that country;
6. Calls upon regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental
organizations to give urgent relief contributions to Yemen.
109th plenary meeting
17 December I 982

37/167.

United Nations Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy 81

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolutions
32/50 of 8 December 1977, 33/4 of 2 November 1978, 34/
63 of 29 November 1979, 35/ 112 of 5 December 1980 and
36/78 of 9 December 1981 regarding the United Nations
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation
in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy and the relevant
paragraphs of the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, 82
Taking note with satisfaction of the appointment of the
Secretary-General of the Conference,
Recalling the experience gained during the last three decades of applications of nuclear energy and technology for
power production and other uses,
Reaffirming the responsibility of States that are advanced
in the nuclear field to promote the fulfilment of the legitimate
nuclear energy needs of the developing countries by participating in the fullest possible transfer of nuclear equipment,
materials and technology under agreed and appropriate international safeguards applied through the International
Atomic Energy Agency on a non-discriminatory basis in
order to prevent effectively the proliferation of nuclear
weapons,
Having considered the report of the Preparatory Committee for the Conference on its second and third sessions, 8 -1
Expressing concern at the lack of progress and recognizing the pressing need to speed up and complete substantive
81

110th plenary meeting
17 December 1982
37/233.

Question of Namibia 84
A

SITUATION IN NAMIBIA RESULTING FROM THE ILLEGAL
OCCUPATION OF THE TERRITORY BY SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations Council
for Namibia"~ and the relevant chapters of the report of the

See also sect. X.B.1, decisions 37/453 and 37/454.

82 Resolution S-10/2.
13

preparations for the Conference, its provisional agenda, its
documentation and its rules of procedure, so as to ensure
a successful conference which would achieve the objectives envisaged in General Assembly resolutions 32/50 and
35/l 12,
l. Decides that the Preparatory Committee for the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy shall meet
twice during 1983, once early in the year for ten working
days in New York and, subsequently, for an appropriate
duration prior to the Conference;
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee and the Secretary-General of the Conference, in order to speed up substantive preparations, to make appropriate arrangements,
including as necessary through intersessional work by States
members of the Committee under the guidance of its Chairman and also through regional efforts and appropriate public
information activities, with a view to ensuring meaningful
results from the Conference;
3. Decides to take suitable decisions in regard to the
date of the Conference in the light of the results of the
session of the Preparatory Committee to be held early in
1983;
4. Reiterates that the aim of the Conference is to promote international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and, to this end, to establish universally
acceptable principles for such co-operation in accordance
with the objectives contained in General Assembly resolution 32/50;
5. Reaffirms the provision of paragraph 4 of General
Assembly resolution 36/78 that the outcome of the Conference should be embodied in appropriate documents, in a
suitable format, pertaining, inter alia, to ways and means
of promoting such international co-operation in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy;
6. Decides that the necessary resources should be provided to ensure successful preparations for the Conference,
including adequate staffing of the secretariat and the availability of expert support in the substantive fields to be covered by the Conference;
7. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency to
contribute to the Conference in terms of paragraph 3 of
resolution 32/50 and paragraph l l of resolution 36/78 in
accordance with its responsibilities under its statute;
8. Urges all States to co-operate actively in the preparation and the holding of the Conference and to respect
and observe the principles set forth in resolution 32/50;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session an item entitled "United Nations Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 48 (A/37/48)

"' See also sect. I. footnote 7. and sect. X.B.6, decision 37/426.
" Official Record.,· of the General Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 24 (1\1.17124).
·
·
