General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

144

(b) To keep the situation in Guinea-Bissau under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental organizations and the international financial
institutions concerned, and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the
status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Guinea-Bissau;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to carry out, in
close collaboration with the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, an evaluation of the
results of the round-table conference of donors and of the
progress made in organizing and implementing the special
programme of economic assistance for Guinea-Bissau, in
time for the status of this programme to be considered by
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/187. Assistance to Sao Tome and Principe
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/96 of I 3 December I 977,
33/125 of 19 December 1978, 34/131 of 14 December
1979, 35/93 of 5 December 1980, 36/209 of 17 December
I 981 and 3 7/ 146 of 17 December I 982, in which it reiterated its appeal to the international community to provide
financial, material and technical assistance to Sao Tome
and Principe to enable it to establish the necessary social
and economic infrastructure for development,
Aware that the economic and social development of Sao
Tome and Principe has been seriously hindered by fragile
infrastructure, inadequate health, educational and housing
facilities and by insufficient external assistance, and that
urgent improvement in these sectors is a prerequisite for
the country's future progress,
Aware also that, at independence, the country inherited
a plantation economy that made it dependent on imports
to meet its national food requirements,
Noting with appreciation the concerted efforts undertaken by the Government of Sao Tome and Principe to
increase national food production and to decrease dependence on food imports,
Concerned that the severe drought in 1982-1983 followed by abnormally heavy rains and floods in 1984 have
seriously affected agricultural production, increased the
national food deficit and reduced the ability of the country
to pay for food imports,
Taking into account the decision of the Government of
Sao Tome and Principe to convene, with the assistance of
the United Nations Development Programme, a roundtable conference of donors in September-October 1985 at
Sao Tome, preparatory to the launching of a national
development plan for 1986-1990,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 91
to which is annexed the report of the review mission sent
to Sao Tome and Principe,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance to Sao
Tome and Principe;
2. Endorses fully the assessment and recommendations
contained in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Member States,
international organizations, and other intergovernmental
91 A/39/394.

and non-governmental organizations which have provided
assistance to Sao Tome and Principe;
4. Renews its appeal to Member States, the appropriate
organs, organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system, regional and interregional organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial
institutions, to provide financial, technical and material
assistance to Sao Tome and Principe through bilateral and
multilateral channels, as appropriate, to enable it to
strengthen its social and economic infrastructure and to
implement the special programme of economic assistance;
5. Urges Member States, organizations and programmes of the United Nations system, regional and interregional bodies, financial and development institutions
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to participate in the round-table conference of
donors to be held in 1985 and to provide all possible
assistance for the implementation of the national development plan of Sao Tome and Principe;
6. Calls upon the international community to continue
its food assistance programmes for Sao Tome and Principe
in order to help it cope with the critical food situation in
the country and to provide all possible assistance to enable
the country to produce more food and reduce its dependence on food imports;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To keep the situation in Sao Tome and Principe
under constant review and to apprise the Economic and
Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the
current status of the special programme of economic
assistance for Sao Tome and Principe;
(b) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Sao Tome and Principe and in organizing and
implementing the special programme of economic assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/188. Assistance to Uganda
The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 35/ I 03 of 5 December 1980,
36/218 of 17 December 1981, 37/162 of 17 December
1982 and 38/207 of 20 December 1983 on assistance to
Uganda,
Bearing in mind the enormous economic and social setbacks suffered by Uganda and the resultant precipitous
decline in the well-being of its people,
Taking into account the revised recovery programme
( 1982-1984) presented by the Government of Uganda to
the meeting of the Consultative Group on Uganda, held in
Paris in January 1984 under the auspices of the World
Bank,
Recognizing that Uganda is not only land-locked but
also one of the least developed and most seriously affected
countries,
Noting the appeals of the Secretary-General for assistance to Uganda,
Taking note of the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 92 in which it is stated that substantial additional
assistance is required to finance the remaining projects in
4,

A/19/.192, sect. IX

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

145

the revised recovery programme which have not yet
attracted the support of the international community,
Reaffirming the urgent need for further international
action to assist the Government of Uganda in its continuing efforts for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development,
Encouraged that the economic policies of the Government of Uganda and the support assistance provided by
the donor countries and international organizations have
produced positive signs of economic recovery,
I. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the steps he has taken to mobilize assistance for
Uganda;
2. Further expresses its appreciation to those States and
organizations that have provided assistance to that country;
3. Reiterates its endorsement of the assessment and
recommendations contained in the annex to the report of
the Secretary-General submitted to the General Assembly
at its thirty-seventh session;9 3
4. Invites the international community, in particular
the United Nations system and donor countries and organizations, to make available more resources to implement
the country's revised recovery programme (1982-1984)
and meet the remaining needs described in the SecretaryGeneral's summary report;
5. Urgently renews its appeal to all Member States,
specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
Nations system and international economic and financial
institutions to contribute generously, through bilateral and
multilateral channels, to the reconstruction, rehabilitation
and development needs of Uganda and to its emergency
requirements;
6. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to maintain and
increase their current and future programmes of assistance
to Uganda and to report periodically to the SecretaryGeneral on the steps they have taken and the resources
they have made available to help that country;
7. Invites the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, the International Labour Organisation, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the World Health Organization and the
World Bank to bring to the attention of their governing
bodies, for their consideration, the special needs of
Uganda and to report the decisions of those bodies to the
Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his humanitarian assistance programmes in Uganda;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Uganda;
(b) To keep the situation in Uganda under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental

organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of I 985, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Uganda;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation in Uganda and in organizing international assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
I 7 December I 984

9 , N37/121
94 A/33/167 and Corr. I. A/341372 and Corr I, A,35,332 and Corr. I. A:
361265. A.'.37/124 and A/38 216, sect. V
9 ) See Proceedmgs o( th<' l 'mtcd l 1./atwm ( ·on_/erent'e on Trade and Dcl-'clopmcnt, Snth Session, vol. I, Report and 1,1rww1 (l ln,ted Nations puhhcatlon, Saks Nn E.81.11 D.6l. pan one, seer \

96 Report of the ['nited Na/Ions Conference on lhe Least Developed
Countries, Paris, 1-14 Septemher /981 (United Nations publication. Sales,
No. F.82.1.8). pan one. sect. A.

39/189. Assistance to Cape Verde
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on assistance to Cape Verde, in
particular its resolution 38/219 of 20 December 1983, in
which the international community was requested to provide an appropriate level of resources for the implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape Verde as
envisaged in the reports of the Secretary-General, 94
Recalling resolutions 142 (VI) and 138 (VI) of 2 July
1983 of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development95 on the progress in the implementation of
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s
for the Least Developed Countries, 96 and on activities in
the field of island developing countries,
Noting that Cape Verde is one of the least developed
countries and a small archipelagic State, with a fragile and
open economy, aggravated by endemic and severe
drought,
Reiterating that increased substantial, continuous and
predictable assistance from the international community is
needed for the effective completion of the First National
Development Plan (1982-1985),
Gravely concerned at the critical food situation in Cape
Verde resulting from the failure of seasonal rains, the continuing recurrence of drought and the spreading desertification,
Recognizing the strenuous efforts deployed by the Government and people of Cape Verde in the process of the
economic and social development of their country despite
existing constraints,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 97
to which is annexed the report of the review mission sent
to Cape Verde in response to General Assembly resolution
38/219;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts deployed in mobilizing resources for the
implementation of the programme of assistance to Cape
Verde;
3. t:xpresses its gratitude to States and to international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance to Cape Verde;
4. Reaffirms the need for all Governments and international organizations to implement their commitments
undertaken within the framework of the Substantial New
Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, particularly those undertaken at the roundtable conference of Cape Verde's partners in development,
held at Praia from 21 to 23 June 1982;

9 ' \ ,9 1~9
