S/PV.6808

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6808th meeting

Wednesday, 18 July 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Osorio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Colombia)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Taib
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Gaspar da Silva
Mr. Zhukov
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirtieth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2012/506)

12-42620 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1242620*

S/PV.6808

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

the country is progressively reintegrating into the West
African region, and the overall security situation has
improved since the end of the post-electoral crisis last
year. Moreover, further to the legislative elections,
the National Assembly began its work in April, with
a commitment from its President for the Assembly
to contribute to national reconciliation and provide
effective oversight of the Government on behalf of the
Ivorian people.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Thirtieth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2012/506)
The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Albert Koenders,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/506, which contains the thirtieth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Mr. Koenders.
Mr. Koenders: It is a great honour for me to address
the Security Council today following my last briefing
on 26 January 2012 (see S/PV.6708).
The thirtieth progress report of the Secretary­
General on the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire (UNOCI) (S/2012/506), which is before the
Security Council, provides members with an update
on major developments in the country since the
Secretary-General’s special report of 29 March 2012
(S/2012/186).
My briefing today will focus on the most crucial
issues of the moment for Côte d’Ivoire, particularly with
regard to the security situation, the political situation
and activities undertaken by the Government, with
UNOCI’s support, to put the country back on the path
to peace and stability.
I would like to start by saying that, as mentioned
in my recent briefings to the Council, Côte d’Ivoire
is making significant advances on the path to peace,
stability and development. The economy is recovering,

2

Yet, this positive picture should not obscure
the fact that the country continues to face important
challenges and significant threats as it transitions to a
peacebuilding phase. In the past couple of weeks, the
country has been characterized by a certain degree of
political anxiety, showing that the root causes of the
conflict — land-related issues, unreformed security
forces, impunity, and lack of national reconciliation and
political dialogue — need to be tackled urgently and in
a transparent manner to the benefit of all Ivorians.
First, with regard to the security situation, it remains
particularly volatile, especially but not exclusively in
the west, at the Côte d’Ivoire-Liberia border, given
the weak State authorities, large numbers of weapons,
armed elements, former combatants, militias and
dozos, as well as competition over the control of
resources. Reports of the rearming and recruitment of
former Ivorian and Liberian combatants and possible
attempts against State security constitute matters of
substantial concern for me. Attacks by armed men
have been carried out in the villages in the border area,
which is often characterized by violent inter-communal
confrontations that have the potential to escalate into
larger-scale conflicts as long as the underlying root
causes, such as land tenure issues, are not effectively
tackled.
The situation experienced a dramatic deterioration
last month when seven United Nations peacekeepers
from Niger lost their lives in an attack by armed elements
on the road from Para to Sao, along the border with
Liberia, showing the need for continuous vigilance and
enhanced action to ensure the protection of civilians.
The Government has strengthened its military presence
and established a commission to investigate the Para
attack, and UNOCI is providing technical assistance
and forensics support.
In response to the incidents in the west, UNOCI
has boosted its military on the ground by reinforcing
troops within Sector West, in line with our operational

12-42620

S/PV.6808

imperative to protect civilians and firmly deter any
initiative to destabilize the country in different parts of
Côte d’Ivoire. We are working closely with the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to coordinate our
activities, for which a detailed plan of action has been
developed.
On their part, the Ivorian and Liberian Governments
have increased their military presence in the concerned
area and are liaising closely to exchange information.
Of special note are an action plan adopted by UNOCI
and UNMIL and a quadripartite meeting comprising
the Governments of the two countries, as well as
UNOCI and UNMIL, that was held in Abidjan on
14 June — just a few days after the attacks — and
resulted in an agreement between the parties to further
enhance cooperation, including by reinforcing their
presence on both sides of the border, intensified air
and foot patrols, and activities to protect civilians,
strengthened judicial cooperation, and measures to
promote reconciliation and development.
The need to combine firmness and vigilance,
and to call on the Government to further increase its
civilian presence, invest in development and ensure the
equitable treatment concerning the land issue cannot be
overemphasized at this stage. In particular, there is in
our view an urgent need to tackle the root causes of the
conflict and promote reconciliation through concrete
measures at the national level, while prioritizing the
strengthening of the rule of law and the restoration of
State authority. It is important that the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire place increasing emphasis on this very
burning issue.
National reconciliation is key to any process aimed
at stabilization and peacebuilding. In this regard, the
need for substantive genuine political dialogue remains
paramount. On 27 and 28 April, a conclave chaired
by the Prime Minister was held in Grand-Bassam,
with the participation of the opposition parties, which
resulted subsequently in a communiqué announcing the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism for ongoing
dialogue through which the Government and opposition
have an opportunity to continue their exchanges.
Yet, a new momentum should be created to allow the
constructive engagement of all parties in political
dialogue. All parties should strengthen their political
will to engage in a well-formulated agenda for a serious
political dialogue.
The Government’s initiative to engage in dialogue
with the political opposition is a positive step. It is

important now that the Government continue working
towards genuine political dialogue and reconciliation
at all levels, and ensure political space for the
opposition by clarifying the context and timetable
for these consultations and taking reconciliatory
measures where and when possible. At the same time,
the opposition should play the role of a constructive
opposition, use reconciliatory language, and contribute
towards building a better future for the country and
reconciliation.
The upcoming local elections, for which the
Government has requested United Nations assistance,
could contribute to strengthening national reconciliation
at the local level. However, if these elections are to be
successful, it is necessary that certain conditions be
met in terms of a larger responsibility of the Ivorian
Government and clarity on proper timing, inclusiveness
and security, as well as allowing for the reform of the
electoral and administrative bodies concerned. It is only
under clearly specified conditions related to these issues
that any possible UNOCI support should be considered
and given the means in financial, administrative and
military terms to do undertake such tasks.
Successful national reconciliation also requires
the promotion of a culture of respect for human
rights. It is of crucial importance that the progress
made be solidified, that impunity for human rights
violations end, that perpetrators be brought to justice
irrespective of their status or political affiliation, that
all detainees receive clarity about their status, and
that the investigation commission speed up its work.
UNOCI remains preoccupied about this situation and
asks the Security Council to pay special attention to
this important issue.
It is worth noting that, as indicated by the
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in
Côte d’Ivoire, many human rights violations resulted
less from the State’s complicity than from its failure
to prevent them, especially owing to the slow progress
in reforming the security sector and restoring State
authority throughout the country. Thus, efforts that
could speed up security sector reform (SSR) and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
should be encouraged. In this regard, I wish to highlight
the positive steps taken by President Ouattara to further
the SSR and DDR agenda, including the creation of an
inter-ministerial working group to develop a national
framework for SSR and DDR. UNOCI stands ready to
continue assisting the Government’s efforts to make

12-426203

S/PV.6808

SSR and DDR a reality, which requires a unified DDR
entity, strict rules on eligibility, and a reliable base.

interest to the briefing just delivered by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Koenders.

In this complex phase, it is important that the United
Nations continue to play its supportive role in assisting
the Government’s efforts to stabilize the security
situation, protect civilians, restore State authority,
promote reconciliation, and undertake post-conflict
development assistance. In order to maximize its impact
in these areas, UNOCI, together with the United Nations
country team, is reinforcing its field presence. We
have opened field offices with our military, police and
civilian personnel presence in Guiglo, Tabou, Taï and
Toulepleu — some of the villages that members of the
Security Council visited during the impressive mission
that they undertook to Côte d’Ivoire in May. We will
soon be opening additional offices and strengthening
existing ones to enhance closer cooperation and
coordination within the United Nations family, within
existing resources. Our action is based on continuous
vigilance, research for political solutions and efforts
to enhance reconciliation as key to accomplishing our
tasks successfully.

My delegation recalls the joy and great pride of
the people of Côte d’Ivoire during the working visit of
all 15 members of the Security Council to our country
a few weeks ago. At that time, every member had the
opportunity to understand and appreciate the gratitude
felt by the people of Côte d’Ivoire towards the Council,
whose commitment to and determined support for the
will of the majority of the sovereign Ivorian people have
allowed democracy to prevail in Côte d’Ivoire since the
elections and especially to provide effective protection
to the civilian population.

In conclusion, let me say that the continued support
of the Security Council is at this stage still crucial in
order to ensure that we, together, successfully tackle
the generalized risks that are typical of countries
transitioning to a peacebuilding phase. I remain
convinced that, with the Council’s support, we can
make a positive contribution to making Côte d’Ivoire a
success story for its own people and, we hope, for the
United Nations as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Koenders for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Bamba (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
have just returned from Addis Ababa and took a taxi
directly to the Council from John F. Kennedy Airport,
so I would ask members to bear with me.
Mr. President, my delegation would like to
congratulate you on your accession to the presidency
of the Council for the month of July. My delegation
has taken note of the Secretary-General’s report on the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2012/506),
whose mandate ends on 31 July, pursuant to resolution
2000 (2011). We also listened attentively and with

4

During that visit, the Council was able to see for
itself the progress that has been made on the ground
since the elections, as well as the challenges that still
lie ahead. The Council had transparent and exhaustive
exchanges with the President of the Republic of Côte
d’Ivoire, Mr. Alassane Ouattara, who presented his postcrisis vision for Côte d’Ivoire and his plans to make it
an emerging country by 2020. He naturally responded
to the questions raised by the Security Council and
was able to clarify some issues. The Council also had
instructive exchanges with members of the current and
previous Governments, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, and civil society.
Lastly, the Council made field trips, in particular
the west of the country and to an Ivorian refugee camp
on the border inside Liberian territory. The Security
Council is thus fully aware of the realities on the Côte
d’Ivoire agenda. That said, I would like to make a few
remarks on specific issues, especially in the light of
recent developments.
First, the security situation throughout the country
has improved considerably. Life in Abidjan and other
large cities has been revitalized, with a perceptible
sense of economic recovery and growth, as the report
underscores. However, the security situation in the
country’s western region remains a source of concern.
Indeed, the attacks of 8 June and subsequent days in
villages of the Taï region, perpetrated by armed groups
from Liberia and in which seven Blue Helmets from
Niger, several civilians and soldiers of the Forces
républicaines de Côte d’Ivoire (FRCI) lost their lives,
have harshly illuminated the nature of the action that
took place there and the objectives of those who would
destabilize the situation.

12-42620

S/PV.6808

Clearly, the criminal acts of these armed groups
were perfectly planned and coordinated to exploit the
effect of surprise, and designed to strike fear into the
hearts of the civilian population. It is also well known
to all that such armed groups receive financial aid
from exiled Ivorians and illegal mining operations.
Some of those who funded and organized the attacks
have been identified and apprehended. In that context,
on 12 June the Minister of the Interior revealed the
existence of a plot against the State following the arrest
in a foreign country and extradition to Côte d’Ivoire
of a former minister and crony of Mr. Gbagbo. Here,
my delegation pays tribute to the memory of the seven
UNOCI soldiers and wishes to assure the Council that
the Government of Côte d’Ivoire has spared no effort
to find the perpetrators of these war crimes and bring
them to justice.
In the light of these attacks, my country has
strengthened its cooperation with Liberia in the areas
of defence, justice and law enforcement. The Special
Representative reported on cooperation activities
involving the missions in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia.
Quadripartite meetings have been held to address a
joint response to the threats. It has also been decided
to convene a meeting of the Ivorian-Liberian Joint
Commission of Cooperation before the end of the year.
Meanwhile, it was agreed that judicial cooperation
should be strengthened, and that a joint meeting of chiefs
of staff and high-level officials in the communities along
the border would be held to promote reconciliation and
development activities.
As indicated in paragraph 56 of the report, we
welcome the new provisions for cooperation between
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
and UNOCI, and the fact that the United Nations
country teams in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia will be
strengthened to enhance their responsiveness to any
possible attacks on either side of the border, especially
through cross-border cooperation. My delegation also
supports the Secretary-General’s recommendation,
also in paragraph 56, to transfer to UNOCI three attack
helicopters currently deployed in UNMIL to improve
the mission’s deterrent and anticipation capacities.
The regional dimension of the security situation
in Côte d’Ivoire is clear. Indeed, the early signs of the
crises in Mali and Guinea-Bissau have accelerated
the implementation of measures taken to respond to
subregional threats. At a meeting in Abidjan on 13 March,
the Mano River Union adopted an operational plan on

peace and security in order to respond to organized
transnational crime and trafficking in West Africa.
The plan provides for joint border patrols, strengthened
information exchange and the establishment of joint
units. Another useful measure was the Mano River
Union summit held in Conakry on 15 June.
My second point, which is also a source of
concern raised in the report, concerns security sector
reform (SSR) and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR). In my statement of April 26 (see
S/PV.6761), I informed the Council about the creation of
an SSR working group with a view both to identifying
a definitive response to the problem of implementing
DDR, and to undertaking serious consideration of
security and defence mechanisms, not to mention all
the various sectors involved in SSR.
In parallel with the efforts of the SSR working
group, the Ministers of Defence and of the Interior, in
their capacity as pillars of security sector reform, have
launched projects within their respective departments.
All of these groups have almost completed their work,
which they will submit to the SSR scientific committee
later this month. This period of intense reflection will
lead to significant reforms aimed at maintaining peace,
democracy and the safety and security of people and
property. Those significant reforms are the result of
work specifically focused on security sector reform,
defence policies, the reintegration of former combatants
and reform of the national police.
The SSR working group, in close cooperation with
UNOCI, the United Nations Development Programme,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States, identified six pillars of SSR. They
are national security, the rule of law and international
relations, democratic control, post-crisis reconstruction,
economic policy and the social and human dimension.
After identifying challenges, needed reforms and
action plans, proposals were submitted to the steering
committee for consideration and validation. They
focused on four areas: a national DDR policy, new
strategies to implement it, a national SSR policy and
a unified vision for reforms. Meanwhile, a national
security council will be established to oversee DDR and
SSR efforts, under the direct control of the President. In
that way, DDR will be implemented by one single body,
the DDR authority, attached to the President’s office.
SSR implementation will be assigned to a special
minister charged with pursuing reforms in cooperation

12-426205

S/PV.6808

with focal points in the various ministries. Each
ministry will be responsible for reforms in its areas of
focus.
The third element, as mentioned in the Secretary­
General’s report, is national reconciliation and political
dialogue. The Dialogue, Truth and Reconciliation
Commission is focused on long-term solutions, and is
endowed with the means to broaden its audience and
its actors. There is increasing ownership of grass-roots
initiatives through inter-community dialogue strongly
encouraged by the Commission. I note with pleasure that
the Ivorian diaspora here in New York is particularly
engaged in this issue.
As for the political process, the Council saw for
itself the extremism of the former ruling party, the
Front populaire ivorien (FPI). Fortunately, there have
been positive developments, and at the request of the
FPI a frank and productive exchange took place two
weeks ago between an FPI delegation and a Government
delegation led by the Prime Minister. It is to be hoped
that this will lead the FPI to participate fully in local
elections in order to build itself a platform to take
part in democratic politics, exercise its right to free
speech and make its expected contribution to national
reconstruction. In that context, my delegation seconds
the report’s recommendations to lend Côte d’Ivoire
electoral support.
The fourth element is human rights. My delegation
takes note of the concerns expressed in the report
about human rights in Côte d’Ivoire. Without trying to
downplay its observations, my delegation believes that it
would be more appropriate to see things in their proper
context. As noted by the Independent Expert on the
situation of human rights in Côte d’Ivoire following his
two visits to the country, most human rights abuses are
less the result of Government actions than of its inability
to prevent them due, inter alia, to difficulties with SSR
and the restoration of State authority throughout the
national territory. We should not forget that it was not
long ago that, in the aftermath of the electoral crisis,
when President Ouattara and his Government took
effective power, they inherited a veritable no man’s land
in the matter of human rights in Côte d’Ivoire.
It is important to remember that the 10 years of
President Gbagbo’s rule were a time of non-rule of
law. During that time, the people of Côte d’Ivoire were
the victims of the worst kinds of violations of human
rights, perpetrated by death squads who kidnapped and

6

summarily executed people on the sole suspicion of
being opposed to the regime or for the crime of being
from the North. Confiscations and beatings, notably of
an army colonel and a former Ivorian soccer star, were
the norm. I say this to recall that President Ouattara
took power in a country that had lost all respect for
human rights. It is therefore all the more commendable
that he showed the wisdom to immediately install a
Minister for Human Rights to restore that element of
society.
This situation, however, does not detract from
the commitment of the President to restoring genuine
rule of law in Côte d’Ivoire as soon as possible.
President Ouattara is irreversibly committed to a
policy of zero tolerance for impunity. That means
that all proven perpetrators of crimes or human
rights violations, regardless of political affiliation or
any other consideration, will be brought to justice to
answer for their actions. A strong military police unit
was instituted to respond to that concern, and it has
helped to fast-track prosecutions of troublemakers.
Two hundred and fifty members of the FRCI have been
arrested and will soon be tried.
Given the state of non-rule of law that prevailed
in the past, the highest priority of the Minister for
Human Rights was to work to train, educate and raise
consciousness on this issue in all sectors of society,
beginning with the police. I will cite some examples
of actions taken, with the support of UNOCI, that
illustrate the will of the Government to protect human
rights.
On 14 and 15 October 2011, a workshop was held
to train security, military and paramilitary forces in
human rights. From 1 March until July, a human rights
caravan traveled to the towns of Korhogo, Man, Gagnoa
and Adzope, and will reach San Pedro by the end of the
month. I also note the holding of a workshop to raise
consciousness in the press and media on national and
international human rights mechanisms.
Transitional justice is at work. Defendants accused
of various crimes during the post-electoral crisis are
included in human rights training and their rights and
dignity are entirely respected. Two days ago, a detained
former minister with a health condition that needed
attention was admitted to one of the best clinics in the
country to get the treatment she required. The Minister
for Human Rights visited her there and spoke with her.

12-42620

S/PV.6808

It is clear that human rights can be enjoyed only within
a healthy legal and judicial environment. On 19 April, a
national strategy for the justice sector from 2012 to 2015
was adopted, with the support of the Government, the
United Nations and other partners in legal and judicial
matters. That plan represents significant progress on
judicial sector reform. UNOCI and the European Union
have worked in close cooperation with the Ministry of
Justice and other stakeholders involved in the strategy.
To implement it, the Ministry of Justice is in the process
of instituting, with the support of UNOCI, an action
plan that will also serve as a road map for international
partners supporting justice sector reform.
To conclude, I stress the importance Côte d’Ivoire
attaches to its cooperation with the United Nations.
Our Prime Minister reiterated that in a letter to the
Secretary-General wherein he stated Côte d’Ivoire’s
request for the UNOCI mandate to be renewed,
including electoral support for upcoming local
elections. While we understand the constraints that

led the Secretary-General to propose a drawdown of
the military component of UNOCI by one battalion,
my delegation hopes that it will not be implemented
at the time of mandate renewal, given the security
situation and the need to avoid creating security gaps.
Based on that same concern, my delegation believes
that the francophone contingents of UNOCI should be
bolstered so as to better fulfil the communication goals
of the United Nations and UNOCI, in the interests of
reconciliation and country-wide political dialogue.
These are the elements of the report that I wanted
to bring to the Council’s attention in the context of its
forthcoming deliberations on this issue.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

12-426207
