UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/402
9 April 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH

LETTER DATED 9 APRIL 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I am transmitting herewith the text of a statement which I made today
concerning Kosovo. I have also transmitted this text to His Excellency
Mr. Slobodan Milosevic, President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and to
His Excellency Mr. Javier Solana, Secretary-General of NATO, and requested their
cooperation.
I should be grateful if you would draw the text to the attention of members
of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-10208 (E)

090499

090499

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/402
English
Page 2

STATEMENT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL

I am deeply distressed by the humanitarian tragedy taking place in Kosovo
and in the region, which must be brought to an end. The suffering of innocent
civilians should not be further prolonged. In this spirit, I urgently call upon
the Yugoslav authorities to undertake the following commitments:
-

to end immediately the campaign of intimidation and expulsion of the
civilian population;

-

to cease all activities of military and paramilitary forces in Kosovo
and to withdraw these forces;

-

to accept unconditionally the return of all refugees and displaced
persons to their homes;

-

to accept the deployment of an international military force to ensure
a secure environment for the return of refugees and the unimpeded
delivery of humanitarian aid; and

-

to permit the international community to verify compliance with the
undertakings above.

Upon the acceptance by the Yugoslav authorities of the above conditions, I
urge the leaders of the North Atlantic Alliance to suspend immediately the air
bombardments upon the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Ultimately, the cessation of hostilities I propose above is a prelude to a
lasting political solution to the crisis, which can only be achieved through
diplomacy. In this context, I would urge the resumption of talks on Kosovo
among all parties concerned at the earliest possible moment.

9 April 1999

-----
