United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/58/106
Distr.: General
17 December 2003

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 19

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 9 December 2003
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/58/480)]

58/106. Question of New Caledonia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of New Caledonia,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to New Caledonia, 1
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and 1541 (XV) of
15 December 1960,
Noting the importance of the positive measures being pursued in New
Caledonia by the French authorities, in cooperation with all sectors of the
population, to promote political, economic and social development in the Territory,
including measures in the area of environmental protection and action with respect
to drug abuse and trafficking, in order to provide a framework for its peaceful
progress to self-determination,
Noting also, in this context, the importance of equitable economic and social
development, as well as continued dialogue among the parties involved in New
Caledonia in the preparation of the act of self-determination of New Caledonia,
Noting with satisfaction the intensification of contacts between New Caledonia
and neighbouring countries of the South Pacific region,
1.
Welcomes the significant developments that have taken place in New
Caledonia as exemplified by the signing of the Nouméa Accord of 5 May 1998 by
the representatives of New Caledonia and the Government of France; 2

_______________
1
A/58/23 (Part II), chap. VIII. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 23.
2
A/AC.109/2114, annex.

03 50094

A/RES/58/106

2.
Urges all the parties involved, in the interest of all the people of New
Caledonia, to maintain, in the framework of the Nouméa Accord, their dialogue in a
spirit of harmony;
Notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord aimed at taking
3.
more broadly into account the Kanak identity in the political and social organization
of New Caledonia, and also those provisions of the Accord relating to control of
immigration and protection of local employment;
Also notes the relevant provisions of the Nouméa Accord to the effect
4.
that New Caledonia may become a member or associate member of certain
international organizations, such as international organizations in the Pacific region,
the United Nations, the United National Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the International Labour Organization, according to their
regulations;
Further notes the agreement between the signatories of the Nouméa
5.
Accord that the progress made in the emancipation process shall be brought to the
attention of the United Nations;
Welcomes the fact that the administering Power invited to New
6.
Caledonia, at the time the new institutions were established, a mission of
information which comprised representatives of countries of the Pacific region;
Calls upon the administering Power to transmit information regarding the
7.
political, economic and social situation of New Caledonia to the Secretary-General;
8.
Invites all the parties involved to continue promoting a framework for the
peaceful progress of the Territory towards an act of self-determination in which all
options are open and which would safeguard the rights of all New Caledonians
according to the letter and the spirit of the Nouméa Accord, which is based on the
principle that it is for the populations of New Caledonia to choose how to control
their destiny;
Welcomes measures that have been taken to strengthen and diversify the
9.
New Caledonian economy in all fields, and encourages further such measures in
accordance with the spirit of the Matignon and Nouméa Accords;
10. Also welcomes the importance attached by the parties to the Matignon
and Nouméa Accords to greater progress in housing, employment, training,
education and health care in New Caledonia;
11. Acknowledges the contribution of the Melanesian Cultural Centre to the
protection of the indigenous culture of New Caledonia;
12. Notes the positive initiatives aimed at protecting the natural environment
of New Caledonia, notably the “Zonéco” operation designed to map and evaluate
marine resources within the economic zone of New Caledonia;
13. Acknowledges the close links between New Caledonia and the peoples of
the South Pacific and the positive actions being taken by the French and territorial
authorities to facilitate the further development of those links, including the
development of closer relations with the countries members of the Pacific Islands
Forum;

2

A/RES/58/106

14. Welcomes, in this regard, the accession by New Caledonia to the status of
observer in the Pacific Islands Forum, continuing high-level visits to New Caledonia
by delegations from countries of the Pacific region and high-level visits by
delegations from New Caledonia to countries members of the Pacific Islands Forum;
15. Decides to keep under continuous review the process unfolding in New
Caledonia as a result of the signing of the Nouméa Accord;
16. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to continue to examine the question of the Non-SelfGoverning Territory of New Caledonia and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
72nd plenary meeting
9 December 2003

3
