UNITED NATIONS

THIR

T Y- THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING:
NEW

8 DECEMBER 1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2 106) . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . .
Adoption of the agenda

Page

. .. ... ......,.....,.. .......... ..,.,,

The situation in the Middle East:
Interim report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
434 (1978) concerning the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/12929) . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . * *. *. *

1

SIPV.2106

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Secun’~~ Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2106th MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 8 December 1978, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Riidiger van WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).
fic~rt:
The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Gerrxmy, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

situation in UNIFlL and in particular of the difficuhies
which UNIFIL is experiencing in fulfilling the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council,
4. Since my report was issued there have been no
significant improvements either in the situation or as a
whole or in the deployment of UNIFIL, although our
efforts both at United Nations Headquarters and in the area
are continuing through contacts with the parties principally
concerned.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/21 06)
I.

Adoption of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Interim report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 434 (1978) concerning the
United
Nations
Interim
Force in Lebanon
(S/12929)
i%e meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agmda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
‘Interim report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 434 (1978) concerning the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/12929)
1 O The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
reipresentative of Lebanon in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion. In accordance with
the usual practice, and with the consent of the Council, I
would propose to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. T&i
took a place at the Council table.

(LebamN

2. The PRESIDENT: The Secretary-General wishes to
make a statement at this stage and I now call on him.
3. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Members of the Council
have before them my report of I8 November [S/129291,
which the Council requested when it renewed the mandate
Iof the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in September. That report gives an account of the current

5. I have already had occasion to inform the members of
the Council in some detail of specific aspects of UNIFIL’s
current situation, and I do not wish to go over the same
ground again, The main points are, in any case, included in
the observations contained in my report which is now
before the Council.
6. I am confident that the formal discussion of my report
by the Council will contribute to the effectiveness of
UNIFIL, to the morale of the Force and to the confidence
of the Lebanese Government in the United Nations. I
welcome this opportunity for the Council to take note of
the present situation and to discuss how best to proceed
with the task of fully implementing resolutions 42.5 (1978)
and 426 (1978). I do not think that any of us had any
illusions in March of this year when UNIFIL was established as to the difficulties which the Force would certainly
encounter. It is those difficulties which arc now under
consideration. I remain convinced, however, that in the
long run the only durable and reliable means by which
peace and security can return to Southern Lebanon is by
the restoration of the sovereignty and authority of the
Lebanese Government. Obviously, the successful implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate is an essential part of this
process, The fact that this objective is so difficult to achieve
is certainly no reason for failing to make the maXillNltn
possible effort to achieve it, I therefore WelcO~llC
the
opportunity which this meeting provides for the Council to
discuss this problem. I hope very mtrch that, with the
co-operation of the Council and witb the results of its
deliberations here, we shall be able to enter a new cbaPtcr
in the implementation of resolution 415 (1978) and the
carrying out of the mandate of UbJIFIi..
7. The PRESIDENT: In connexion witi1 thC inkrim
report
of the Secretary-General, I should
like to read out the
following statement [S/lZ9S8/, which has been prepared ia
the course of consultations among members of the Council:
“The Security Council has studied the SecretaryGeneral’s report contained in document S/12929, sub-

Zionists flagrantly launched a massive invasion of Southern
Lebanon. Subsequently, they repeatedly sent aircraft for
indiscriminate bombing of several areas in Lebanon. On
5 October, the Israeli Zionists again sent war vessels to
bombard the Beirut area, slaughtering innocent people
there. Meanwhile, they have tried by every possible tneans
to obstruct the Lebanese Government from exercising its
sovereign right in Southern Lebanon. Israel’s serious crimes
of continued aggression against Lebanon have met with
firm resistance on the part of the Lebanese Government
and people, and these crimes have been unanimously
condemned by the Palestinian and other Arab people as
well as all the countries and peoples that uphold justice.

mitted in pursuance of resolution 434 (1978). The
Council associates itself with the views of the SecretaryGeneral set forth in the report regarding the obstacles
placed against the full deployment of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and against the total implementation of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).
“The Council expresses its deepest concern over the
grave situation in Southern Lebanon.
“The Council is convinced that these obstacles constitute a challenge to its authority and a defiance of its
resolutions. The Council therefore demands the removal
of these obstacles, specifically described and referred to
in the Secretary-General’s report under consideration, as
well as in his previous reports submitted to the Council.

11. The Chinese Government and people have consistently
given resolute support to the Lebanese, Palestinian and
other Arab peoples in their just struggle against Zionism
and super-Power hegemonism for the recovery of their lost
territories and the restoration of their national rights. We
maintain that the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Lebanon must be respected scrupulously. We
strongly condemn Israel for its continued aggression against
Lebanon and its obstruction of the exercise of sovereign
rights by the Lebanese Government in Southern Lebanon.

“The Council believes that the unimpeded deployment
of the Force in all parts of Southern Lebanon will
contribute significantly to the restoration of the authority of the Lebanese Government and the preservation of
Lebanese sovereignty within Lebanon’s internationally
recognized boundaries.
“The Council therefore caIIs upon all those not fully
co-operating with the Force, particularly Israel, to desist
forthwith
from interfering with the operations of the
Force in Southern Lebanon and demands that they
comply fully without any delay with the implementation
of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).

12. Based on the above position, we are in favour of the
paragraphs condemning Israel, as contained in the statement just read out by the President of the Council. But it is
not satisfactory that the statement has failed to pronounce
a stern condemnation befitting Israel. Moreover, in view of
the different position which the Chinese delegation has
always held in principle on the question of the dispatch of
United Nations forces, we dissociate our&es
from all the
contents of the statement concerning the United Nations
lnterim Force in Lebanon.

“The Council also calls upon Member States that are in
a position to do so to bring their influence to bear on
those concerned so that the Force may discharge its
responsibilities unimpeded.

13. Mr BISHARA (Kuwait): Mr. President, WC are grate.
ful to you for your efforts to arrive at a consensus on the
document you have just read out. To our satisfaction, you
read it out in the famous traditional German firm tone.

“The Council notes with appreciation the efforts made
by the Secretary-General and the United Nations staff,
and the commanders and soldiers of the Force for the
implementation of resolution 425 (1978). It also takes
this opportunity to express its particular appreciation to
the countries that have contributed troops or are assisting
in the deployment and facilitating the task of the Force,

14. Today my delegation learned of the death of
Mrs. Meir. It is a pity that she did not live long enough to
see the triumph of the people of PaIestine about whom she
once observed cynically: “Where are the people of Palestine? They do not exist .”

“The Council decides to remain seized of the problem,
and to review the situation if and when necessary, before
19 January 1979, so as to consider practical ways and
means that will secure the full implementation of its
resolutions,”

15. Coming to the substance of today’s debate, I should
like to express our satisfaction with the supplementary
information just given by the Secretary-General. Let me
begin by quoting from the important report of the
Secretary-General /S/12929].

8. It is my understanding that the members of the Council
are ready to approve the text of the statement which I have
just read out by consensus.

9. Mr. CHEN Chu (China) (intcrperation from Chinese).
Mr. President, first of all, on behalf of the Chinese
delegation, I wish to congratulate you warmly upon your
assumption of the high office of the presidency of the
Council for this month.

16. In its resolution 434 (1978), the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report on the situation in two months.
The Secretary-General submitted his report on 18 November, in fulfilment of the Council’s request. In the same
resolution, the Council decided that it would meet in two
months “to allow it to assess the situation and to examine
what further measures should be taken” for the fulfilment
of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).

10. The development of the situation in Southern Lebanon causes widespread concern. Last March, the Israeli

17. The delegation of Kuwait is therefore very grateful to
the Secretary-General and to his colleagues for their

It was so decided.

2

unflagging efforts towards the implementation of resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). My delegation is extremely happy with the report, as it very frankly places the
blame on Israel, which has been obstructing the implementation of the Council’s resolutions. The document is
unique in its frankness and shows signs of the frustration
from which the United Nations has been suffering.

present situation . . . it has not been denied that they
provide them with logistic and other forms of support.”
25. In paragraph 19 the Secretary-General adds: “the
indefinite continuation of such a situation is obviously
unacceptable”
26. In paragraph 20 the Secretary-General says:

18. In paragraph 5, the report states: “there has been no
significant improvement in the deployment of the Force
since the last report of the Secretary-General” and “despite
the efforts of UNIFIL, little progress has been achieved”.

“It is therefore essential that the Lebanese de facto
forces and those who support them should come to terms
with certain realities . . . Continued military resistance to
this effort can only be regarded as a deliberate defiance
both of the legitimate authority of the Lebanese Government and of the decisions of the Security Council.”

19. In paragraph 8 the report says:
“In the area under the control of the Lebanese defacto
armed groups”,- that is Naddad and his CoIlaborators“UNIFIL, which had previously secured limited freedom
of movement there, was subject to periodic harassment.”

In the same paragraph the report says that: “the present
state of affairs, if continued, will inevitably lead to the
erosion of UNIFIL”.

20. In paragraph 9 it states:

27. Our sincerest thanks must go to the Secretary-General
for his unequivocal frankness. The crux of the matter is
Israel’s defiance of the Council’s authority. This is characteristic of Israel, not only on UNIFIL, but also on other
issues, be they on the Syrian territory, the West Bank or
Gaza. For how long can we tolerate this blatant defiance of
the authority of the Council? Which part of resolution
425 (1978) has been implemented’? That resolution called
for the withdrawal of the Israeli armed forces, for the
restoration of Lebanese authority and for full UNIFIL
deployment in Southern Lebanon. UNIFIL deployment in
the South has been blocked by Israel, as the SecretaryGeneral clearly stated. Consequently Lebanon has not been
able to restore its authority in Southern Lebanon. The
gangsters who rely on Israel are opposing UNIFIL advancement to the South. So there is no implementation of
resolution 425 (1978) but there is defiance, There is no
co-operation by Israel with United Nations forces but there
is a blatant challenge, There is no restoration of Lebanese
authority in the South but there is an erosion of this
authority and a noticeable erosion of UNIFIL prestige. Who
is to blame in this unbelievable confusion? Undoubtedly,
Israel, first and foremost, and it is the only culprit in this
tragic quagmire.

“UNIFIL
installations were also harassed by the de
armed groups.. . . UNIFIL officers identified three
personnel of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) in plain
clothes.”

facto

This paragraph also narrates the tragic lawlessness of the
episode of 25 October when the rebels and their masters,
the Israelis, entered UNIFIL quarters and stabbed an Irish
soldier. Israeli soldiers, in complete contempt of United
Nations authority, ran amok and criminally ransacked
UNIFIL headquarters at Naqoura.
21. In paragraph 12 the report says that UNIFIL has
observed the presence of IDF personnel in Southern
Lebanon. A group of 30 Israelis were seen laying mines
some 300 metres inside Lebanon.
22. In paragraph 13 the Secretary-General states, in
obvious exasperation and frustration: “To my regret I have
to report that, in spite of these efforts, little progress has
been made.”
23. It is obvious that the Secretary-General felt compelled
to express his frustration at the lack of Israeli co-operation
in the full deployment of UNIFIL. In paragraph 15 the
report unequivocally goes on to say:

28. The implementation of resolution 425 (1978) requires
the co-operation of the Palestinians, who have displayed
enviable patience in the most provocative circumstances.
But for how long will the Palestinians be so co-operative,
especially when they see the advantage of trickery and
ill-will which Israel so greatly enjoys? It also requires the
co-operation of the Lebanese Government, which has tried,
in the most confusing circumstances, to send some of its
troops in order to assert its authority. On the Arab side, so
to speak, the obligation has been fulfilled. But the problem
is with the Israeli side. Israel does not want UNIFIL
success. It is enjoying the benefit of the whole confusion.
The Times of London of 27 November wrote:

“An essential precondition for UNIFIL’s success is the
co-operation of all concerned, especially those armed
elements and groups in and around its area of operation.
In the present circumstances, this particularly applies to
the Lebanese de fucto forces in the area and to the
Government of Israel. I regret to have to inform the
Council that at the present time the necessary cooperation is still lacking in these quarters and the
complete deployment of UNIFIL and the progressive
re-establishment of Lebanese authority in the area is
therefore blocked.”

“It seems obvious, however, that Israel is not going to
countenance a United Nations presence along its border.
This would, after all, lose it the pro-Israeli SeCun’tY zone
in Southern Lebanon which the Christians maintain for
them.. At the same time, the intensity of the shooting

24. The Secretary-General continues, in paragraph 17:
“The relationship between the Israel Defence Forces
the Lebanese de .facto forces is a major factor in the

and

3

against Israel. When we speak about Israel’s involvement in
Southern Lebanon, they become ruffled and rattled,
although they know the facts better than we do. And yet
we talk about the restoration of international peace and
security in Southern Lebanon as provided for in resolution
425 (1978). Where is this peace and security? Where has it
been restored? Who is responsible for its absence? What
have we done to see it restored?

suggests that the Israelis also want to demonstrate to the
United Nations that any move further South will be met
with force. Perhaps they also want to prove the United
Nations’ impotence.”
In the same report, it stated:
“The Israelis claim that they do not exercise ‘control’
over the Christian militias but most United Nations
soldiers have come to regard this with considerable
cynicism, An official recalled how one junior officer-not
with the Irish battalion-received
a radio call from an
Israeli soldier to ‘warn’ him that the Christians were
about to fire their artillery and that the Israelis could not
be held responsible.”

34. My Government is involved in the two peace-keeping
operations in Lebanon. My Government is playing a vital
role in the Arab peace-keeping force, not only in terms of
finance but more so in terms of political participation. My
Government was instrumental in the recent meeting of
some Arab Foreign Ministers held on the supervision of the
cease-fire. My Government also follows the role of UNIFIL
with keen interest, as this role complements the efforts of
the Arab deterrent force. But the effect of our efforts in
connexion with the Arab deterrent force will remain
limited and incomplete as long as UNIFIL is not allowed to
be deployed in Southern Lebanon.

29. Major-General Erskine, UNIFIL Commander, said in
an interview published in 5%e Times of London of 20
November that his 5,600 men “have not been able to make
any substantial progress at all”.
30. The report of the Secretary-General which was discussed in September hit the nail on the head when it stated:

35. The Council’s authority is at stake, It is not fair to
“pass the buck” to the Secretary-General, who cannot act
without the authorization of the Council. Here we cannot
shirk our responsibility, which is the full implementation of
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978). This abnormal
situation which prevails in Southern Lebanon has to be
dealt with one way or another. If UNIFIL cannot shoot its
way down-and apparently it cannot--then we have to
think of other alternatives. Surely the present situation
serves the best interests of Israel, which is protected by its
surrogates in the south, and to the north by UNIFIL and
then, further north, by the Litani river. I-low can we accept
this anomalous situation which is a threat to international
peace and security? This abnormal situation tempts others,
who have SO far shown remarkable restraint, to make the
best of the prevalent confusion, Southern Lebanon is
saddled with thorny problems which the Government of
Lebanon is incapable of handling and UNIFIL is in no
position to confront. There is lawlessness created by Israel,
from which only Israel benefits, and the continuation of
which satisfies Israel alone. The Council is prisoner of
power politics, and in the full knowledge of its limitations,
particularly at this juncture, the delegation of Kuwait
supports the President’s statement, which, we believe,
contains essential elements. We know that this statement
will not resolve the ordeal in Southern Lebanon but it
could provide the required pressure which usually accompanies the Council’s decisions.

“The fact that the Israel Defence Forces handed over
control of the border area to de facto armed groups
rather than to UNIFI L has continued to make impossible
the full deployment of UNIFIL and the restoration of the
authority of the Lebanese Government in the whole area
of operation.” (S/1284.5, para. 61./
31. Therefore, the whole fiasco in Southern Lebanon is
due to Israel’s action in handing over territories under its
occupation to the illegal rebels who seek control of the
area, in order to ensure complete calm for Israel. The New
York Times of 3 December reported that these servile
agents of Israel intended to build an airport and a port in
Southern Lebanon. This is a joke in bad taste, for we know
that these subservient elements are not only on the payroll
of their Israeli masters but that they do not dare to think of
so blatant a mutilation of Lebanese sovereignty without
Israel’s backing. The Secretary-General unequivocally accuses Israel of obstructing UNIFIL deployment. There is no
room for Israeli attempts to whitewash this accusation.
These agents who project the image of daring heroism
against their fellow countrymen are in fact a bunch of
lily-livered and misguided Lebanese who subsist on Israeli
military and political support. Had it not been for the
treacherous Israeli designs, they would have fallen under
the feet of their Lebanese compatriots.

36. We have shown considerable sense of co-operation in
our desire to accommodate rather than exacerbate the
feelings of those who always urge us to place our faith in
their efforts. In January we will have an opportunity to
examine the situation and, if things remain as they are, my
delegation may ask for either the invocation of Chapter VII
of the Charter against Israel or the termination of UNIFIL’s
mandate.

32. My delegation is admittedly sick and tired of the
velvet-glove treatment which the United States accords to
Israel. When the Council’s authority is at stake, the spoiled
brats of some of our colleagues should be prevailed upon.
For how long will the Council tolerate this shambles
created by Israel? There is a moral decline in the authority
of the Council, and Israel is the main contributor to that
decline. We see it always go Scot-free with its spoils with
enviable impunity.

37. 1 should like now to speak briefly about what we call
“the Metullah conncxion”.

33. It is no secret that some members of the Council
accepted this debate on UNIFIL most reluctantly, notwithstanding the indicting report of the Secretary-General

38. Last August, a Lebanese army unit attempted to move
into the area, a necessary part of the fulfillment of
4

UNIFIL’s mandate in assisting the Lebanese Government to
restore its authority in Southern Lebanon. That courageous
move by the Government of Lebanon, given its great
problems in the north of the country, had been advocated
by all of us and by all countries contributing to LJNIFIL.
What happened’? Haddad, with modern artillery, fired for
four days, not only on the Lebanese unit but also on
UNIFIL, especially the Nepalese contingent. Shells landed
within a few yards of the Nepalese and some close to the
Norwegians. The move by the Lebanese army unitrepresenting the legitimate authority recognized by all
Council members-was stopped.

42. The reason for insisting on UNIFIL’s
freedom of
movement throughout Southern Lebanon is not academic
or polemical. It is not just a question of implementing
Security Council resolutions or a hope for restoration of
the sovereignty-the
legitimate sovereignty-and
authority
of a Member State. The fundamental reason is the need to
assist the people of Lebanon, bind up their wounds and
have their country rise again,
43. Hundreds, thousands of Lebanese have returned to
their homes in Southern Lebanon since UNIFIL went there.
The only part of Southern Lebanon where there is conflict,
actual and potential, is that buffer zone virtually annexed
by Israel. Let UNIFIL operate throughout the area and
Southern Lebanon can be a model for all Lebanon. Only
Israel, through Metulla, prevents that.

39. How was that possible? First, the renegade forces of
Majors Haddad and Chidias had been allowed, during Israeli
occupation, to expand their control over an area one to six
kilometres inside Lebanon along the Israeli border. They
expanded their control by bringing Christian militia into an
area predominantly Moslem, not controlled by the Christian militia before the Israeli invasion. Naqoura, the
headquarters of UNIFIL, is in a Moslem area, behind the
lines of the renegade majors and completely at their mercy.
Before the Israeli invasion, none of the troops of the
renegades has been into that area. During the Israeli
invasion, the Israelis built about 1.5 new roads from Israel
into that one to six-kilometre border zone to supply the
renegades. Supplies via what is called the “good fence” go
in-artillery, other heavy weapons, shells and the like. The
“good fence” was good for Major Haddad. It is very good
for Israel. What was very good for Israel was that it created
a buffer zone in Lebanon, leading to what is today a virtual
annexation”

44. Israel has been telling the United Nations that it has
already complied with resolution 425 (1978). That has
been said tongue in cheek, with insincerity, and with the
intention of deceiving the international community. Fortunately, the United Nations and Member States know the
dismal circumstances of the situation. Because of Israel’s
obstruction of UNIFIL deployment we meet here in order
to consider what can be done to take the bull by the horns.
Too much is at stake. Those who have so far shown
self-imposed restraint may be tempted to take advantage of
the present lawlessness created by Israel.
45. The delegation of Kuwait is indeed aware of the
complexity faced in the efforts that are being made to
secure Israel’s co-operation. It is for that reason that my
delegation preferred a statement by the President of the
Council, on behalf of its members, instead of a resolution.
Our aim was unanimity; our objective was and stiI1 is the
promotion of normalcy in Southern Lebanon. We want to
avoid acrimony, recrimination or linguistic confrontation.
We understand the difficulties which some Member States
have with a resolution and we appreciate their understanding of our own difficulties. What interests us is the
contents rather than the form, and we believe that the
statement which the President read out so affirmatively
covers all the points that we wanted emphasized, bearing in
mind of course the difficulties of the present circumstances.

40. But what made it possible for Major Haddad, who
commands no more than 800 troops, to hold off both
UNIFIL and the legitimate Lebanese army? The answer is:
supplies, advice and logistic support from Israel. The key is
the town of Metulla, on the border, with direct links to
Maraijou, the headquarters of Haddad. A road goes directly
across the border. United Nations spokesmen have reported
that Israeli officers have been seen in demonstrations inside
Lebanon, at Naqoura, UNIFIL headquarters, ostensibly led
by Haddad. Where do they come from? Metulla. Where
does Haddad get his military supplies from? Metulla. Where
are the computers backing up Haddad’s guns, guns firing
not just on the Lebanese army but also on UNIFIL, a
United Nations force representing all members of the
Council? At Metulla. What is blocking the movement of
UNIFIL into that area of Lebanon, an area which the
Lebanese Government wants UNIFIL to enter? Metulla.
And Metulla is in Israel. Metulla is manned by Israeli
troops. Metulla is supplying Haddad with Israeli guns.
Metulla is sending over Israeli advisers, Metulla gives the
advice, the encouragement and the logistics. Metulla is
Haddad’s survival. Haddad works for Metulla, not for
Lebanon and not for the United Nations.

46. Condemnation, deploring and admonition give satisfaction to the psychology, but they rarely contribute to the
betterment of those whose future we care for and care
about. It is in this spirit that my delegation thanks the
members of the Council for their understanding and
co-operation. Some, indeed, are dissatisfied with the inadequacy of the language of the statement and some think that
they accepted elements which were difficult for them to
accept, To both we are grateful for this understanding.
47. Lebanon has placed its faith in the Security Council
and in its ability to enforce the implementation of its
resolutions, That is why we should live up to the challenge
posed by Israel, and in doing so we will satisfy the
yearnings of the Lebanese people for tranquillty, harmony
and peace.

41. That, then, is the answer to our problem: block off
Metulla and let Southern Lebanon be Lebanese, not Israeli.
It is the lifeline of the rebels and, therefore, we must shut it
off. But that is the past and the present. What about the
future?

48. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): Three months ago,
when we alI met to discuss the renewal of the mandate of
5

1 pointed out [208.5th meeting/ my Government’s
concern at the interFerence and the obstruction that the
Force had met from armed groupsreceiving “support from
outside” in the implementation of this mandate in Southern Lebanon.. We appealed, in the resolution which emerged
from that debate, to Israel and Lebanon and all others
involved to co-operate fully and urgently with the United
Nations in the implementation of resolutions 425 (1978)
and 426 (1978). It is with no little concern therefore that
we learn from the Secretary-General’s report that some
have not acknowledged that appeal, that the attitude of the
de facto armed groups has markedly hardened and that
tension in and near the UNIFIL area of operation has
increased. Far from the commanders of the Force being
able to achieve an improvement in the deployment of the
Force in areas of Southern Lebanon hitherto inaccessibleto
them, various contingents of the Force have come under
fire from elements of the de facto forces.

to all partiesto co-operatewith the United Nations Force
in Lebanon.

49.. We believe that the Government of Israel hasconsiderable influence over those forces in the South. We also
believe that the Government of Israel should ceasefurnishing supplies and military equipment to them which enable
them more effectively to frustrate UNIFIL’s performance
of its tasks, Indeed, as the Secretary-General has pointed
out, the presence of Israel Defence Forces personnel has
been observed in Southern Lebanon on a number of
occasions. The Secretary-General hasconfirmed againtoday
that these incursions continue. Those and other actions give
my Government great causefor concern. As we saidin the
earlier debate to which I referred, there can be no excuse
for this lack of co-operation with a peace-keepingforce of
the United Nations.

53. Mr BARTON (Canada): In March this year the
Council decided,in responseto the urgent requestof the
Government of Lebanon, to deploy the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon for the purpose of confirming
the withdrawal of Israeli forces, restoring international
peace and security and assisting the Government of
Lebanon in ensuringthe return of its effective authority in
Southern Lebanon. The Council has also called upon the
parties and on all others concerned to facilitate the
operation of the Force.

UNIFIL,

52. We have had, and we will have again next month, an
opportunity to praise the performance of Major-General
Erskine and the officers and men of UNIFIL. The physical
danger facing the contingents remains regrettably undiminished, if not increased,and we can but admirethe way
in which they seek to perform under these pressures
the
task which the Council has allotted to them. We admire
equally the determined and devoted efforts of the Secretary-General and his staff to securethe effective itnplementation of the Council’s resolutions in respect of
Southern Lebanon.The Council owesit to them all to seek
to do what it canto assistthem and to secureimprovement
in the difficult political climate in which they have to
operate. It is in that spirit that my delegation approaches
the present discussionsin the Council, which we consider
timely-

54. The latest report of the Secretary-Generalinformsus
that, notwithstanding the Council’s directions to all concerned, United Nations peace-keeping
forces are beingfired
upon, restricted in carrying out their missionandharassed.
That is an unacceptable situation, The report clearly
indicates that the major offendersin the casesdescribedare
what he refers to asde facto forces. He alsoreports that
Israeli authorities do not deny providing these forceswith
logistic and other forms of support and that, notwithstanding the reported withdrawal of the Israel Defence
Forces from Southern Lebanon, UNIFIL has occasionally
identified membersof the forcesstill in the area.The report
also mentionsincidents with Palestinianarmed elementsin
the UNIFIL areaof operation.

50. In the few weeks remaining prior to the time when we
are asked to review the mandate of the Force, we look
forward to hearing of a marked improvement in both
attitude and degree of co-operation received by the Force
from all concerned. I hope particularly that the Government of Israel will use its influence more constructively to
enable UNIFIL to achieve its task. I would add in this
connexion that any country which underminesthe position
of UNIFIL must itself bear a heavy responsibility for any
subsequent increase in tension and violence in the area.
Failure to co-operate with UNIFIL, thus in effect defying
the Security Council, must also cast doubt upon that
country’s readiness to accept in good faith the role of
United Nations peace-keepingforces in sustaininga wider
settlement in the Middle East. It must also undermine the
willingness of contributor countries to participate in such
forces..

55. As the Secretary-Generalhas said, the restorationof
the authority and sovereigntyof the LebaneseGovermneat
is the only durable and reliable meansby which normality
and security can return to Southern Lebanon.Unlessthere
is a return to normality and security in Lebanonthereis
bound to remaina threat to the security and peaceof the
Middle Eastasa whole.

51. I note that relations, on the other hand, with other
armed elements in the area have not created major
problems, although there have been occasionalclasheswith
armed per.mnnel attempting to enter UNIFIL’s area of
operation from the north. But these clasheshave remained
for the most part minor. The situation is, however, clearly
brittle; all the more important, therefore, for us not to
jeopardize the co-operation so far received by failing to
achieve significant progress throughout the area mandated
to IJNIFIL.
Her Majesty’s Government will continue,
therefore, to use every opportunity to emphasizethe need

56, Moreover, the authority of the Council isalsoat stake.
We must not permit our decisionsto be ignored nor the
good name of United Nations peace keeping to be
tarnished. Canadais no longer a participant in UNIFIL, hut
we continue to believe that the decision to authoriseits
establishmentwas the right one and we have beenimpressed by the Force’sperformancein very difficult conditions.
But, as we have often said,peacekeepingis a meansto an
end. If the end is not being achieved, it is reasonable
to
reconsiderthe meansat our disposal.

6

57. Sir, it is for this reason that we support your
statement and in particular the call to all those not fully
co-operating with UNIFIL, particularly Israel, to desist
forthwith from interfering with UNIFIL’s operations in
Southern Lebanon..
58. Mr. HULINSK? (Czechoslovakia) (interpretation from
Russian): Already at the time of the diplomatic preparation
for the separate talks with Egypt, Israel had committed an
aggression against a peace-loving State, Lebanon. Despite
the sharp criticism which these actions aroused in the whole
world, including the United Nations, Israel needed three
whole months to respond to the decision of the Security
Council on the withdrawal of its troops from the occupied
southern part of Lebanon. Moreover, as shown by the facts
mentioned in the reports of the Secretary-General pub.
lished in documents S/12845 and S/12929, Israel has not
transferred control over several regions it had evacuated to
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon but has
handed it over to the illegal armed groups which have
refused to this day to submit to the authority of the
Government of Lebanon.
59. In the period from last June, when the Security
Council was informed that Israel had completed the
withdrawal of its forces from Lebanon, the Israeli army has
undertaken, with the assistance of local reactionary forces
which receive moral, financial and military support from
Tel Aviv, a whole series of acts of provocation aimed at
producing a split in Lebanon As shown in the last report of
the Secretary-General, the situation has not changed in the
two months that have elapsed since the adoption, last
September, of resolution 434 (1978), which
“Calls upon Israel . . . to co-operate fully and urgently
with the United Nations in the implementation of. . .
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978).”
As in the past, Israel continues to interfere in the domestic
affairs of Lebanon and continues to co-operate actively
with the illegal armed groups in its frontier zone. This, as
the report of the Secretary-General indicates, is the main
factor which impedes the restoration of the authority of
the Government of Lebanon in the south of the country.
60. Such a situation can only causethe deepestconcern to
the membersof the Security Council, a situation Which
has
in the past impededthe restoration of peace in Lebanon
andwhich createsa threat to the achievementof ajust and
lastingsettlement of the whole questionOFthe Middle East.
In the joint communiquC which was published at the
conclusionof the visit of the Presidentof the Government
of the CzechoslovakSocialist Republic to the Republic of
Iraq from 26 to 29 November 1978, it wasstated:
“Both parties support the consolidation of the lawful
authority of the Government of Lebanon over the whole
of the territory of that State. They support respect for
the legitimate interests of the Palestinian resistance
movement in Lebanon. Both parties condemn the interference of Israel in the domesticaffairs of Lebanon and
its attempt to aggravate tensions and to achieve a
partition of the LebaneseState.”

61., The Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia, together
with the other membersof the Security Council, condemns
the arrogant conduct and actions of Israel, undertaken in
disregardand violation of the decisionsof the Council and
considers the statement by the President on this matter
fully warranted and necessary.That statement should be a
serious warning to the Israeli authorities, becausetheir
actions are contrary to the decisionsof the Council, clearly
aimed against the restoration of the full sovereignty of
Lebanon over the whole of its territory and continue to be
a threat to peacein the region.
62. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)(interpretation from Russian):The delegationof
the Soviet Union believes that the submissionto the
Security Council of the interim report of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon is very timely, correct and indeed indispensable.
More than eight months has elapsedsinceIsrael committed
a direct aggressionagainst Lebanon, a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations. This barbaric attack by
Israel, which led to great lossesof life amongthe civilian
population of Lebanon,including womenand children, was
yet another link in the chain of aggressiveIsraeli actions
aimedat the neighbouringArab States.
63. In its resolution 425 (1978), the Security Council
demandedthat Israel should immediately ceaseits military
action against Lebanon and withdraw forthwith its forces
from all Lebaneseterritory and it called on Israel scrupulously to respect the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independenceof *Lebanon However, the whole
course of subsequentevents has clearly shown that Israel,
despite the demandsof the Council, in fact continuesits
infringements of the sovereignly and territorial integrity of
Lebanon and has not ceasedits crude interference in the
domestic affairs of that State. Such actions cannot be
viewed asother than deliberatesabotageof the decisionsof
the Council and direct defiance of the Council and the
United Nations asa whole.
64. The report of the Secretary-Generalclearly indicates
that, as in the past, Israel is continuing to maintain its
military presence in Southern Lebanon and to provide
military and other types of assistanceto’ the antigovernment groups in Lebanon and that it impedesthe
restoration of the authority of the Government of Lebanon. These actions by Israel are properly qualified in the
report of the Secretary-Generalasdeliberateflouting of the
legitimate authority of the Government of Lebanonand of
the decisionsof the Security Cotmcil.
65. Israel is carrying out against Lebanon a policy of
threat and military provocation. Maintaining under its
control essential areas of Lebanon along the IsraeliLebaneseborder, it endeavoursalways to keep open the
door to a new and massiveincursion in that country. The
deepest concern must be aroused by the information
indicating that Israel is engagedin active work to create a
new harbour in Southern Lebanon and that it intends to
begin shortly the building of an airport in the region. It is
clear that all this is designedto strengthenIsrael’scontrol
over the defucto occupiedfrontier zone of Lebanon.

71. The Council clearly demandsthat Israeland alsoother
elementswhich fail to co-operate fully with the United
Nations forces, that is, the elementsnow under Israeli
control, the armedgroupsin SouthernLebanon, shouldput
an end to their obstaclesto the activities of the United
Nationsforces. This demandmust be consideredby Israel
very seriously,and it must without any delay implement
the resolutionsof the Council demandingthe complete
cessationof interference by Israelin the domesticaffairs of
Lebanon.

66, The actions of Israel in Lebanon are aggravating the
already dangerous situation in the Middle East, which is a
threat to peace, and the unfolding of events in that region
has again confirmed how well founded were the repeated
warnings of the Soviet Union that the lack of a settlement
of the Middle East conflict, the occupation by Israel of
Arab lands and the violations of the legitimate national
rights of the Arab people of Palestine. were creating a
situation fraught with serious consequences for international peace and security.

72. At the sametime, we want to expressregret at the fact
that in the present decision of the Council there is no
proper condemnationof Israel in view of its sabotagingof
the decisionsof the Council, its continuing aggressive
actions againstLebanon and its grossinterference in the
domesticaffairs of that country. We alsobelieve that it is
high time for the Council to move towards more energetic
and effective measures
to ensurethe implementationof the
decisionsadopted by it in connexion with Israel’saggressionagainstLebanon

67. The Soviet Union has always been and continues to be
a supporter of a just and comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East which, because cf its very substance and
character can be achieved only by the collective efforts of
ail the interested parties. As regards the policy of separate
deals, that can only lead to further complication of the
situation. It encourages Israel to attempt to consolidate the
results of its aggression, including the aggression in Lebanon, and to proceed to further expansion through the
seizure of Arab lands.

73. Mr. HARRIMAN (Nigeria): My delegationwould like
to express its profound appreciation to the SecretaryGeneralfor his helpful interim report concerningUNIFIL. I
am, of course,awarethat the ritual of renewalof UNIFIL’s
mandateis more than a month away. Nevertheless,recent
developmentsin Southern Lebanonhave now renderedthe
presentreport necessary,

68. The position of the Soviet Union in support of ending
the inferference by Israel in the affairs of Lebanon and in
favour of normalization of the situation in Lebanon was
recently reconfirmed in the joint communiqud of 2 November this year issued on the occasion of the visit to the
Soviet Union by a delegation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization headed by the Chairman of its Executive
Committee, Mr, Arafat. It states:

74. We note with satisfaction that, during the period
under review, the Secretary-General,the Chief Co-ordinator
of the United NationsPeace-keeping
Missionsin the Middle
East and the Force Commander,General Erskine, maintained contact with the Lebaneseauthoritjes aswell aswith
the Israelisregardingthe stepsto be taken to further the
implementationof resolutions425 (1978), 426 (1978) and
434 (1978). We equally note that UNlFIL maintained its
contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization
throughout this period. And in order to facilitate an early
implementation of its mandate, UNIFIL ,has been compelled, by circumstancesbeyond its control but which
continue to hamper its work, to deal on an au’ hoc basis
with the Lebanesede facto armed groups in Southern
Lebanon

“Both parties expressed serious concern over the
situation in Lebanon in connexion with the continuing
interference by Israel in the domestic affairs of that
country and its attempts to aggravate tension and to
cause a partitioning of the Lebanese State. The parties
declared their intention to co-operate in bringing about a
normalization of the situation in Lebanon on the basis of
ensuring its sovereignty, its independence and its territorial integrity. They also advocated the strengthening of
the legitimate authority of the Lebanese Government
over the whole of the territory of that country and
expressed themselves in favour of respect for the legitimate interests of the Palestinian resista?ce movement in
Lebanon.”

75 We are gratified that the Secretary-Generalhas been
able to report that UNIFIL hascontinued to use its best
efforts to ensurethat its areaof operation will not be used
for hostile activities of any kind. In the areawhereUNIFIL
exercisesfull control effective action continuesto be taken
not only to prevent the entry of armed personnelbut also
to promoteprogressivenormalization of life.

69. The delegation of the Soviet Union believes that the
members of the Security Council cannot and must not
tolerate the inadmissible situation in which Israel openly
sabotages the decisions of the Council in regard to an
immediate ending of the Israeli aggression against Lebanon
and the demands of the Council for strict respect for the
sovereign rights of that country.

76. But then there are other aspectsof the report of the
Secretary-Generalwhich have given considerablecausefor
anxiety. In spite of the good faith underlying UNIFIL’s
contactswith the so-calledde facto armedgroupsof Major
Haddad-contacts made through Major Haddad’spolitical
mentor, the State of Israel-UNIFIL is still experiencing
considerabledifficulty on the vital issue of effective
deploymentof its units and control in its areaof operation,
not to speak of having to restore the Lebanesenational
forcesin the area.

70. In the light of these considerations, the Soviet
delegation joined in the consensus of the members of the
Council regarding the statement just read out by the
President. In doing so,my delegationhasnoted that in that
statement responsibility for the very serioussituation in
Lebanon is clearly placed on Israel. The nonImplementation by Israel of the decisionsof the Council
has been very justly described as a challenge to the
authority of the Council and a defianceof its resolutions.
8

77. One matter of considerable concern to my delegation
is the escalation of defiance on the part of the de facto
armed groups and the menacing challenge they pose to the
authority of UNIFIL in its legal area of operation. We are
indignant that these lawless groups now have the audacity
to bring heavy artillery into the area and to use it against
UNIFIL
units, which, like traditional United Nations
peace-keeping troops, have only light weapons for the
purpose of self-defence.

act fast and firmly-if it is to arrest the continuing erosion
of its authority by Israel. This might be the very motive of
Israel, which has been restrained as far as has been possible
in its expansionist designs in the Middle East. UNIFIL
cannot be expected to fulfil its mandate if the armed
groups of Major Haddad persist in their present criminal
activities with the active support of the Israelis.
83. We must not lose sight of the fact that UNIFIL is
mandated to provide protection to all sectors of the
population and its record so far has proved conclusively
that it is not a partisan force in the area. The Security
Council, in the view of my delegation, seems left with no
other option but to start, as a matter of urgency, earnest
consideration of effective measures designed to compel the
strict compliance of all parties with its resolutions. In this
instance it is obvious that the State of Israel provides
support and succour for Haddad and his group. It will no
longer be enough to condemn the State for its continuing
defiance. We may now have to serve notice of the Council’s
determination to apply more serious measures if the current
unacceptable situation persists.

78. We feel no less indignant at the revelation that
UNIFIL installations have become targets of harassment by
those same de facto armed groups. In this regard, there can
be no better illustration of such lawlessness or contempt for
the authority and power of the Security Council than the
incident involving 300 demonstrators at UNIFIL headquarters at Naqoura on 16 October. The demonstrators
were reported to have severely damaged a Lebanese army
helicopter used by the Lebanese liaison team. That was not
all. The unruly bands had the effrontery to abduct four
Lebanese liaison personnel in broad daylight. In view of the
proved links between the militia and the State of Israel, my
delegation finds it strange that Israel claims not to have
been aware of such a mass demonstration and of its
consequences.

84. Israel must realize that a strong and stable Lebanon is
both desirable and essential to its own security. An unstable
Lebanon, which it seems bent on creating, must of
necessity have destabilizing effects on Israel’s northern
front. I only hope that Israel will fully co-operate with the
United Nations to ensure the stability and territorial
integrity of Lebanon.

79. As we consider this report, the so-called de facto
armed groups are having a field day in UNIFIL’s area of
operation. Civilians have been routinely harassed by the
same groups and mortar shells have been fired and freely
used against peaceful villages. The incident on 30 October
at Brashit even resulted in the killing of at least one woman.

85. In conclusion, my delegation would like to reaffirm its
solidarity with the people of Lebanon in their quest to
regain and preserve the territorial integrity of their State.
We also wish to seize this opportunity to salute the men
and officers of UNIFIL
for their valour and levelheadedness in the face of provocation and harassment from
the unruly militia in their area of operation. Finally, we
highly commend Major-General Erskine and his staff for
their steadfastness, courage and sense of responsibility in
the extraordinarily
difficult and volatile atmosphere in
which they have had to operate. We only hope that the
sacrifices they have made in the past and which they may
have to make in the future will not be in vain.

80. And, as if the Israelis had not found the depredations
and atrocities of the armed groups disquieting enough, we
now have concrete proof of the presence in Southern
Lebanon of Israeli armed personnel who, in full view of the
world, lay mines some 300 metres deep inside Lebanese
territory in violation of the country’s territorial integrity
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. One
begins to wonder from where the source of Israel’s fear
emanates and why it lays these mines in this particular
area?
81. We cannot but endorse the assessment of the Secretary-General to the effect that the relationship between the
Israel Defence Forces and the de facto Lebanese armed
forces of Major Haddad is a major factor in the problems
confronting UNIFIL in the implementation of its mandate
in Southern Lebanon, UNIFIL has, from time to time,
requested the Israeli authorities to use their good offices
and influence in efforts to control or moderate the extreme
actions of Major Haddad and his militiamen. While the
Israelis continue to disclaim any control over them, they
have not denied-and, indeed, cannot deny-having given
the Major and his group considerable logistic and other
material support. Thus, the Israelis have more or less
succeeded in maintaining their presence in Lebanon by
proxy in violation of resolution 425 (1978).

86. I might end by adding that I regret that the powerful
members of the Council which afford Israel the logistic
support enabling it to defy the United Nations in the
Middle East generally cannot utilize their leverage to restore
the territorial integrity of Lebanon, which has offended
nobody. It is the hope of my delegation that the call on
Israel by the Council, through the President, to desist from
interfering with UNIFIL’s operations in Southern Lebanon
will be followed by pressure on Israel to be less belligerent,
not only in Lebanon but throughout the Middle East.
LEPRETTE
(France)
(interpretation
fkom
On 18 November the Secretary-General issued an
interim report under resolution 434 (1978) concerning the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. My Government
wishes to congratulate him and to thank him for the skilful
and objective manner in which he has once again carried
out his task. We see from his analysis that in the last two
months UNIFIL’s
commanders have spared no effort,
87. Mr.

Rench):

82. Th.e issue as we see it, and as we have seen it all these
years, is whether the Security Council will continue to fold
its arms and allow Israel to persist in its brazen acts of
defiance and intransigence. The Council must now act-and
9

within the framework in which we had placed their task, to
achieve progress with respect to the implementation of
resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978) and 434 (1978). Those
efforts, however, have not led to any marked improvement
in UNIFIL’s deployment, nor have they enabled the Force
to take up positions throughout the area from which the
Israeli army withdrew in June 1978 to make way for the
Lebanese de facto armed groups. It is obvious, in fact, that
it was precisely in that sector that UNIFIL elements were
the object of acts of harassment some of which, on 16 and
25 October, assumed a serious character.

officers, will be able to be consolidated, and to make it
possible for the authority of the Government of Lebanon
to be extended to Southern Lebanon. By “all involved”, we
mean all the organized Lebanese and Palestinian groups in
the area and all Governments having influence on the
situation there.
93. While sharing the concern for the lack of progress in
WIFIL’s
area of operation, my Government believes it
worthy of note that UNIFIL has been successful in making
possible the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from Southern
Lebanon. It has done much to promote stability and
security there. To achieve these objectives requires full
co-operation. They cannot be achieved when the de facto
forces mentioned by the Secretary-General cause so much
interference with UNIFIL’s operations, ignoring the fact
that UNIFIL is in Lebanon in the interests of Lebanese
citizens and ignoring UNIFIL’s clear record of accomplishment in this respect.

88. The report shows unambiguously that the Lebanese de
facto armed groups responsible for those incidents enjoy
the sLIpport of Israel. The Secretary-General has informed
us that he awaits replies to the detailed suggestions he made
concerning a new deployment of the Force in the area, in
accordance with the objectives and tasks which the Council
has entrusted to it. We also await those replies with interest.
We shall follow very closely the measures that may be taken
which would enlighten us on the degree of hope with which
we can envisage the future role of the peace-keeping forces
in the Middle East.

94. It is clear that Israel has influence on these groups and
the ability to exercise greater influence than it has done SO
far. We believe that Israel has a duty, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions, to assist UNIFIL in fulfilling
its mandate.

89. The French authorities address a further pressing
appeal to the interested parties to heed at last the voice of
reason and to abide by the decisions of the Council. That is
why my delegation gave its full support to the statement
read out by the President of the Council.

95. In this connexion, I would note that several of those
who have spoken here today-and perhaps this may become
true also of several of those who have not yet spoken but
will shortly address the Council-have used language and
expressed ideas and judgements with which the United
States definitely does not associate itself. In particular,
several have used the words “condemn” or “condemnation” and various parallel phrases to characterize the
consensus statement today. These words appear nowhere in
the, statement, and that is not accidental. Rather, the
Council has expressed deepest concern and has called upon
all concerned, particularly Israel, to extend full cooperation to UNIFIL. The significance of this call by the
Council is clear enough and it serves no good purpose for
representatives here to escalate the rhetoric and thus
misstate the import of today’s action by the Council. This is
a serious question, and I am confident that all concerned
will take seriously the carefully measured language pronounced here today by you, Mr. President.

90. The relative calm that has reigned at Beirut since the
implementation of the cease-fire on 7 October has permitted the Lebanese Government concomitantly to undertake efforts to reassert its authority. My delegation wishes
to stress the importance it attaches to ensuring that no
faction, no party and no country shall hinder that essential
action. It is in fact the only action likely to preserve
Lebanon from the outbreak of new bloody confrontations
which would again impose untold sufferings on the civilian
population. That action is moreover essential to the
restoration of Lebanese sovereignty over the entire territory. My Government reiterates today its support of the
Lebanese authorities in that long and difficult task.
91. The French Government wishes to pay an especially
warm tribute to the Commander of the Force, MajorGeneral Erskine, as well as to the officers, men and civilian
personnel of UNIFIL. They are all fulfilling their task in an
exemplary manner in conditions which, as we know, have
at times been difficult. For this we thank them.

96. It would not, of course, be fair or accurate to ascribe
current problems solely to Israel’s action or inaction, for
Southern Lebanon represents but one aspect of Lebanon’s
plight. The situation in Lebanon is complex and difficult.
Other Governments, which are friends of Lebanon, also
bear responsibility for co-operating in finding a solution to
that country’s difficulties. The Council, which only a few
months ago acted to promote a cease-fire and an end to the
bloodshed in central Lebanon, has acknowledged that fact,
as have those countries which are supporting an important
resolution in the General Assembly designed to improve the
effectiveness of humanitarian and developmental assistance
to Lebanon. We are gratified that the cease-fire in central
Lebanon is holding. We believe it will continue to do so as
long as the Maronite militia and the Syrian elements of the
Arab deterrent force, which were in a bloody confrontation
prior to the cease-fire, continue to exercise restraint. The
Secretary-General’s report makes it clear that firm peace

92. Mr. LEONARD (United States of America): Only two
months ago, in renewing UNIFIL’s mandate, we expressed
concern that the mandate had not been fulfilled in all its
aspects and we noted in particular that the restoration of
effective Lebanese governmental authority in Southern
Lebanon had not yet been accomplished. My Government
shares the concern of other members of the Council that, as
is indicated in the Secretary-General’s report, little progress
has been made in this regard. Once again, we join in the call
for co-operation with UNIFIL by all involved, This cooperation is vital in order to ensure that the relative
stability now existing in the UNIFIL area, brought about
by the outstanding performance of UNIFIL’s men and
10

will come to all of Lebanon only when its Government is
able to operate independently, effectively and free from
civil strife. Efforts are now under way towards that
objective, and we are encouraged by the sense of purpose
with which President Sarkis and his colleagues, working
with others, are attempting to rebuild the nation and
promote national reconciliation. My Government will do all
it can to assist in this important effort and we urge all
involved to continue this work with persistence, vigour and
strength of will. I emphasize the importance of this effort,
because it is directly relevant to our discussion of UNIFIL
today and to the ability of the central Government to
re-establish its authority in the South.

echo in an Organization which has proclaimed peace to be
synonymous with humansurvival.“*
Her words are more timely today than before. We extend
our condolencesto the people of Israel for their sad~loss.
101. Mr. CHADERTON (Venezuela) (interpretation from
Spanish): When Venezuela voted in favour of resolutions
425 (1978), 426 (1978) and 434 (197X), it did so in the
conviction that the presenceof a United Nations interim
force in Southern Lebanon would prevent a deterioration
of the already delicatesituation in the area.Unfortunately,
the objectives for which UNIFIL was set up have not been
fully achieved, and we are witnessingits transformation
from an interim measureinto an almostpermanent one, if
we bear in mind the fact that nine months have elapsed
since its establishmentand that lessthan a month remains
before its mandate expires. It thus has less than one
month in whi$h to accomplishitstask.

97. While this effort proceeds, it is incumbent upon all
involved to assist UNIFIL in preparing the way for the
extension of central governmental authority into the area.
UNIFIL, as its name indicates, is only an interim force; it
cannot supplant the Lebanese Government, and progress
towards fulfilment of the third part of its mandate must
surely be made-and quickly. There are numerous ways of
promoting this progress. Certainly, UNJFIL’s
area of
operation must be expanded in the South, and its freedom
of movement must be assured. At the same time, an
increasing Lebanese governmental presence should be developed in the area, whether through units of the Lebanese
Army, which is now being reconstructed, through increased
Lebanese police authority in the area, through greater
numbers of Lebanese civil authorities dealing directly with
the population, or by a combination of all these steps.

102. The delegation of Venezuela wishes to make its
position clear. UNIFIL has not fully accomplishedthe task
entrusted to it by the Security Council because it has
lacked the necessaryco-operation of all the parties and
Governments involved, particularly as the result of the
obstaclesplaced in the way of its full deployment in the
area covered by the mandateand owing to the emergence
of new elementswhich hamper its task. We consider that
that co-operation, especially on the part of Israel, is
indispensablefor the achievementof the full deployment of
the Force and the gradual restoration of the authority and
sovereignty of the LebaneseGovernment in the area of
operation, in conformity with the aforementioned resolutions.

98. ’ This development will require resolve on Lebanon’s
part and maximum co-operation and assistance frcfm all
those interested in advancing Lebanon’s stability. This will
also be ‘the kind of progress which, together with the
strengthening of a central Government acting purposefully
to unite the country, can bring about the advancement of a
strong and united Lebanon. Members of the Security
Council, Lebanon’s friends and neighbours and all factions
in Lebanon itself have a grave responsibility in this
endeavour, and we call upon all to join together to achieve
this goal.

103. For the present, we are comforted by the thought
that, as stated in the Secretary-General’sreport, particular
attention is being paid to efforts to improve UNIFIL’s
ability to protect all elementsof the civilian population,
among which, as noted by the Secretary-General, there
could be a loss of confidence in UNIFIL. This wouid be
regrettable, since in such situations it is the civilian
population and its property that are generally hit the
hardest.

99. I should like now to turn briefly to another matter
which has already been noted today in, I am afraid, a very
tasteless and regrettable manner. Several hours ago, we
learned of the death of the former Prime Minister of Israel,
Golda Meir. We take the occasion of this meeting to express
our profound regrets on the passing of that international
stateswoman.

104. Anything that may be said in the debates in the
Council will avail us very little unlessUNIFIL obtains the
support we demand. If it is denied, the Lebanesepeople
would be inexorably condemned to live in a permanent
situation of tension and suffering, a state of affairs which
our Organization mustprevent.

100. As Prime Minister, Golda Meir led Israel through
many of its most trying years. Addressing the General
Assembly on 9 October 1962, she said:

105. The Venezuelan delegationwishesto associateitself
with those who have paid tribute to UNIFIL’s civilian and
military personnelfor the courageand devotion with which
they ate endeavouringto fulfil their mandate, as well asto
those States providing contingents or someother form of
co-operation to UNIFIL.

“My Government rejects war as a means of settling
disputes.
‘L. . .

106. Similarly, we wish to expressour appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his continued endeavours to bring

“ . . . As long as negotiation is sought, there is hope.
Those who rule out negotiation in the Middle East . . .
should know that their attitude is irrelevant to the basic
theme of the international community and can have no

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 1148th meeting,
paras.168 and 209.

11

Army-a somewhat strange relationship, if I may say so,
whereby Israel provides logistic and other forms of support
to them but claims inability to control or influence them.
That claim is obviously unacceptable. Israel does not need
lessons in the not-so-gentle art of applying pressure.

about a change for the better in the situation in Lebanon
and for keeping a watchful eye over events in the area.
107. ‘Lastly, we also wish to express the hope that
Lebanon-the cradle and example of culture and civilization-may recover the peace to which it is entitled and
rebuild its life, free from outside interference, in prosperity,
democracy and freedom throughout its territory.

114. The Secretary-General’s report states bluntly that an
essential precondition for the success of UNIFIL is the
co-operation in particular of the de facto armed groups and
the Government of Israel. Resolution 425 (1978) has
prescribed the role for UNIFIL in the wake of Israeli
withdrawal, a role which was agreed to by Israel but which
could not be fulfilled because Israel handed over the areas
vacated by it to the so-called de facto armed groups.
Perhaps the resolution should have clearly called upon
Israel to hand over to UNIFIL the areas vacated by it. The
absence of such a clear directive is obviously being
exploited by Israel.

108. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members-of-the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Israel in which he asks to be invited to
participate in the discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice and with the consent of the Council, I propose to
invite the representative of Israel to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hum (Israel) took
the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

115. However, the Council did not authorize Israel to
hand over the vacated areas to local armed groups of its
own choice. The fact that Israel did so is surely not a very
responsible act, because it nullifies the very act of withdrawal. Israel’s presence is now masked by the so-called de
facto armed groups, and that surely constitutes a clear
violation of the spirit of resolution 425 (1978). Israel
cannot possibly make a virtue of its withdrawal by
perpetuating the occupation of parts of Southern Lebanon
by its friends or allies.

109. Mr. JAIPAL (India): I would begin by expressing our
appreciation of the frank and objective report of the
Secretary-General and extend our full support to him and
his dedicated officers for their determined and patient
efforts to fulfil the difficult mandate of the Council.
110. I would also place on record my delegation’s tribute
to the splendid work done by the Commander, officers and
men of UNIFIL in a situation that is increasingly hostile to
them.

116. In our view, it is necessary for the Council to clarify
its intention by calling upon Israel to facilitate the taking
over of Southern Lebanon by UNIFIL and also to cease its
support and assistance to the de facto armed groups.
Nothing less would enable UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate in
peace and with honour. But it would seem that Lebanon is
being regarded by some as just another piece on the
chessboard of the Middle East-a piece that is not yet ready
to be moved. Meanwhile, the Council and UNIFIL remain
inactive in the face of blatant violations of resolution
425 (1978). The Council surely cannot afford to jeopardize
either the presence or the credibility of UNIFIL. The
Council should warn Israel and other parties concerned that
unless their co-operation is forthcoming for implementing
resolution 425 (1978) UNIFIL’s mandate will not be
renewed and the Force will be withdrawn.

111. It needs to be brought home once again to Israel that
it had freely accepted the induction of the Force into
Lebanon, as well as its mandate, and therefore the United
Nations has every right to expect Israel to co-operate fully
with UNIFIL in the achievement of the objectives laid
down in resolution 425 (1978). But such co-operation has
not been forthcoming.
112. After a lapse of more than six months the United
Nations Force is still being harassed, fired upon, abducted
and generally prevented from deploying fully in Southern
Lebanon. If that sort of thing is going to continue, there is
no reason why we should allow the United Nations
peace-keeping force to remain there. UNIFIL should either
be withdrawn
or strengthened and converted into an
enforcement group under Chapter VII of the Charter. We
should naturally prefer the former course of action, that is,
the withdrawal of UNIFIL. There is a limit beyond which
the Council should not permit a poorly equipped United
Nations peace-keeping force to be subjected to attacks by
better equipped forces with little respect for the authority
of the United Nations.

117. My delegation reluctantly agreed to the consensus
statement read out by the President. While we are duly
impressed by the firmness of the President’s English voice,
we are not as impressed by the content of the statement.
For one thing we would have preferred the form of a
resolution; for another thing the statement should have
included a clear call to Israel to do two things: first, to
cease such logistic and other forms of support to the de
facto Lebanese armed groups and, secondly, ‘to facilitate
the taking over by UNIFIL of Southern Lebanon from
those armed groups.

113. There is at present a more or less stable deadlock,
The Secretary-General has said that the full deployment of
UNIFIL and the restoration of the authority and sovereignty of the Lebanese Government in Southern Lebanon
have been blocked by superior forces. Those forces are able
to block the implementation of resolution 42.5 (1978) only
because they enjoy a special relationship with the Israeli

118. In making these observations, we are not unaware of
the incidents caused by other parties which have been
termed by the Secretary-General’s report relatively minor.
However, a beginning has to be made somewhere and, in
our opinion, it has to be made in Southern Lebanon. Israel
12

has the major role to play in reversing the situation caused
by its invasion of Lebanon, and Israel’s good faith is now
being put to the test.
119. Our principal concern is the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and we should
like to see the elimination from Lebanon of all forms of
foreign interference so that national reconciliation becomes
feasible in conditions of relative peace and stability.
120. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I now call.
121. Mr. TUl?NI (Lebanon): Security Council meetings on
Lebanon seem to be in the process of becoming a periodic
feature of the Organization and they also seem somehow to
become repetitious. Yet, we are particularly rewarded by
the fact that the present meeting is held under your
chairmanship, Mr. President, while you also preside over the
European Economic Community group, I shall not dwell on
the relationship of Europe to Lebanon or Lebanon to
Europe-named after our Phoenician goddess Europa. My
reference to history is merely intended to place our debate
in what may, today, be a most significant context.
Lebanon, along with other States, was privileged to
sponsor the European group’s resolution on peace keeping.
We were thus emphasizing our confidence in the capability
of soldiers from all over the world, particularly from
Europe, and more particularly from France, to promote
with us-in Lebanon, the Middle East or Africa-a new
dimension of United Nations partnership in establishing
international law, order and security.
122. But what value will resolutions have if, while we are
here engaged in voting, the very credibility of “our soldiers
for peace” is being subjected to systematic erosion and
decisions of the Council are challenged as never before?
123. I submit that what is at stake here today is indeed
the credibility of peace keeping. My first reference to the
interim report of the Secretary-General now under consideration by the Council will therefore be to the very clear
and unequivocal warning-and I repeat “warning’‘-that
the
report delivers. Are we not told in so many words-and I
quote inter aliu-that
non-compliance with resolutions
425 (1978),
426 (1978)
and 434(1978),
the nondeployment of UNIFIL
and further escalation of the
conflict will not only imperil human lives, both civilian and
military, but will also have most serious consequences and
lead to grave dangers?
124. I need not quote any further from the interim report,
nor do I wish to burden your debate with additional facts,
figures and dates which will duplicate those which some
representatives here have already given. Every hour of every
day of every month there has been proof after proof that
Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon on 13 June was only a
fiction and that Lebanese territorial integrity and sovereignty is subject to constant violation. Through what
UNIFIL calls so diplomatically the “Lebanese de facto
forces” Israel has in fact achieved one of two things, or
probably both: pushed its real border further north into
our country and established through occupation by proxy a
shadow client mini-State. That, and nothing else, is the real

mean.ing of what the Secretary-General confronts us with in
unprecedented clarity and accuracy.
125. When RSOlUtiOn
434
(1978)
was
adopted
in this
chamber over two months ago, the general sentiment was
preCiSdy
that no loss of confidence in UNIFIL should be
allowed. The term of the renewed mandate was shortened
to fOUr mOrIthS
Only
and we a11agreed that we should
convene again in mid-term to assess and evaluate what
would have already been achieved and to decide further
what best should be done.
126. We now know the facts. We also know beyond
question that one Member State, the State of Israel, is
defying peace-keeping, the Security Council, the forces of
the United Nations, the countries which have contributed
their men to those forces and all those who have made this
whole enterprise possible by putting both their resources
and their political prestige at the disposal of the Council
and the Secretary-General.
127. SO, we are compelled to ask in all candour and
responsibility, how much longer can we all, and the world,
tolerate this situation, sitting here almost helplessly, renewing the mandate of international forces that we thus
condemn to’ becoming gradually the tacit accomplices of
aggression? In the report of the Secretary-General there
seems to be a very simple yet determined reply which I beg
to underline:
“Nor should UNIFIL’s attitude of restraint be mistaken
for lack of determination to carry out the mandate
entrusted to it by the Security Council.” [S/12929,
para. 19-J
128. UNIFIL,
the Security Council and peace-keeping
alone are not at stake. There is also at slake the fate of a
country, my country, another State Member of the United
Nations, peace-loving Lebanon, its land and its people.
129. I know what many will say, n’ot only the sceptical,
the pharisees, and the sophists, but also some of those who,
while meaning well, cannot grasp the full implications of
what is happening today in the South. Hence, we are
gratified and reassured that the Secretary-General should, in
his present and past reports, have taken into consideration
the effect of “the tragic developments at Beirut” on “the
situation in Southern Lebanon which . . . is closely linked
to the situation in Lebanon as a wholc”/ibid., para. 141.
130.
Yet it is also clear by the mere description of the
facts that responsibility for obstruction, even when done by
and through the ?/e facta armed groups”, lies With krael
and Israel alone.

131. Let me be still more explicit. It is my Government’s
clear understanding, shared by our numerous friends who
have observed the scene and many of whom have testified
here, that, were it not for Israel, the situation ir Southern
Lebanon both de facto and de jure would be very different
indeed. Israel seems to have opted for continued war in
Lebanon while appearing to seek peace elsewhere. Through
Southern Lebanon and its organic “link” with the Lebanese
tragedy, Israel seems to be determined to maintain mY

country
bility.

peace standing bravely with US in Southern Lebanon could
be a lesser protection than those who carry with them
bloodshed and destruction and devastation?

in a state of perpetual division, strife and insta-

132. Though I am not tempted here to restate the so-often
debated grand designs of Israel in the Middle East, I cannot
fail to note with the greatest concern that because of the
situation in the South, Lebanon’s natural position in the
Arab world has been gravely shattered, as has the confidence of its closest, most sincere and natural allies.

138. On 19 September, when the Council last met to
discuss Southern Lebanon, I gave my Government’s solemn
assurance that “we do not look upon UNIFIL
as a
permanent engagement” [2086th meeting, para. 331 and
that “we have no intention of maintaining the United
Nations Interim Force permanently on our borders or
inside our land” [ibid., para. 411. My Government is
gratified that the Secretary-General, in his report, should
have found it possible to echo our commitment and express
the hope that “in the relative calm which now prevails at
Beirut, efforts to rebuild the Lebanese Army will be able to
go forward” (S/12929, para. 141.

133. I do not propose to discuss today the question of
Lebanon as a whole. I have done so sufficiently where and
when it was appropriate. My Government is clear on that
and the people of Lebanon have now expressed beyond any
question their genuine, irrevocable and unanimous determination to restore peace, to reconcile, to preserve
Lebanon’s unity, its independence and sovereignty, to
search for a new national compact, and to reconstruct both
OUT cities and our democratic institutions.

139. My delegation is empowered to inform the Council
and the Secretary-General that, in a modest way, the
Lebanese Army is now prepared to start assuming limited
responsibilities, in conjunction with UNIFIL, and within
the terms of reference approved in resolution 426 (1978).
A joint plan must be carefully worked out between the
commanders of UNIFIL and the Lebanese Army, probably
through a permanent working group at an appropriate
military level. We welcome any proposals from General
Erskine in this direction.

134. Through nearly five years of continued warfare
where each and all, internally and externally, have their
share of responsibility, the values and the ideals that were
our raison d’&tre were as imperilled as our land, let alone
Our very existence. Even our history seemed questionable in
the eyes of the world, let alone our future. Yet we are
determined to survive: so, give us back our land!
13.5. These are very difficult days for us in Lebanon,
probably the most difficult days since we regained our
independence 35 years ago. We know and we admit in all
candour and honesty that there are still problems that may
justify the very special concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report for the “civilian population” in some
parts of Southern Lebanon. Yet we do not think that these
problems can or will ever be solved in say, Marjayoun. So
Marjayoun will have to come to Beirut with its problems,
rather than expect to become a capital of its own to which
Beirut will have to go.

140. We sincerely hope that a new and fresh start can now
be tried, in which we shall all avoid the tragic consequences
of the army’s movement towards Tibnin in August. Some
may have not been altogether displeased by the fact that
the army then successfully tested its unity and cohesion,
quite apart from testing Israel’s real intentions. But times
have now changed, and so must our scale of priorities and
norms of judgement.
141. It may be relevant to remember that the question of
Lebanon was started by war in Southern Lebanon. Peace
also, I am confident, will come from the South.

136. Therefore I hope to be understood and excused if I
use this unique and solemn occasion to address an appeal to
my brethren and fellow countrymen in the South: none
should be further misled or lured into false expectations
and prejudices. There can be no security for any, Christian
or Moslem, save in the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty
and authority; and there can be no such restoration of
sovereignty or authority as long as Israeli destabilization, in
the South and through the South, continues to disrupt
Lebanon’s unity, to destroy its national character and to
prejudice its chances of international concern, love and
assistance.

142. The General Assembly has been concerned this past
week with a debate on the question of Palestine, Nowhere
more than in Southern Lebanon does it appear how closely
the two questions are interrelated. Greatly as we have been
disturbed by the incidents between Palestinian armed
elements and UNIFIL reported to the Council, we are
pleased that the United Nations should have been able to
find satisfactory solutions and prevent infiltration of armed
personnel into the area under its control, thus maintaining
the peaceful character dictated by resolution 426 (1978).
143. If we choose to stress this success of UNIFIL, it is to
give further proof that United Nations peace-keeping can be
successful, that there can be adequate protection of human
lives and property in the peace zones and that confidence in
the determination of the United Nations and the world
community to maintain peace can be rewarding.

137. So I say to those who seek illusory protection and
reassurances, moved by an understandable obsessional fear
for their security: trust Lebanon, and Lebanon alone, for
therein also lie all the guarantees-the real and truthful and
practical guarantees-that
our unity and determination
carry in the world community. Indeed, what greater and
more effective assurances can they find outside the magnificent consensus that Lebanon has always found in the
Security Council, the General Assembly and everywhere
else in the United Nations? Could they, could we be so
blinded, so spell-bound, as to think that the soldiers of

144. While hoping that the Palestinians-all the Palestinians, both in the area controlled by UNIFIL
and
beyond-will not be led to a change of attitude, we wish to
reiterate in this chamber previous Lebanese appeals that
Lebanon should not again be the substitute arena for a
14

substitute war. We think this message should be clear to all.
We think further that the greater the response from the
Palestinians to this role of partners in peace, the greater will
be the chances of peace, all chances of peace: peace witF
Southern Lebanon, peace in Lebanon as an independenl
State restored to its unity and sovereignty, and, above all,
peace in the Middle East.
14.5. Before concluding, allow me to express once more to
the Council, to the Secretary-General and to the commanders and soldiers of UNIFIL, Lebanon’s feeling of
profound gratitude,

which is posed to the very existence of a large segment of
the Lebanese population.
152. In recognition of those facts, the Security Council,
more than eight months ago, entrusted the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon with a broad three-part mandate,
designed principally to restore “the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon within
its internationally recognized boundaries”.
153. With regard to Israel, UNIFIL’s mandate was specific
and limited. It was no more and no less than to confirm the
withdrawa of Israeli forces. That part of UNIFIL’s mandate
has been fulfilled, and so far it is the only part of the
mandate which has been fulfilled. The complete withdrawal
of the Israel Defence Forces from Southern Lebanon was
confirmed by the Commander of UNIFIL on 13 June 1978,
and recorded in the progress report of the SecretaryGeneral of the same day [S/1262O/Add.S].
As the Secretary-General’s spokesman stated on that day, and I quote
from the Office of Public Information
press release
UNIFIL/S:

146. My final remarks will include another quotation from
the report of the Secretary-General:
“ . . . the restoration of the authority and sovereignty of
the Lebanese Government in Southern Lebanon is in the
long run the only durable and reliable means by which
normality and security for all can return to that strifetorn area. It is therefore vital that all concerned should
co-operate to this end. Continued military resistance to
this effort can only be regarded as a deliberate defiance
both of the legitimate authority of the Lebanese Government and of the decisions of the Security Council.” (Ibid.
para. 20.1

“The fourth and last phase of the withdrawal
of the
Israeli forces from Southern Lebanon took place today,
13 June 1978. The withdrawal process was verified by
United Nations military observers. By 1700 hours GMT
all Israeli positions were evacuated and the Commander
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, MajorGeneral E. A, Erskine, confirmed to the SecretaryGeneral that the Israel forces had completely withdrawn
from Southern Lebanon as called for by Security Council
resolution 425 (1978).”

147. Mr. President, the statement in which you embodied
the consensus of the Council is primarily an endorsement of
this appeal. It is also a challenge to us all, for it asks each
and all of us to bear our share of responsibility. I earnestly
hope that when the Council next meets on this subject,
before 19 January 1979, this appeal will have been
answered, and that the need will not then arise for a
decision to carry peace keeping a step further, in other
ways provided for in the Charter.

154. However, it remains a matter for regret and indeed
grave concern that the other two parts of UNIFIL’s
mandate, as set out in resolution 425 (1978), have not been
fulfilled, namely, “restoring international peace and sccurity and assisting the Government of Lebanon in ensuring
the return of its effective authority in the area”.

148. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the representative of
Israel to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
149. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, let me begin by
paying my warmest respects to you as President of the
Security Council for this month. We are confident that YOU
will conduct the businessof the Council with absolute
fairness,propriety and wisdom,reflecting your outstanding
diplomatic skills, so much appreciatedby all of us at the
United Nations.

155. The problem of Southern Lebanon cannot be detached from the political tragedy of Lebanon over the last
few years. To try to do so is short-sightedand in practical
terms unproductive, becausea solution to the problem will
only be found when it is seenin its proper perspective.

150. The Government and people of Israel deeply appreciate the words of sympathy and condolence which the
representative of the United States addressedto them on
the passingof Mrs. Golda Meir, one of the great leadersof
Israel and the Jewish people and one of the towering
personalitiesof our time. I will refrain from commenting on
the tasteless remark made in this connexion by the
representativeof Kuwait. Memberscanjudge for themselves
its propriety.
151. Israel views with grave concernthe present situation
in Lebanon. That concern,which goeswell beyond the area
of operation of the UNIFIL mandate,stemsboth from our
own vital security considerationsand from the real threat

156. The roots of that tragedy are well known. They were
vividly described in the General Assembly, in October
1976, by the former representative of Lebanon, and I feel
obliged to remind the Council of Ambassador Ghorra’s
words, becausewe cannot afford to forget them. He put the
blame squarely where it belongs,with the so-called PLO, I
shallquote from his statementof 14 October 1976:
the origins of the tragic . . . events [in
Ledanon] . . . are to be found in the . . . Arab rivalries
and the assaultsperpetrated by Palestiniansagainst , , .
Lebanon and , . . its people.
“

“[There has been] constant Palestinianintervention in
the internal affairs of Lebanon and intolerable encroachment on its sovereignty.
15

“[In 19731 President Franjieh . , , denounced the illegal
occupation of parts of Lebanese territory by Palestinian
elements.

the country. However, for reasonswhich are well understood by the membersof the Council, but are far from
comprehensibleto world opinion, the Council has been
unable to discussthe situation in the north in any depth
whatsoever. Throughout the long and tragic civil war in
Lebanon the Council did not conduct a single formal
debate on the subject, even though, by any yardstick,
foreign intervention and threats to international peaceand
security were involved. When, on 6 October of this year,
the Council finally brought itself to adopt a resolutionon
the situation in Beirut and its surroundings(resohtion
436 (197811, it did so without any open debate on the
subject, and nervously avoiding even indirect referenceto
the outside State involved in the massivebombardmentand
destruction of civilian quartersof Beirut.

I‘ . . .
“. . . [The Palestinians]
increased the influx of arms
into Lebanon . . . They transformed most-if not all-of
the refugee camps into military bastions.
“ 1. .

common-law
criminals fleeing from Lebanese
justice found shelter and protection in the camps . . .
Those camps in fact became centres for the training of
mercenaries who were sent and financed by some other
Arab States . . . Palestinian elements belonging to
various . , . organizations
resorted
to kidnapping
Lebanese-and
sometimes
foreigners-holding
them
prisoners, questioning them, torturing them and sometimes even killing them . . , They committed all sorts of
crimes in Lebanon. . . They smuggled goods . . . They
went so far as to demand ‘protection’ money.

159. However, the Christian villagersof the south do not
suffer from any such inhibitions or illusions.They are all
aware of what has gone on in the north. They are all too
awareof the massacreof hundredsof their brethren and of
the continued devastation of Beirut sincethe last renewal
of UNIFIL’s mandatein September.After all, what seems
to be forgotten is that the Christiansin the south are
Lebanese, and that their perceptions and responsesare
conditioned in the context of Lebanonasa whole. They are
in continual contact with the north. Day by day, they
receivedetailedreports about what ishappeningthere. That
is what influences and determinestheir actions. Failure to
recognize this point constitutes a failure to grasp the
objective and psychological realities of the situation in
Southern Lebanon. For the present, the local Lebanese
forces defendingthe Christian and Shiah areasin the south
represent what they see,with good reason,as their only
defenceand, incidentally, operatein the only areain all of
Lebanonwhere Lebaneseauthority hasbeenmaintained.

“It is difficult
to enumerate all the illegal activities
committed by those Palestinian elements.
‘L. . . Whatever grievances the Lebanese may have had
amongst themselves or in their relationship with their
Government, the Palestinians had neither the right nor
the justification
to become a party to an;, i?ernal
dispute,
are] “-this
said two
years
“. . . [There
was
ago-“50,000
dead, 100,000 injured, 1 million Lebanese
Europe and
refugees in Syria, the Arab world,
America; . . . all that could not be justified by any
objective of the Palestinian revolution.

160. The Secretary-Generalhastaken cognizanceof this
fact in his last reports. In his report of 18 November,he
correctly states:

“

it became apparent that the Palestinians had
de&& on becoming a major factor in the battle for
political power in Lebanon. They openly allied themselves, and continue to do so to this very hour, with one
group of Lebanese against another.“2

“Inevitably, the tragic developmentsat Beirut, which
escalatedtowards the end of September,had their effect
on the situation in Southern Lebanonwhich, asI noted in
my last report, is closely linked to the situation in
Lebanon as a whole. It is my hope that, in the relative
calm which now prevails at Beirut, efforts to rebuild the
LebaneseArmy will be able to go forward. Progressin
this field would certainly facilitate the fulfilment of the
mandateof UNIFIL.” [S/12929, pm. 14.1

157. As Ambassador Ghorra indicated, from the early
1970s onwards, Lebanon lost much of its sovereignty over
its own territory to the so-called PLO. But, in the bitter and
brutal war in Lebanon between 1974 and 1976, the
country also lost its independence to Syria. During the war,
Syrian allegiances jockeyed and changed for reasons of
political expediency to suit Syrian purposes. At one stage
the Syrians represented themselves as protectors of the
Christians against the PLO, and did not hesitate at that
stage to bombard and demolish PLO strongholds such as
Tel el-Zaatar. Later, roles reversed, and they turned
mercilessly on the Christians, with horrifying results on
which 1 need not elaborate.

161. It is certainly the view of the Government of Israel
that the problem of Southern Lebanonis directly linked to
the situation in the country as a whole and that any
discussionof Lebanon must aim at creating a permanent
peace,and at restoring full Lebanesesovereignty,not only
in the south, but throughout the whole country, including
Beirut.

158. Just as it is impossible to detach the situation in
Southern Lebanon from the political circumstances of
Lebanon as a whole, so it is impossible to detach artificially
the situation in the south from the situation in the north of
2 Ibid..
paris.

Thirt,V-first Session, Plenary Meetings,

32nd

162. It is painfully clear to all observersthat the problems
of the LebaneseGovernment in reassertingits authority
over its territory are not confined to certain marginalareas
of Southern Lebanon.

meeting,

163. The sad but undeniable fact is that the country of
Lebanon is still under foreign occupation. Syrian forces,

60-68.

6

ostensibly there to keep the peace, dominate everywhere
and in every sphere of political life, The Council must
recognize that effective control by the Lebanese Government will be frustrated as long as it functions in the
gunsights of foreign artillery and tanks, As to the so-called
PLO, it still constitutes a virtual State within a State in
Lebanon, and the continued presence of its armed terrorists
constitutes a serious threat both to the authority of the
Lebanese Government and to the prospects for peace
throughout the region.

attention of membersof the Council the following report
carried by the AssociatedPressyesterday, 7 December:
“Major-General EmmanuelErskine, Commanderof the
United Nations peace-keepingforce in SouthernLebanon,
was quoted Thursday as denying that an airfield was
being built by Israeli-backedright-wing Christianmilitia
in the south.
“ ‘I am puzzled by the fuss raised over this airport
business’,Erskinewasquoted astelling the correspondent
of the independentBeirut newspaper,An Nahar.

164. Perhaps the most salient fact in connexion with the
present debate is that PLO armed elements have been able
to infiltrate back and been allowed to exercise control over
certain areas in Southern Lebanon, which continue to be
barred to the Lebanese Army. It is a fact that in trying to
reach Southern Lebanon, units of the Lebanese Army did
not dare to advance through the coastal sector of Tyre or
through PLO-dominated areas in the central sector of
UNIFIL’s area of operation.

“The GhanaianGeneralalsosaidthe airfield in question
was ‘a grassand tree covered strip left by British and
French forces sinceWorld War II’.
“Erskine said he flew several times by helicopter over
the areaof Khiam, two miles north of the Israeliborder,
and ‘I saw no activity to repair the strip or make it
operational. There is no equipmentin the areaeither’,”

165. In the light of their own experience, the villagers in
the south know that their own Government does not
possess at present the means to guarantee their security.
Their apprehensions have been exacerbated by the fact that
hundreds of members of the PLO remain in UNIFIL’s area
of operation. It is their well-founded fear that foreign
forces and more armed elements of the PLO will enter the
south in the wake of UNlFIL that has prompted the
villagers there to depend on themselves and to adopt the
positions they have taken. According to Radio Cairo Iast
Wednesday, 6 December, local residents have reported that
a clash took place in the western sector of Southern
Lebanon between UNIFIL and Palestinian terrorists. The
clash occurred when the UNIFIL unit tried to prevent the
terrorists from moving into villages controlled by UNIFIL
and setting up positions there.

170. Israel will continue to co-operatewith UNIFIL, asit
has done since the establishmentof the Force. It is just a
pity that once againno room was found in the SecretaryGeneral’sreport to acknowledgethe considerableassistance
and tangible aid provided by Israel to UNIFIL, facilitating
its entry into its areaof operation, installing facilitiesand
assistingwith communications,suppliesand logistics.Space
was found in the report to lavish praisein other directions,
but the fact is that UNIFIL could not function without the
co-operation it enjoys from IsraeI.
171. Israel appreciatesthe job that the commandersand
men of UNIFIL have beendoing sincespringof this year in
very difficult circumstances. Israel also believes that
UNIFIL is adequately equipped to fulfil its mandate.Israel
trusts that it will live up to all its responsibilities.At the
sametime, Israel recognizesthat, given the dimensionsof
these problems,the task of UNIFIL, with its geographically
limited mandate and its politically defined scope,remains

166. Whosoever wishes to suggest that the villagers’ fears
are out of place is taking on a grave responsibility. There is
nothing in the recent record of the area which should lead
them to expect otherwise.

awesome.

172. Moreover, let us have no illusionsabout the fact that
over the last two months a further dimensionhasbeen
added to the problems of the Force. The peaceprocessin
the Middle East has been making demonstrableprogress
and, in witness thereof, Syria and the PLO have taken the
lead, both in the Middle East and in the current session
of
the General Assembly, in the attempts to sabotagethe
ongoing peace negotiations. Since the PLO and Syria are
present and active throughout Lebanon, they will havefew
inhibitions about exploiting the situation there, both in the
north and in the south, to their own nefariousends.If
UNIFIL continues in the next few months to be as
unsuccessfulas it has been in its attempts to fulfil the
second and third parts of its mandate, the Councilis surely
duty bound to lay responsibility squarelywhereit belongs,
namely, at the foot of those elements so implacably
Committed to the frustration of peacein the Middle East.

167. Certainly, no one can seriously advise the villagers in
the south not to regard the threats to their existence
seriously so long as the Lebanese Government is unable, for
the reasons I have described, to reassert its sovereignty in
the south.
168. While Israel has made it clear that it cannot be
indifferent to the fate of the v’illagers in the south, it cannot
assume responsibility for their actions. They act in accordance with what they judge to be a matter of their own
survival, and very often in accordance with instructions
that they receive from Beirut.

169. In the course of this debate the allegation has been
made that the de facto forces in the south are building an
airstrip and port facilities with the help of Israel. I should
like to make it clear that these allegationsare absolutely
without foundation. Israelcan only expressits surprisethat
somerepresentativeshere are preparedto basethemselves 173. To detach the question of Southern Lebanonfrom
the situation in Lebanon as a whole will not enhancethe
on and give currency to maliciousrumours about activities
cause of peace, and to refuse to discussin complete
that are complete fabrications. I wish to bring to the
17

180. Syria is committed to one Lebanon, to the Lebanon
which we have always been proud of, to the Lebanon that
has always played and can indeed continue to play a
significant role in the Arab world, the role of the cradle of
Arab civilization and its openness to the world at large.

candour the massacres which have been perpetrated in the
north will do the Council no credit. Certainly the disingenuousness of resolution 436 (1978), concerning the
deteriorating situation at Beirut and its surroundings, is
preposterous in comparison with the heavy-handed, unbalanced and one-sided nature of the Presidential statement
which was read out at the beginning of this meeting.

181. As the Council will realize, the burden we are
shouldering in Lebanon is enormous. We responded to an
appeal by the Lebanese Government and the Lebanese
people. We are more than ready to leave Lebanon; in fact,
we are doing all we can to enable the Lebanese authorities
once more to exercise their authority over their whole
territory.

174. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic in which he asks
to be invited to participate in the discussion., In accordance
with usual practice, and with the consent of the Council, I
propose to invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

182. We appreciate indeed any help extended to Lebanon
to this effect in order to help it regain complete control
over its territory, especially in Southern Lebanon, where
Israeli arrogance is infringing not only on Lebanese authority but also on the authority of the Security Council, as
was said today by many members of the Council.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. El-clzoufi (Syrian
Arab Republic) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

183. My Government does realize that the future of
Lebanon depends on the imminent reconciliation among the
different parties in Lebanon. We fully support the efforts of
President Sarkis and his Government to achieve such a vital
reconciliation. We solemnly appeal to all factions in
Lebanon to engage in a true reconciliation amongst
themselves so that peace and tranquillity can prevail anew.
We solemnly state before this highly respected Council that
we shall help in good faith all of the Lebanese factions-and
I repeat: all of the Lebanese factions-to achieve their
reconciliation, which, in our view, is a prerequisite for
building a new Lebanon, an aim that we cherish and look
forward to.

175. The PRESIDENT: I invite the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
176. Mr. EL-CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity
to speak before this important body which is er.t:usted
with the maintenance of international peace and order,
with the defence of the victims of aggression and with the
task of acting in the best interests of humanity, as
stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations.
177. Notwithstanding
the allegations, distortions and
fabrications that we have heard from the representative of
Israel, I should like to state the position of my Government
regarding the situation in Lebanon in general and the
obstacles facing the full deployment of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon in particular.

184. We appreciate the fact that the world has indeed
shown keen interest in maintaining the hope of Lebanese
reconciliation and trying to promote that. But we cannot
fail to observe that Israel is actively involved in trying to
prevent Lebanon from achieving this goal. Reconciliation of
Lebanon and in Lebanon cannot be accomplished unless
the Lebanese Government can exercise its authority over all
Lebanese territory, and I think that the Security Council is
holding this meeting in order to help the Lebanese
Government to do so, in the face of Israeli defiance of the
directives of the Council, let alone Israel’s stated intentions
to dictate its will to the Lebanese Government.

178. It is an established fact that Syria and Lebanon have
always been sister countries. Since the independence of
both, they have agreed not to exchange ambassadors since
they regarded their relations as very special and their
bilateral relations as so important that they consequently
decided that those relations would always be handled
directly by their respective Governments. For the last 30
years, Syria and Lebanon have maintained that tradition.
We believe that the close friendly relations between Syria
and Lebanon should always be handled exclusively in that
way. We oppose any disruption of this state of affairs and
especially if we are to be lectured by the representative of
Israel about non-intervention and the like. The sovereignty,
national independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon
are as important to Syria as its own sovereignty, national
independence and territorial integrity,

185. As many speakers have said today, Israel has indeed
been guilty of impeding the efforts of UNIFIL, and I think
that it will persist in doing so unless the Council can act
promptly and effectively to face its expansionist schemes.
186. The Syrian Government, while appreciating the
statement that was just made by the President and the
report of the Secretary-General, cannot but state that the
Security Council should have acted in a more positive,
effective and thorough manner, The Council in our view,
should have taken a decision and not been satisfied with the
statement of its President-notwithstanding
our deep respect far you personally, Mr. President. The Council should
have ordered Israel to desist from creating more trouble in
our already troubled area.

179. We think, furthermore, that Lebanon is threatened
by Israeli expansionist schemes, exactly as we are threatened. As a matter of fact, we believe that the whole Arab
world, and consequently international peace, are threatened
by this Zionist expansionism.
18

187. Having heard the statement of the representative of
the United States, I cannot but draw the attention of the
Council to the fact that, through such encouragement to
the aggressor, Israel can persist in its present policies of
aggression, expansion and arrogance.
188. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait):
When we asked for a
meeting of the Council on the implementation of its
resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978), we opted for a
statement by the President. My delegation was the prime
mover behind that, and our concern was to avoid any
polemics or acrimonious confrontation. As I said in my
earlier statement, that sort of verbiage and linguistic
confrontation will not help the plight or the cause of the
Lebanese people, for whom we are gathered here to seek a
better future.
189. I heard the emotional statement by the representative of Lebanon-emotional
in the sense that it
stemmed from a genuine feeling of the fiasco in the
southern part of his ravaged country. Indeed, he said that
the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Southern Lebanon
was, to use his word, a “fiction’‘-in
other words, phoney,
non-existent, a sham. On the contrary, there are Israeli
forces in Lebanon which come during the day and
disappear during the evening. I will come to that later.

eventually
para. 9.1

released with

IDF

assistance.”

/S/12929,

That shows the power which the Israeli Government and
the Israel Army have on these rebels.
194. The Secretary-General also states:
“The relationship between the Israel Defence Forces
and the Lebanese de facto forces is a major factor in the
present situation. UNIFIL has from time to time requested the Israeli authorities to use their good offices
and influence in efforts to control or moderate the
actions of Major Haddad and his militia. The Israeli
authorities have indicated that they do not control the
Lebanese de facto forces. However, it has not been denied
that they provide them with logistic and other forms of
support. During the period under review, IDF personnel
were been observed on several occasions in Southern
Lebanon.” [Ibid., para. 17.1
195. Now, what are we to believe: the Israeli statement, or
the documents submitted by the Secretary-General on the
basis of on-the-spot information? The Israeli representative
states that the Israeli forces have withdrawn. Yet, here in
this document, the opposite has been confirmed: they
come and go and are having a “fling’‘-a Roman holiday-in
Southern Lebanon.

190. The representative of Israel referred to the port and
the airport, as I did in my statement. But I qualified it by
saying “according to The New York Times of 3 December”.
I did not invent that. The New York Times is not an Arab
paper; it is not a socialist paper, and it is not noted for its
special liking for the Arabs. So I qualified that and
introduced the source of my quotation. This is for the sake
of honesty and intellectual probity.

196. It is not my intention to engage any further in
unnecessary linguistic confrontation. We came here not to
discuss the Syrian or PLO presence in Lebanon but to
discuss the impediments and obstacles raised by Israeli
forces against UNIFIL deployment in Southern Lebanon.
That has not been touched upon by the Israeli representative. He spoke of the Syrian involvement and the PLO
presence in Southern Lebanon. He used the same hackneyed, worn-out arguments that we have heard in plenary
and in every committee at every session of the General
Assembly. He said nothing new.

191. Having listened to the long statement of the representative of Israel-since tastelessness has become the
watch-word today-I would qualify it merely as tastelessly
confusing and mischievously evasive. We came here to
discuss what?
The implementation
of resolution
425 (1978) and to examine the reasons behind the obstacles to full deployment of UNIFIL, All members of the
Council subscribe to the statement you so strongly and
powerfully read out, Mr. President, in which they call upon
all those involved-particularly
Israel-to assist, and not to
It is very
oppose, the full deployment of UNIFIL.
significant that the delegation of the United States subscribed to this, having full knowledge and information
about the situation along the Israel-Lebanon border.

197. There are really two important questions which are
relevant to the present debate. One of them is: will Israel
genuinely, constructively, allow unimpeded deployment by
UNIFIL in order that the Force may carry out its mandate
and fulfil resolution 425 (1978)? The second is: will Israel
stop its logistic and other supplies to those rebels? We are
waiting for the answers to those two questions.
198. That is the crux of the matter-not
the Syrian
presence or PLO misbehaviour, as the representative of
Israel has said. Let us hear the answers from the Israeli
representative as to whether Israel accepts the unimpeded
deployment of UNIFIL along the internationally recognized boundaries, as mentioned in the statement read out
by the President; and, also, will it put an end to its
uninterrupted
supply of logistic and other military assistance to those rebels? Those rebels are not an independent group; they are dependent, as I said in my earlier
statement, on their notorious Metulla connexion, The city
of Metulla is the lifeline for those rebels. Once Israel stops
supplying them they will fall like autumn leaves.

192. The two major points in Southern Lebanon are the
presence of Israeli military personnel and the continuous,
uninterrupted logistic support and other assistance given to
the rebels.
193. As to the presence of Israeli personnel in Southern
Lebanon, the report of the Secretary-General states that:
“UNIFIL
officers identified three personnel of the
Israel Defence Forces (IDF) in plain clothes on the
scene. . . . The Israeli authorities disclaimed all responsibility for this demonstration [that is, the tragic episode
of 16 October] . The four Lebanese liaison personnel were

199. I should like to hear the answers to those questions,
19

civilians still mourn their loved ones killed when Syrian
gunners poured 5,000 shells a day into heavily populated
areas.

200. The PRESIDENT: There are no other names on the
speakers’ list. I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as representative of the FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY.

209. Our memories are sometimes short in this Organization, but no one here has forgotten the desperate appeal
by the International Committee of the Red Cross on
5 October 1978 for

201. My delegation notes with considerable concern that
the Government of Lebanon is still facing serious obstacles
in its efforts to restore its authority in the southern part of
the country. In his report, the Secretary-General outlined a
number of difficulties confronting UNIFIL in its efforts to
carry out its difficult and responsible mandate. Unimpeded
freedom of movement is absolutely necessary for the Force.
The Federal Republic of Germany therefore calls upon all
parties involved, including Israel, to comply with resolutions 425 (1978) and 434 (1978) and to co-operate with
the Government of Lebanon and UNIFIL SO that the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon within its internationally recognized borders can
be preserved.

“an end to the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of
people in Lebanon. The civilian population, hospitals,
dispensaries, public shelters and homes-none have been
spared.
“On behalf of humanity, on behalf of, . . human rights,
on behalf of the children, women and old people who are
dying by the hundreds, we beg you [the President of
Lebanon, world Powers, the United Nations and others]
to act.” [S/12879, annex.]

202. My Government has repeatedly stressed its commitment to those principles. On 30 November 1978 the
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs, in addressing the
Federal Parliament, reaffirmed the statements which the
Foreign Ministers of the nine countries of the European
Community made on 6 July and 23 October that each and
every group in Lebanon should lend its support to President
Sarkis and the legitimate Government of the country in an
effort to create a situation in which all citizens can live
peacefully side by side.

Indeed, the Red Cross, usually most reticent about issuing
protests, nevertheless issued an official statement, which
“vigorously protested against the use in a densely
popuIated town of weapons causing considerable loss of
life among the civilian population”.
210. The sense of outrage at Syrian atrocities was shared
even by Syria’s erstwhile allies. On 4 October, Radio Cairo
reported the Acting Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia to the United Nations vehemently attacking the
President of Syria for misusing the Syrian troops in
Lebanon to crush his brother Arabs, while they were
ostensibly there to keep peace.

203. Only if all communities in Lebanon seriously adopt a
course of reconciliation will it be possible for the people of
that country to pursue, under the roof of the Republic of
Lebanon, their political, economic, social, cultural and
religious aspirations.

211. On 10 October,
reported:

204. We have noted with satisfaction that the cease-fire at
Beirut which was agreed upon on 7 October-not least as a
result of the efforts of the Security Council-has been
maintained during recent weeks. We are convinced that
stability and peace in Lebanon are an important factor for
progress towards an over-all solution of the Middle East
conflict.

“The Syrians used poison gas rounds in shelling various
areas. The symptoms of these cases are high temperature,
vomiting, diarrhoea and convulsions.”
212. Beirut will not quickly forget that barbarity, for its
eastern sector remains a moonscape, it.s once tall buildings
still gutted and blackened, its shell-cratered streets still
cluttered with the rubble of toppled houses and burnt-out
cars.

205. My statement would be incomplete without a tribute
of appreciation and gratitude to the Secretary-General and
his staff for their untiring efforts, The troops of UNIFIL,
which, despite serious obstacles, fulfil their task in an
exemplary manner, deserve our admiration.
206. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Council.

the Voice of Lebanon Radio

213. l%e Economist of London reported at the time, on
7 October 1978, that the Syrian strategy was deliberate, a
methodical attempt “to pulverize the buildings in such a
way that they cannot be easily repopulated”. The paper
went on:

of the

207. The representative of Israel has asked to be allowed
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and I call on him.

“Hence the significant fact that the Syrians have been
using a high proportion of phosphorus shells to cause
fires.

208. Mr. BLUM (Israel): There can be no one in this
chamber who has not been appalled and outraged by Syrian
excesses in Lebanon, both before and since the last renewal
of the mandate of UNIFIL. Beirut has not yet recovered
from the murderous bombardment rained upon it by Syriar
artillery just two months ago. Hundreds of Lebanese

“.. .
c<. . . This coldly cruel type of warfare involves the
application of military power against civilians to achieve
non-military objectives. It is intended to cause as much
20

*“’

disruption and suffering as possible by shattering the
structure of organized social life.
“...
“ . . I most of the people killed have been civilians.”
214. Is this a peace-keeping force? My delegation submits
that Syria’s record of brutality in Lebanon disqualifies that
country from making any comment on today’s proceedings.
Indeed, the agony suffered by the Lebanese population is
only compounded by the cynicism of the motives of their
assailants.
215. When Syria, under the guise of regional peacekeeping, massacres civilians in order to expand its control
over Lebanon, its true character and intentions are revealed.
Syria has never established diplomatic relations with
Lebanon, since that would prejudice its long-standing claim
to hegemony over that country. When I first referred to this
bizarre fact in the General Assembly on 13 October, the
Syrian representative replied somewhat lamely that “the
fraternal relations between our two countries were special
relations that made an exchange of diplomatic missions
unnecessary”.3 A statement to this effect was also made by
the Syrian representative here tonight. If that is how Syria
interprets fraternal relations, I should hate to be its brother.
216. Until the present Syrian leadership is disabused of its
outdated expansionist designs which, according to official
Syrian statements, also include Jordan and Israel, that
rigime will continue to stir up trouble throughout
Lebanon. Moreover, so long as that regime is implacably
’ opposed to the current peace process in the Middle East, it
will continue to exploit the situation in Lebanon in order
to try to torpedo any movement towards peace in the
Middle East.

224. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Kuwait, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right of
reply.

219. The larger Soviet design, as I have had occasion to
point out during the current session of the General
Assembly, is even more ominous. It is, as Soviet representatives have made clear both in the General Assembly
Thirty-third

221. In his attempt to subvert the peace process in the
Middle East and the spirit of Camp David, the Soviet
representative has once again seen fit to rail against the
Egyptian-Israeli peace talks which constitute, asI have said
before, the first step towards a peace settlement in the
entire Middle East. May I ask, does the Soviet Union’s
constant obsessionwith what it terms “a separate peace”
stem perhapsfrom the fact that the Soviet Union began its
diplomatic history with a separate peace treaty with
Germany at Brest-Litovsk in 1918? Thosewho live in glass
housesshould not throw stones.

223. Mr. EL-CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic): In the first
place, I did not intend to make any statement at this
meeting until I had heard the statement of the representative of Israel. I noticed, asindeed everybody noticed,
that he tried to evade the main issuethat the Council is
considering,the issueof the Israeli “occupation by proxy”
of Southern Lebanon, as the representative of Lebanon
described it. In fact one wonders how it is that the
representative of Israel is always so well armed with
quotations to prove any distortion he chooses to offer. I
appreciate the patience shown by you, Mr. President, and
by the Security Council in listening to such a long and
eloquent statement by the representativeof Israel without
its replying to the main question, the question of Israeli
guilt in disrupting the task of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, preventing its deployment in Southern
Lebanon and preventing the Government of Lebanon from
exercising its authority over its own territory. The questions put by the representative of Kuwait have not been
answeredby the representativeof Israel.

218. One of the representatives who has had some of the
hardest things to say about Israel in the deliberations of the
Council this afternoon represents a country which has
equipped those responsible for the tragedy of Lebanon and
for the consistent attempts to frustrate the cause of peace
in the Middle East. Who, one may ask, supplied the guns,
tanks and artillery pieces which have devastated large parts
of Beirut? Who, one may ask, has supplied the PLO
terrorists
operating throughout
Lebanon with their
Katyushas, Kalashnikovs and other playthings? The answer
is painfully clear, it is the Soviet Union.

3 Ibid.,

220. The situation in Lebanon may possibly be seen by
the Soviet Union as an opening through which it can
disrupt the peace process by proxy, through its agents
operating there. Members of the Council should entertain
no illusions on this point and should not be taken in by the
misplacedbluster of the Soviet representativeshere.

222. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic wishes to speak in exercise of the right of
reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

217. Israel continues to respect the full sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon and wishes nothing other
than to see the legitimate Government of Lebanon assume
full and effective authority throughout its territory. That
cannot happen while the Syrian occupation army remains
on Lebanese soil.

para.190.

and in the Security Council, to torpedo what they choose
to call “separate deals”. Members of the Council
Will
understand that what Soviet representativesreally mean is
that they are fundamentally opposed to the Camp David
peace process, even though they know full well that the
peacetreaty with Egypt is only the first step in the search
for a peacesettlement in the entire Middle East.

Session, Plenary Meetings, 34th meeting,

21

225. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I am not really speaking in
exercise of the right of reply assuch, but I have listened to
the representative of Israel, and againI say, in all honesty,
that his was a distasteful statement-distasteful in the sense
that it wasout of order.

comes here and sheds tears over the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. That is all I wanted to say.

226. We have been talking here about the mandate of
UNIFIL and the obstacles facing the implementation of the
mandate-and
obstacles exist because of the Christian
militia, supported by Israel. I directed two questions to the
representative of Israel. He evaded them, in his characteristic manner. Apparently he was, as the English say,
barking up the wrong tree. Instead of confining his remarks
to UNIFIL, to the substance of this debate, he continued to
talk about the Soviet Union and about the role of the Arab
deterrent force in Lebanon. What really captured my
attention were the tears he shed so profusely over the
sovereignty of Lebanon. Lebanon is wounded. Lebanon is a
mass of wounds, no doubt, but its sovereignty has been
mutilated and amputated by none other than the Israeli
forces in Southern Lebanon, by the Israeli presence in
Southern Lebanon, by Israeli collaboration with the rebels
in Southern Lebanon. Yet the representative of Israel

227. The PRESIDENT:
Lebanon.

I call on the representative of

228. Mr. TUfiNI (Lebanon): I have really nothing to add
to my statement, and I refuse to be drawn into distracting
the Council from the precise issue that is at stake here.
229. Mr. President, the magnificent consensus that you
expressed so well, with the co-operation and the unanimity
of the members present here, in support of the report of
the Secretary-General should remain the main focus for our
attention and concern. I want to urge once more, let us not
create in Lebanon a substitute arena for a substitute war.
The meeting rose at 6.45 p.m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00

74-82001-May

1980-2,200
