UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCI&
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

Af’R22 1988
UNlsA

2233.rd

MEETING:

GO&ljQN

24 JUNE 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .1.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13966). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2233)

SjPV .2233

?

. i;

NOTE

,,

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2233rd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 24 June 1980, at 11 a.m.
President: Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

20 June from the representative of Tunisia [S/14013],
which reads as follows:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philip
pines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with the
Council’s usual practice.”

agenda (SIAgendai2233)

3. The proposal of the representative of Tunisia is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
but, if approved by the Council, the invitation to
participate in the debate would confer on the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of
participation as those conferred on a Member State
when invited to participate under rule 37.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to’ the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

4. Does any member of the Security Council wish to
speak on this proposal?

was called to order at 11.25 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

5. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The
United States has said on many occasions that we do
not believe there is any legal basis for extending an
invitation to the PLO to participate in the debates of
the Council with the same rights of participation as
those enjoyed by Member States. On the other hand,
it has been our consistent position that the PLO could
be invited to participate under rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. Accordingly, when a
vote is taken on this issue we will vote against the
manner in which the invitation is extended.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13966)

1. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel,
Jordan, Morocco and Pakistan in which they request
to be ,invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

6. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak, I shall take it that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal of Tunisia.
A We was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia

At the invitation of the Prisident,
Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Shahi (Pakistan) took places at the Council
table and Mr. Elaraby (Egypt), Mr. Suwondo (lndonesia), Mr. Al-Ali (Iraq), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan) and
Mr. Laraki (Morocco) took the. places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

Against:

United States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated

The proposal
4 abstentions.
1

was adopted

by IO votes to I, with

i,

At the invitation
(Pulcstine Liberution
Council ruble.

have received the full backing of the ruling coalition
in the Israeli Parliament, has been referred to a committee for eventual adoption as a basic law. This
move to alter juridically the status of Al-Quds AlSharif has been followed by the provocative decision
to shift the office of the Prime Minister to East
Jerusalem.

of the President,
Mr. Dqjuni
Orgunizution) took u plure ut the

7. The PRESIDENT: I have received another letter
dated 20 June from the representative of Tunisia
[S/140/2], which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer for the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, to participate in the consideration
of the item entitled ‘The situation in the Middle
East’, in accordance with the provisions of rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure.‘*

13. The Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers has
viewed the introduction of this legislative measure
as a dangerous development that demands the urgent
attention of the Security Council. The Conference has
declared the firm opposition of the Islamic States to
any attempt by Israel to alter the status of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif or to Iegalize its annexation. The Islamic
Foreign Ministers affirmed, inter uliu, the determination of.a!! Moslem peoples and Governments to defend
their eternal and sacred right to Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and to the other Holy Places in Palestine. They have
called upon the Council to convene immediately in
order to examine the dangerous consequences of the
Israeli measure, to declare its annulment and, in case
of defiance by Israel, to impose against Israel the
sanctions stipulated in Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. The resolution of the Islamic
Conference also reaffirmed the commitment of a!!
Islamic countries to severing relations with any country
that promotes Israel’s design to annex A!-Quds AlSharif by recognizing it as the Israeli capital.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to the request.

8. The PRESIDENT: The Council is meeting today in
response to the letter dated 28 May from the representative of Pakistan to the President of the Security
Council [S/13966].
9. The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Pakistan, Mr. Agha Shahi, who wishes to
make a statement in his capacity as Chairman of the
Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers. I call on him.

14. This decision of the Islamic Conference is based
on one of the fundamental objectives enshrined in its
Charter. Since its inception, the Conference has
consistently opposed the Israeli occupation of Al-Quds
and the insidious design to annex it, along with vast
adjacent areas, under the guise of unification and to
destroy the historical personality of the Holy City.
Our steadfast opposition to these Israeli moves and
our abiding commitment to the liberation of Al-Quds
have been reflected in a number of resolutions and
declarations of the Islamic Conference of which the
Council is well aware.

‘10. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, it is a
matter of special pleasure for me to address the Security Council under your presidency. We have been
colleagues in the service of the United Nations, where
I have had the opportunity of knowing you as an
outstanding personality dedicated to the cause of
peace, humanity and international good will.
11. I wish to thank you and the other members of the
Council for responding to the request of Pakistan,
made on behalf of 39 member States of the Conference of Islamic Foreign Ministers, to convene an
urgent meeting of the Council to consider the dangerous situation arising from Israel’s latest moves to
consolidate its illegal annexation of the Holy City of
Jerusalem and to declare it as the permanent capita!
of Israel. These steps have stirred the deepest
emotions and indignation throughout the Moslem
world, and at the Eleventh Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers I was honoured, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Conference, with the mandate of
bringing to the attention of the Council the assertion
of principles reiterated at that Conference and the
expression of concern and anger that was contained in
the resolution on Al-Quds Al-Sharif adopted unanimously at Islamabad last month.’

15. In 1969 at Rabat, the heads of State and Govemment of the Islamic world who assembled to consider
the grave situation arising from the desecration of
one of the holiest shrines of Islam, the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, declared that Al-Quds AI-Sharif must be
restored to the status it had prior to June 1967, a
status which had been established and sanctified by
a history of 1,300 years. This same commitment was
reinforced at the Second Islamic Summit Conference,
held at Lahore in February 1974, which declared that
Israeli withdrawal from Al-Quds Al-Sharif was a
paramount and unchangeable prerequisite for lasting
peace in the Middle East.
16. The Tenth Conference of Islamic Foreign
Ministers, held at Fez in May 1979, was devoted to
Palestine and Al-Quds. It invited member States to
call upon the countries having diplomatic missions in
Israel to resist a!! pressures aimed at making them

12. The recent bill introduced in the Knesset
declaring Al-Quds Al-Sharif as Israel’s capita! has
added a new dimension to Israeli aggression and its
occupation of the Holy City. The bill, which is said to
2

transfer their embassies, consulates and offices to
occupied Al-Quds. The Fez Conference warned all
countries of the adverse consequences to their relations with the Islamic countries that would result
should they do so.

20. In total disregard of universal sentiment and
opinion regarding the status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem, Israel has persisted in its insidious design
to alter the status and destroy the historical, spiritual
and demographic character of AI-Quds Al-Sharif. We
are being asked to believe and to accept a number of
cynical contentions that are being advanced to justify
the Israeli claim to annexation of the Holy City and
its Judaization through sequestration of Arab property,
eviction of its Arab inhabitants, demolition
of Arab
homes and acts of sacrilege against Islamic shrines.
Those crimes are a violation of the unique religious
sanctity of the Holy City and a denial of the hallowed
symbolism
that it has radiated for more than
3,000 years. Jerusalem embodies the world’s greatest
spiritual tradition and the continuity
of the divine
message proclaimed
by Judaism, Christianity
and
Islam.

17. The Islamic Conference resolutions I have cited
should leave no one in doubt of the primary importance attached by the entire Islamic world to the
inadmissibility
of annexation
by military
conquest
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and to its liberation from Israeli
occupation.
18. The United Nations itself has adopted a number
of resolutions on this question. In this connection,
I may recall that resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254
(ES-V), adopted by the General Assembly in July 1967
at its fifth emergency special session, declared all
measures taken by Israel to change the status of
Jerusalem invalid and called upon Israel to rescind
those measures and to desist forthwith from taking
any action which would alter the status of the Holy
City. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 252
(1968), 267 (1969), 271 (1969), 298 (1971) and 446
(1979) have unequivocally affirmed the principle of the
inadmissibility
of the acquisition
of territory
by
military
conquest and declared totally invalid all
legislative and administrative
actions taken by Israel
to change the status of the City of Jerusalem, including
the expropriation
of land and properties, the transfer
of population and legislation aimed at the incorporation
of the occupied section. In almost all of those resolutions, the Council has condemned or censured Israel
for its refusal to comply with the Council’s resolutions.
In its most recent such resolution-namely
resolution 465 (1980) of 1 March 198O-the Council determined
.

21. Throughout the 13 centuries of Moslem rule over
Palestine, Islamic sovereignty over Jerusalem was
exercised as a sacred trust. It was in the year A. D. 638,
when
Caliph
Omar
entered
Jerusalem,
that
the Jews were allowed to return to the city and to
establish their synagogues after an exile of more than
500 years. The history of Muslim sovereignty over
Jerusalem is eloquent. testimony of Islam’s true spirit
as a religion of peace and toleration and its great
tradition of respect for other religions and their places
of worship. The unique spiritual heritage of Al-Quds,
which spans a period of more than 3,000 years, was
consistently
nurtured and preserved under Islamic
administration.
22. Today, that sacred heritage is being systematically obliterated by the obsessive Zionist scheme to
Judaize Al-Quds and the other cities of Palestine
such as Hebron and Nazareth. The Israeli announcement declaring the Holy City its permanent capital is
part of the same design. The sacrilege at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, the desecration of Al-Khalil
and plots to
demolish the sacred places of Islam in Palestine are
not simply isolated incidents but constitute composite
facets of the Israeli plan permanently
to occupy
Al-Quds and to destroy its historical and unique
spiritual character.

“that all measures taken by Israel to change the
physical
character,
demographic
composition,
institutional
structure or status of the Palestinian
and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, or any part thereof, have no
legal validity and that Israel’s policy and practices
of settling partsof its population and new immigrants
in those territories constitute a flagrant violation of
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian
Persons in Time of War* and also
constitute
a serious obstruction
to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East”.

23. Those intolerable
acts aimed at the mutilation
of the historical personality of Jerusalem constitute a
betrayal of a sacred trust, a profanity and a crime
against civilization.
It is the duty of all of us to put
an end to this iniquitous situation. Al-Quds cannot be
made the spoils of war. It must be restored to Arab
sovereignty.
As the Lahore Summit
declaration
affirmed,

19. The universal spiritual heritage and significance
of Jerusalem, and its pivotal importance to peace in
the Middle East, were given eloquent expression
by His Holiness Pope John Paul II in his address to
the, General Assembly
last year.3 Recently
the
European heads of State and Government who met
in Venice declared that “they will not accept any
unilateral initiative designed to change the status of
Jerusalem” [S/14009. para. 8.1.

“Al-Quds is a unique symbol of the confluence
of Islam with the sacred divine religions. For more
than 1,300 years, Muslims have held Jerusalem as a
trust for all who venerate it. Muslims alone could be
its loving and impartial custodians for the simple
reason that Muslims alone believe in all the three
3

prophetic religions rooted in Jerusalem. No agreement, protocol or understanding which postulates
the continuance of Israeli occupation of the Holy
City of Jerusalem or its transfer to any non-Arab
sovereignty or makes it the subject of bargaining or
concessions will be acceptable to the Islamic countries. Israeli withdrawal from Jerusalem is a paramount and unchangeable prerequisite for lasting
peace in the Middle East.”

the shelter of the veto, but instead to impress upon
their ally a modicum of respect for the norms of
international behaviour.
28. The Council must firmly and immediately act to
ensure that, pending withdrawal, Israel, as the
occupying Power, carries out its obligations in accordance with the United Nations resolutions and the
fourth Geneva Convention.* The Council must take a!!
necessary measures to ensure the preservation of the
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Should Israel
persist in its design to annex the Holy City and to
declare it its capita!, the Council must proceed directly
to the imposition of sanctions stipulated under Chapter VII of the Charter.

24. The Security Council must act and bring a!!
possible pressure to bear on the Israeli authorities to
rescind forthwith the administrative and juridical
measures taken by them to annex Al-Quds and to
destroy its character. The arrogant and contemptuous
statement made by the Israeli authorities two days
ago, announcing the wholly illegal decision to shift the
Israeli Prime Minister’s office to East Jerusalem,
provides a conclusive reason for the Council to act
urgently and decisively in the matter.

29. The Islamic nations cannot ask for less. The
cynicism with which Israel has carried out its expansionist policy in Palestine and strengthened its grip
over Al-Quds Al-Sharif in contemptuous defiance of
the Council compels us to demand that the firmest
measures be taken under the Charter. We make this
call because of our respect for the rule of law in
international relations, our commitment to the Charter
principle of self-determination of peoples, our concern
for a just and lasting peace and our deep reverence
for Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

25. The Council must clearly warn Israel that it can
no longer flout the verdict of the international community or present the world with anotherfair accompli; that it must respect the decisions of the United
Nations, to which it owes its very existence; and that
its spurious historical claim to the annexation of
Al-Quds is repugnant to international morality and
inadmissible under international law. This claim totally
negates basic human rights and the fundamental right
of selfdetermination of peoples.

30. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Minister for National Education of Morocco,
Mr. Ezzedine Laraki, who wishes to make a‘statement
on behalf of the Jerusalem Committee of the Islamic
Conference. I welcome Mr. Laraki and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

26. Justice and peace are inseparable. Peace cannot
be built on a foundation of injustice. The denial of the
national rights of the Palestinian people is the core of
the Middle East conflict. The deepening concern over
the crisis in the Middle East has been reflected in the
successive meetings of the Security Council convened
to deal with the series of aggressive actions by Israel
undertaken to perpetuate its military occupation of
Arab and Palestinian lands and to coerce the indomitable people of Palestine into accepting the coionization and usurpation of their homeland. This policy
cannot bring peace. It can only lead to ever greater
violence, bloodshed and conflict in the Middle East,
and destroy the lingering hopes of a just and lasting
peace.

31. Mr. LARAKI

(Morocco) (inrerprerarion

from

French): At this delicate juncture where the fate ofone

of the most important Holy Places of Islam is at stake,
I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for allowing me to speak in
order to express the feelings and, above a!!, the
concerns of hundreds of millions of human beings who
are deeply spiritually hurt and anxious about the future
of the prestigious heritage handed down by many
generations which have safeguarded it with vigilance
for centuries.
32. The Holy City of Jerusalem holds a very special
place in the hearts of a!! those who believe in one
God and for the Muslims, in particular. Jerusalem
was the first kibiah towards which the first Muslims
in history turned to pray and it is there that the chief
mysteries of the faith have been accomplished.

27. The situation calls for determined action by the
international community. The United Nations surely
cannot permit itself to acquiesce to expansionism.
The Security Council must reaffirm the overriding
necessity of ending the prolonged occupation by
Israel since I967 of Arab and Palestinian territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem. It is our inescapable duty to compel Israel to terminate its
aggression against the Palestinian people, whose
agony is deeply felt, particularly throughout the world
of Islam. In this regard, it is necessary to reiterate the
fact that the countries which support Israel bear a
special responsibility to contain rampant Israeli aggression and not to encourage Israeli intransigence under

33. For 14 centuries Jerusalem was a. unified Arab
city, throughout the Islamic caliphate and up to the
very recent 3ritish Mandate. Throughout that time,
the Holy City was a point of encounter and of mutually
enriching contacts for the various religious communities attached to it, without the obstacles or the
constraints unfortunately to be found in the region
>
today.
4

34. The undisputed historical truth is that the Holy
Places of the three monotheistic religions were never
so well protected or so easily accessible to a!! believers
than during the long period of Islamic responsibility.
It is precisely for that reason that mankind has
received almost intact, after centuries of ravages of
every kind, the whole historical and spiritual heritage
handed down to it in the land of Palestine.
35. In Jerusalem, that city of peace, peace has been
martyred, in the words of an inspired poet. The Israeli
occupation quickly imposed in Jerusalem hatred,
mistrust, a falling away from the most common acts of
devotion and even gratuitous violence and the murder
of innocents for which atonement cannot be made.
36. Slightly more than 13 years ago, specifically on
7 June 1967, a high-ranking Israeli officer peremptorily
but rather prophetically declared:
“The Israeli Defence Forces have liberated
Jerusalem. We have reunified the capita! of Israel,
a divided city. We have returned to this most
sacred site which we will never leave.”

,

That statement, made at a time when Israel was
annexing Jerusalem while claiming to be repulsing a
so-called Arab offensive, is unquestionably incriminating and indeed bears out the fact that, far from
seeking to safeguard what the international community
at that time hesitated to recognize as theirs, the
Israelis had in mind expansionist plans that were as
illegitimate as they were unbridled and detrimental
to the spiritual and material interests of the neighbouring Arab and Islamic-and above a!!, Palestinian-communities.
37. Once again this morning, as too often in the past,
the Council has heard the catalogue of violations,
expropriations, transfer of populations, destruction of
religious or private property, and transformation of
the Arab or Islamic character of the Holy City and its
environs. Entire districts such as the historic district
called Al-Maghariba or the Moroccan quarter, have
been wiped offthe map and given over to the bulldozer.
38. The deliberate burning in August 1969 of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, the main Islamic kiblah, represented
a painful challenge to a!! Islam and provoked universal
indignation the effects of which are today still far
,from dissipated. Following that criminal act, His
Majesty Hassan II, King of Morocco and Emir of the
Believers, interpreting the feelings of the Oumma, the
Islamic nation, that same year invited to Rabat the
first Conference of Islamic States. The Conference
was established as a standing organization devoted to
the defence of the sacred values of Islam, and in the
first place of the Holy City of Jerusalem and the
national rights of the Palestinian people, the principal
victims of international Zionism.
39. In the more than 10 years of its existence, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference has con-

sistently adopted courageous and resolute positions
to combat the multifaceted Israeli policy, which seeks
on one hand the continua!, illegal establishment of
settlements in the occupied Palestinian Arab territories
and on the other, with the same aim of absorption,
the gradual Judaization of Jerusalem, which is destined
to become the wrongful ,capita! of Israel.
40. That Israeli policy, based on obstinacy and the
flouting of international disapproval, led the Islamic
Conference to decide henceforth to hold meetings of
the Committee on Jerusalem at the level of Ministers
for Foreign Affairs, with His Majesty Hassan II as
its Chairman.
41. From its first meetings, the Committee on
Jerusalem decided on international action which
would be of a particular style and a new character,
so as to take advantage, for the sake of peace, of
special relationships long established and maintained,
notably with His Holiness Pope John Paul II, a man of
great prestige whose love of justice and mankind are
beyond doubt, and with heads of States who, in
particularly troubled international circumstances,
have been willing and able to take on responsibilities
for which mankind will be much indebted to them.
42. In answer to these efforts at pacification, which
called for reason, moderation and humility in the face
of the real problems which confront mankind, we met
only with arrogance, blindness and the spirit of
conquest.
43. Today, the Israeli occupation authorities are
determined to launch a new phase in the escalation,
a decisive phase since it might lead to the establishment of Jerusalem once and for a!! as the indivisible
capita! of the State of Israel.
44. What is still presented simply as a possibility fits
very neatly with what is known from other sources of
Israeli plans for the Holy City and the other occupied
Palestinian territories; and Prime Minister Begin has
quite recently himself explicitly corroborated a!! the
apprehensions we have had.
45. The fact that the Islamic Conference has resorted
to the Security Council today bears witness, in the first
place, to the seriousness of the situation, as it is viewed
by our organization, for the future of peace and
concord in that region. It also shows that our countries continue to fee! confident that this body will adopt
measures as called for by the situation with a view to
safeguarding the fundamentally spiritual and moral
interests of a large part of the international community.
46. In communicating with His Holiness Pope John
Paul II, His Majesty Hassan II, Emir of the Believers,
was well aware that he was addressing the successor
of Saint Peter in order to discuss a subject of interest
to a!! mankind, the subject of which was Jerusalem, a
Holy City many times over.

53. The very constructive vote taken recently in the
United States House of Representatives concerning
the unfortunate move by the Knesset gives ground
for hope that the- international community as a whole
will deal with those Israeli plans to impair the status
of Jerusalem.

47. With my mandate from His Majesty Ha&an II,
I believe that I am faithful to the feelings and thoughts
of almost a billion Muslim believers in saying in their
name to a!! those present that Jerusalem must be
saved, that devastation by the occupier must be
halted, that the Holy Places, Muslim, Christian and
Jewish, must be liberated from the sectarian grasp
of violence and repression, the aim of which is
illegally to expropriate them the better to isolate them,
and to change their character at the very probable
risk of destroying them once and for all.

54. We strongly reject the whole Israeli policy of
hegemony and annexation of the Holy City of Jerusalem and of any other occupied Arab territory. The
Islamic nation, which represents about one third of
mankind, protests these Israeli plans which are
detrimental to the status, character and institutions
of Jerusalem as guaranteed by the international community and will regard any change that may harm its
material and spiritual interests in the Holy City as a
provocation which will have unquestionable effects
on international co-operation; peace and security.

48. The Council has repeatedly considered this issue
and has taken a number of very brave and pertinent
decisions. In May 1968and July 1969, it declared itself
in resolutions 252 (1968) and 267 (1969) against the
legislative and administrative measures taken by
Israel at that time which affected the status of Jerusalem. In its resolution 271 (1969) of 15 September
1969, the Council unanimously expressed its indignation at the criminal burning of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Other resolutions followed, unswervingly condemning
Israeli initiatives tending to change the nature of the
status of the Holy City and other Palestinian townships
and advocating the implementation of the fourth
Geneva Convention.

55. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization.
56. Mr. DAJANI (Palestine Liberation Organization): Mr. President, we are pleased to see you
guiding the deliberations of the Council on an issue of
the utmost importance to us and to mankind as a whole.
We are confident that under your wise and able leadership the deliberations will be most fruitful.

49. The role entrusted to the Council by the Charter
for maintaining international peace and security is an
exalted one, but one that is also heavy with responsibility. We have the firm hope that the Council will
spare no effort to see that the Holy City of Jerusalem,
a city of peace, can regain and maintain that peace;
that the Palestinian people can return to their homeland and establish a respected national State; and that
the whole Middle East, delivered from fear, war and
violence can resume its role, both in the same way
and better than it did in the past, to consolidate
international peaceful co-operation.

57. The Council is meeting again to consider the
question of Jerusalem and it will meet again, as long
as Jerusalem remains under occupation. Indeed, as
long as the occupation continues, the occupiers will
commit crimes and the victims of the occupation will
suffer and will resist. Therefore our point of departure
in the discussion of any aspect of occupation is putting
an end to that occupation.
58. The issue under consideration in the Council
today is the bill before the Israeli Knesset proposing
passage of a basic law relating to the annexation of
Jerusalem as a new link in the long chain of crimes
committed by Zionism against both our rights and the
will of the international community. The heavy
suffering resulting from Zionist crimes in Jerusalem
affects both the Palestinian people and believers the
world over.

50. The Council, we are convinced, will live up to
its responsibilities in the face of the challenge which
has been facing the whole international community
for several decades. If it proves necessary, the Council will be able to adopt appropriate measures in
accordance with the Charter to put an end to that
challenge to the dignity of the United Nations.

59. For us, the Palestinian people, Jerusalem is the
capital of our homeland Palestine and it has always
been its symbol since our forefathers, the Arab
Canaanite Jebusites, established it over 3,000 years
ago in a distinc?ly strategic location consecrated to
God. Our founding forefathers gave it the name, “the
City. of Peace”. It was in Jerusalem, the City of
Peace, that our people worshipped the compassionate
God and glorified His name. I! was in Jerusalem that
they established their Arab Canaanite civilization. It
was from Jerusalem that the masses of our people
conveyed the message of morality, peace and love,
heralded by the divine religions believing in the one
God. Therefore, for the Palestinian people, the
liberation of Jerusalem is a question of destiny.

51. The task of the Council is all the clearer since
we have noted from very responsible sources the
adoption of positions which represent explicit disavowals of Israeli obstinacy and arrogance.
52. The position adopted recently by the European
Community on the Middle East question and on
Jerusalem in particular, despite its positive aspects,
apparently has not given full satisfaction, as had been
hoped. None the less, it is a very encouraging sign
that the decisive steps desired by the Palestinian people and the Arab and Islamic peoples will be taken for
the benefit of peace and peaceful co-operation in one of
the most sensitive parts of the world.
6

land of its people and the holy destination of all
believers.

60. Moreover, Jerusalem is the kiblah of the faithful,
the direction in which all believers in the divine
religions turn in prayer. It is the destination of their
pilgrimage to glorify the name of God. Therefore the
liberation of Jerusalem constitutes a basic issue for all
believers.

66. It would be redundant to detail the crimes committed by the Israeli occupation in Jerusalem. The
Council has on various occasions heard details about
those crimes. Recently it heard detailed statements
about the atrocities of the military Government, the
settlements, oppression and confiscation of land. It is
sufficient to note briefly that the Zionist invaders
have to an extreme degree attempted to destroy our
culture and used the most inhuman methods.

61. We in the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
representative of the Palestinian people, are struggling
with our eyes set on those two facts. Our destiny is
tied to the liberation of Jerusalem; its liberation will
bring good to all believers. We are proud that our
people have assumed throughout the ages their
responsibility of providing care and protection to
the pilgrims. We are proud of our cultural heritage,
of which the Jewish, Christian and Muslim cultures
are component parts inherited from ancestors who
upheld Judaism, Christianity and Islam. We, the
Palestinian people, are proud of the atmosphere of
I .toleration that has characterized their relations with
one another and their attitude towards the pilgrims
during their stay in the Holy Land.

67. Jerusalem has suffered a great deal of destruction. Its holy character has been distorted by the
establishment of concrete military structures. It has
been desecrated by the introduction of life patterns
far from spiritual values and contrary to all holy
values.
68. Today we witness the beginning of new measures of annexation and read about the determination
of the Israeli Government to transfer its seat to East
Jerusalem upon the demand of Menachem Begin,
which is an indication of his insistence on usurping
Jerusalem and challenging the will of the international
community as expressed by United Nations resolutions
and by international agreements, especially the fourth
Geneva Convention.

62. The agony of Jerusalem under Israeli occupation
is the direct result of the Zionist conquest of our
homeland, Palestine. The history of Palestine throughout the ages clearly draws a distinction between two
groups: the pilgrims and the conquerors. The former
came to pray; the latter came to usurp. The conquerors
came to confiscate property and oppress us. They
concealed their real aims behind religion. The Zionist
movement wanted to repeat what the European
crusaders had done nine centuries earlier. Our people
-Muslims, Christians and Jews-equally resisted the
Crusaders and the Mongols, some of whom were
Muslims. In both cases our people emerged victorious.

69. The Council is meeting on the initiative of the
Islamic Conference, which met last month at
Islamabad. Among other issues before it, the Conference discussed the question of Jerusalem and
considered it the central issue before the member
States in terms of its influence on all the other issues.
The Conference also observed that the recent Israeli
measures called for a stand by the international community within the framework of the United Nations.

63. Our people distinguished between persons like
Moussabeh Maimoun-Moses
Maimonides, the
Arab scholar of the Jewish faith-and Benjamin of
Tudela, who came to Palestine as a pilgrim, and
those Zionist invaders like Menachem Begin, the
terrorist who came from Poland and who led the
massacre of Deir Yassin, and Meir Kahane, who
came from New York full of hatred planning to blow
up the Al-Aqsa Mosque and several churches while
they were full of worshippers.

70. The concern of the Islamic Conference over
Jerusalem is based on two factors. First, the PLO is a
full member of that Conference; secondly, the Conference is the voice of the Muslim world.
71. Because of its concern, the Conference called
upon the international community to challenge all the
Israeli criminal measures of annexation in Jerusalem.
The Conference specifically called upon the United
States to shoulder its responsibility for the agony of
Jerusalem. It condemned

64. History distinguishes the constructive role of the
pilgrims, which represents cultural interaction and
enriches human civilization, from the disastrous effect
of the invaders, which represents cultural deterioration.

“all policies, activities, declarations and stands
of . . . certain forces and circles in the United
States of America that encourage the Israeli enemy
to escalate its aggression”.’

65. Clearly, because we are proud that Jerusalem
is the destination of believers from all over the world,
we shall do our best to meet the requirements for the
continued protection of the Holy Places. But in no
circumstances shall Jerusalem be open to attack by
alien invaders, nor shall its sanctity be a pretext for
conquest and usurpation of our homeland and our
culture. Over the ages Palestine has been the home-

The Conference also called upon the Muslim countries
to take a firm position vis-Avis the United States
Government and those forces by adopting concrete
and practical measures aimed at putting an end to the
continued Israeli aggression against the right of the
Palestinian people and the integrity of Jerusalem.
7

72. The suffering of Jerusalem under Israeli occupation is a matter of deep concern to the international
community as a whole. A few days ago His Holiness
the Pope reiterated, in the presence of President
Carter, that the resolution of the question of Jerusalem
was essential for the attainment of a just peace in
Palestine. Furthermore, the declaration issued on
13 June 1980 in Venice by the European Council,
which represents tens of millions of Christians, states:

interim and provisiona!“.s Yet the actual United States,
policy, which culminated in the Camp David accords,
is contradictory to the declared United States
position.
78. Perhaps the most dangerous aspect of United
States policy is that it has enabled the Zionists to
continue their occupation of Palestine and Arab territories and it has given priority to the Israeli concept
of security over the Palestinian rights of expression,
assembly, self-determination and sovereignty, as
we!! as over the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations which establish the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. The United States
has gone further in its collaboration with Israel: the
United States refuses to recognize the rights of our
people which are guaranteed by international agreements; it is even committed to an absurd policy which
rejects even a dialogue. In this connection, the United
States has made of itself a hostage to Israeli policy.

“The Nine recognize the special importance of the
role played by the question of Jerusalem for a!! the
parties concerned. The Nine stress that they will
not accept any unilateral initiative designed to
change the status of Jerusalem and that any agreement on the city’s status should guarantee freedom
of accessof everyone to the Holy Places.” [S/14009,
para. 8.1

73. Moreover, despite Zionist pressures, a number
of Jewish leaders and intellectuals have on various
occasions expressed their concern over what the
Zionists are doing in the name of Judaism. Recently,
the American Friends of the Peace Now Movement
published a statement signed by a number of American
Jewish personalities saying that continued Israeli rule
over more than 1 million Arabs in the occupied Palestinian territory was subversive.

79. Yet it is a source of satisfaction that some forces
have emerged among the American people rejecting
that official United States behaviour and tailing for a
policy based on the moral principles of justice and
right.
80. The Zionist concept of security is predicated on
the acquisition of more land, the subjugation of the
peoples of the region and the exploitation of their
natural resources. On the other hand, our conception
of security is based on peace and justice. Herein lies
the difference between the logic of the Zionist aggressor and the logic of human liberation of the Palestinian revolution. The usurpation of territory and the
practice of terrorism breed resistance by peoples
defending their freedom and dignity. Security cannot
be established at the expense of justice and the rights
of others. History is full of lessons for those willing
to learn.

74. The majority of the countries of the world have
defined their stand on what is happening in the many
relevant resolutions adopted by the international
community.
75. Given that degree of suffering imposed by the
Israeli occupation of Jerusalem and its people and the
deep concern of the international community, how can
Israel pursue its aggression and challenge the will of
the international community?
76. The experience of the past 13 years has demonstrated that Israel cannot pursue its aggressive policy
without the unlimited support of the United States.
Therefore, what is happening in our homeland is
primarily the responsibility of the United States.
Through United States support, Zionism is enabled
to implement its expansionist plans of building settlements and confiscating Arab land. Thanks to United
States support, Zionism can show contempt for Palestinian human rights.

81. In spite of our sufferings as individuals and as a
people and in spite of the failure of the United Nations
to implement its resolutions concerning our rights,
our presence here today is a reaffirmation of our
belief in the constructive role of the international
Organization in the search for peace and justice.
82. We should also like to make it clear that it is our
sacred right and moral responsibility to struggle against
the Israeli Zionist occupation and aggression. We are
proud of the heroic struggle of our brothers and sisters
against aggression. We strongly reject any and a!1
attempts to equate, or even to compare, our legitimate
struggle for self-determination and nationai independence with the aggression of the Zionists. That would
amount to equating the victim with the criminal. It
is high time for those who talk about the cycle: of
violence and counter-violence to stop this distortion
and condemn the aggressor.

77. The United States has a declared position on the
question of Jerusalem, contained in two official statements made before the United Nations by Arthur Goldberg in July 19674 and Charles Yost in July 1969
[1483rd meeting]. Both statements clearly consider
Israel as an occupying Power subject to the rules of
international law which prevent the occupying Power
from making changes in the legal or administrative
status of the occupied territories. Mr. Goldberg
expressed the insistence of the United States “that
the measures taken cannot be considered as other than

83. I should like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to the achievement of ajust and lasting
8

peace which fulfils our national and inalienable rights,
namely, our right to self-determination
and national
independence and our right of return, in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. This
position has been adopted by the Palestine National
Council, the supreme legislative body of the PLO.
The Arab States are also committed
to that peace.
They have expressed their commitment
in the resolutions of the Baghdad Arab Summit Conference, held in
November 1978.

only the historical, cultural and religious importance
of Jerusalem to the Islamic world, but also the right of
the Palestinian
people to exercise its inalienable
national rights.
91. My delegation cannot fail to note that Israel’s
actions-and policy in the occupied Arab territories,
including
Jerusalem, are the prime cause for the
aggravation of tension in the area. Israel’s decision to
annex Jerusalem is already giving rise to increased
anger and concern among the inhabitants
of the
occupied territories and, indeed, among the entire
international
community.
This decision will only
exacerbate the already tense situation in the region.
My delegation therefore wishes to call upon Israel
immediately
to abandon its decision.

84. While the PLO and the Arab States reject the
Camp David accords, which ignore our rights, we are
striving within the framework of the United Nations for
a comprehensive and just peace.
85. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Indonesia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

92. Furthermore,
measures taken by Israel which
change the legal status and character of Jerusalem have
long been declared invalid by the Security Council.
Indeed, the Council, in unanimously adopting resolution 465 (1980) last March, strongly deplored Israeli
practices and called upon Israel to dismantle
the
existing settlements and to cease the planning and
establishment
of new settlements in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem.

86. Mr. SUWONDO (Indonesia): First of all, I should
like to express my appreciation to the members of the
Council for affording me the opportunity to participate
in the deliberations on this very important matter.
87. May I also offer my warm congratulations
to
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of June. We
are convinced that your wisdom and diligence will
provide expert guidance in our present deliberations.

93. It is significant that within the past few months
the Council repeatedly has condemned Israel and
insisted on the restoration of the right of the Palestinians to determine their own future. The Council’s preoccupation with the Middle East issue reflects a
genuine concern that the mounting violence on the
West Bank is threatening the fragile peace in the
region. Clearly the principal reason for the recent
deterioration in the situation is the continuance of the
occupation. Thus, in resolution 471 (1980) the Council stressed “the overriding
necessity to end the
prolonged occupation of Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem”.

88. As a member of the Jerusalem Committee established under the aegis of the Organization
of the
Islamic Conference and in view of the resolution
concerning Jerusalem adopted recently by the Islamic
Foreign Ministers at Islamabad,’ my delegation finds it
incumbent on it to participate in the present deliberations. Our concern is further exemplified
by Indonesia’s membership in the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Therefore,
my delegation cannot remain silent regarding the events that have been unfolding with
respect to the status of Jerusalem.

94. The Government
of Indonesia has consistently
participated in the many deliberations
in the United
Nations and other forums held with a view to finding
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East through
effective implementation
of all relevant resolutions, as
well as through recognition of the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people. The termination
of Israeli
occupation is long overdue. It is imperative, therefore,
that the Council exercise its responsibility
and take
the necessary and effective measures under the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and, in keeping with its own relevant resolutions, achieve a just and durable settlement.

89. We have followed the various statements made
at recent meetings of the Council on the situation in the
Middle East. We have listened to them with close
attention, always in the hope and expectation that they
would contribute to finding a peaceful and comprehensive solution to the problem. It is obvious, however, that the situation has deteriorated.
90. My delegation
deplores the occurrence of a
number of disturbing developments,
in particular the
decision by the Government
of Israel to annex
Jerusalem and declare it Israel’s capital. The Islamic
Conference of Foreign Ministers meeting in Islamabad
last month adopted a resolution which unequivocally
set forth its position concerning the status of the Holy
City. It categorically rejected all illegal decisions by
Israel and the bill which stipulates that Jerusalem is
the capital of Israel. The Conference reaffirmed not

95. Finally, regarding the status of Jerusalem, which
Israel is now annexing in disregard of all Security
Council resolutions, my delegation believes that it is
important
that the Security
Council
should act
expeditiously
in this matter, for failure to do so will
only exacerbate the already dangerous situation and
lead to further tension, which we may find to be
beyond control.
9

96. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Israel
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of his
right of reply, and I now call on him.

the country and of Jerusalem,
Aeolia Capitolina.

98. I have asked to be allowed to speak today in
exercise of my right of reply to sound a note of
warning. A dangerous dimension has been injected
here into our discussions. We have heard in this
meeting, right from its beginning, the shrill voice of
hatred, incitement and fanaticism. As the representative of a people which throughout the ages has been
the traditional
victim and target of this despicable
phenomenon,
I feel in duty bound to caution against
succumbing here to an evil that has brought so much
misery not only in the past, but even in our own time.
Members of the Council need not be reminded of the
most recent manifestations
of this evil and of its
implications
for all of us.

101. One would have hoped that the Foreign
Minister of Pakistan might have directed his attention
primarily to the grave threats to his country’s sovereignty, integrity-nay,
to its very survival; and we all
know where those threats to his country come from.
Or could it be that his appearance here ‘today was
calculated to conceal his real concerns and preoccupations?
In other words, is Jerusalem being
abused here for the sake of concerns connected with
Kabul? Is Jerusalem’s
sanctity being dragged into
these discussions for the sake of all kinds of mundane
interests totally extraneous and unrelated to it?
102. Let me appeal to the Council not to permit the
voice of intolerance and prejudice to prevail here. Let
us all substitute reason for prejudice and reconciliation
for incitement.

99. The nature of this debate and its objectives were
clearly revealed by the tone and contents of the statement that led off this discussion. It was characterized
by intolerance and incitement.
One of the manifestations of this intolerance and incitement here today has
been an attempt by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan
-whose absence from the chamber I deeply regret-to
obliterate even the name of Jerusalem by which that
city has become known and venerated for the past
three millennia.
The name of the city is of course
derived from the Hebrew Yerushalayim,
meaning the
City of Peace. The attempt made here today to
obliterate this historic name is not the first of its
kind. It was preceded by, among others, that of Rome,
an imperialist
Power of another age, which, having
crushed Jewish independence and sovereignty in the
land of Israel, then set out to obliterate the name of

Nations,

New York

the latter

100. But Jerusalem and its historical name cannot be
obliterated. Its historical unity cannot be jeopardized
by transparent political exercises. Spurious attempts
to rewrite and falsify here the history of the Jewish
people, of 3,000 years of Jerusalem and the cultural
and spiritual history of mankind are doomed to failure.

97. Mr. BLUM (Israel): I intend to make a statement
at a later stage in our deliberations,
and I shall then
fully set out Israel’s position on the matter before us.

Litho in United

renaming

The meeting

rose at 12.55 p.m.

NOTES

’ A/35/419-S/14129, annex I, resolution No. 4/11-P.
2 United Nations. Tream Series. vol. 75. D. 287.
’ Of#cial
Records
of - the G&era/
Akembly,
Thirty-fourth
Session,
Plenary
Meetings,
17th meeting.
4 Ibid.,
Fifth
Emergency
Special
Session,
Plenary
Meetings,

1554th meeting.
5 Ibid., para. 100.

00300

83-61462-September

1986-2.050

'
