S/PV.9000

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9000th meeting

Tuesday, 22 March 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Nusseibeh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-29564 (E)
*2229564*

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, I will devote this briefing to presenting his
twenty-first report on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), covering the period from 10 December to
18 March.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel to immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and to fully respect all its legal obligations
in that regard. No such steps were taken.
On 5 January, Israeli authorities published tenders
for some 300 settlement housing units in East Talpiot
neighbourhood in East Jerusalem.
On 10 and 24 January, the Jerusalem District
Planning Committee advanced plans to build some
800 and 400 housing units, respectively, in the East
Jerusalem settlement of Gilo.
On 17 January, the same committee advanced a plan
for some 1,200 housing units next to Ramat Rachel, in
the southern Jerusalem area, a significant number of
which are intended to be constructed in East Jerusalem.
On 1 February, following an official land survey,
Israel’s Attorney-General published a legal opinion
allowing authorities to declare land in the outpost of
Evyatar as State land and authorizing accelerated
planning procedures for the establishment of a
settlement there.
On 28 February, the Jerusalem District Planning
Committee advanced a plan for some 700 housing units
in the East Jerusalem settlement of Pisgat Ze’ev.
2/19

22/03/2022

Demolitions and seizure of Palestinian structures
continued across the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. Citing the absence of Israeli-issued
building permits, which are almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, 216 structures were demolished
or seized by Israeli authorities, or demolished by their
owners to avoid costly Israeli demolition fees. Those
actions displaced 299 people, including 138 children
and 76 women. Of the structures that were demolished
or seized, 37 were donor-funded.
In an effort to reduce tension, Israeli authorities
reportedly decided to freeze most demolitions in
East Jerusalem before and during the month of
Ramadan. Tensions were high in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah in the run-up to
19 January, when Israeli forces evicted a Palestinian
family and demolished their home. Twelve Palestinians
were displaced, including two children and three
women, with several arrests reported.
The Israeli authorities stated that the demolition
was undertaken to build a special-needs school to
serve Palestinian children. Tensions mounted further
in February over the potential eviction by Israeli
authorities of a Palestinian family scheduled for March.
Following weeks of numerous violent altercations,
protest and property damage in the neighbourhood,
the atmosphere calmed somehow after the 22 January
decision by the Israeli Magistrate Court to suspend the
eviction pending consideration of an appeal submitted
by the family.
In developments that further reduced tension, the
Israeli Supreme Court ruled on 1 March that four of
the families in the neighbourhood would not be evicted
and would be recognized as protected tenants, paying
their rent, until a determination were made on their
claims to ownership. On 3 March the families held a
press conference noting the importance of the Supreme
Court decision and vowing to continue pressing their
claims of ownership of their homes.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including
all acts of terror, as well as acts of provocation and
destruction. Unfortunately, daily violence continued.
Overall, 244 Palestinians, including four children, were
killed by Israeli security forces during demonstrations,
clashes, security operations, attacks, alleged attacks
against Israelis and other incidents; 2,966 Palestinians,
including five women and 537 children, were injured.
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Of those, 2,283 injuries were due to tear-gas, inhalation,
while 50 persons were injured by live ammunition. In
addition, Israeli settlers or other civilians perpetrated
144 attacks against Palestinians, resulting in 47 injuries
and/or damage to Palestinian property.
One Israeli civilian was killed by Palestinians,
and 100 Israelis, including five women and one child,
were injured by Palestinians in clashes, the throwing
of Molotov cocktails, attacks and other incidents. In
total, Palestinians perpetrated 277 attacks against
Israeli civilians, resulting in injuries and/or damage to
Israeli property.
On 5 January, a vehicle under the supervision of
the Israeli police hit and severely injured a 70-yearold Palestinian man in Um Al-Khair, south of Hebron.
The man later died. Israeli police officers present at the
location did not intervene to provide medical assistant
to the victim. Police reported that the driver had
sustained head injuries from stones thrown at him by
other Palestinians present in the area.
On 12 January, an 80-year-old PalestinianAmerican man died in the context of Israeli security
forces operations near Ramallah, where the victim
was reportedly handcuffed, blindfolded and assaulted
by Israeli security forces. Following an internal
investigation on 31 January, the Israel Defense
Forces removed two officers from their positions
and reprimanded a third. A criminal investigation
is ongoing.
On 8 February, Israeli security forces shot and
killed three Palestinians in their car in Nablus in Area
A. The Fatah-affiliated Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades
claimed the men as members. According to Israeli
authorities, the three were members of a cell that have
carried out attacks on Israeli forces, were planning
additional attacks and tried to shoot at Israeli security
forces during the incident.

S/PV.9000

refugee camp; on 31 December 2021, near Salfit; and
on 17 January near Hebron. Palestinians were also
killed during the exchange of fire or clashes with Israeli
security forces on 13 December 2021 in Nablus; on
6 January in the Balata refugee camp; on 1 March in
Jenin and Bethlehem; and on 15 March in Qalandia.
On 28 February, clashes erupted at Damascus
Gate, in the Old City of Jerusalem, where hundreds
of Palestinians had gathered to celebrate the Islamic
holiday of Al-Isra’ wal-Mi’raj. Thirty-seven Palestinians
were injured, including a six-month-old infant and an
11-year-old-girl with disabilities. Twenty Palestinians
were arrested, most of whom were between the ages
of 14 and 17. Israeli police stated that Palestinians
had chanted incitement and thrown stones and bottles
at police on the scene. On 6 March, a 15-year-old
Palestinian was shot by Israeli security forces in Abu
Dis, near Jerusalem, reportedly after having thrown
Molotov cocktails at Israeli soldiers. The boy later
succumbed to his wounds.
On 6 March, a Palestinian stabbed an Israeli
police officer in the Muslim Quarter in the Old City
of Jerusalem, wounding him, and was subsequently
shot dead by Israeli security forces. On 7 March, a
Palestinian stabbed and injured two Israeli police
offices near the entrance of the holy sites in Jerusalem’s
Old City, before being shot dead by Israeli security
forces. Video of the incident shows a police officer
shooting the man while he was on the ground, after
already having been shot. Hamas later claimed the man
as a member. On 15 March, Israeli security forces shot
and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian boy in the Balata
refugee camp during clashes that developed following
an arrest operation.

On 22 February, a 13-year-old boy died after
having been shot by Israeli security forces in the
Al-Khader area, near Bethlehem. There are conflicting
reports about whether the boy was throwing stones or a
Molotov cocktail when he was shot.

Settler-related violence remains significant across
the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
On several occasions, Israeli security forces and
Israeli settlers clashed, including in the context of the
demolition of unauthorized structures in the outposts,
which are also illegal under Israeli law. Beita village,
near Nablus, remained a flashpoint for clashes amid
ongoing Palestinian demonstrations against the nearby
Evyatar settlement outpost.

On several occasions, Palestinians were shot and
killed by Israeli security forces, reportedly in the
context of attempted attacks, including on 21 December
2021, near the settlement of Mevo Dotan, south-west
of Jenin; on 22 December 2021, near the Al-Amari

During clashes on 10 December 2021, a Palestinian
man was shot and killed by Israeli security forces. On
4 February, 45 Palestinians were injured, including
three with live ammunition. Another 26 were injured
on 18 February — four by live ammunition, including

22-295643/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a 10-year-old boy shot in the head with a rubber-coated
metal bullet.
Areas in and around Burqa village, which is also near
Nablus, saw serious confrontations. On 16 December
2021, a 25-year-old Israeli man was shot and killed by
Palestinians near the evacuated settlement of Homesh.
On 19 December 2021, Israeli security forces arrested
six Palestinians in Silat Al-Harithiya, near Jenin, on
suspicion of involvement in the attacks and three related
charges. That same day, hundreds of settlers attempted
to enter Homesh and set up illegal structures, clashing
with Israeli security forces and breaking through their
barricades. Later, on 1 March, eight Israelis were
arrested in connection with those events.
From 23 to 25 December 2021, repeated raids
by Israeli settlers on Burqa led to clashes between
Palestinians and Israeli security forces, in which
171 Palestinians were injured, including 15 by live
ammunition. On 13 February, a 16-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by Israeli security forces in Silat
Al-Harithiya, near Jenin, amid clashes that erupted
after Israeli forces entered the village to demolish the
family home of one of the suspected perpetrators of the
December shooting.
On 21 January, adjacent to Burin village, near
Nablus, Israeli settlers injured five Israeli activists
involved in a tree-planting activity with local
Palestinians. On 7 February, three Israeli settlers from
Givat Ronen were arrested, and demolition orders
were issued on structures in the settlements. On
24 January, Israeli settlers drove a convoy to Huwwara,
near Nablus, throwing stones at Palestinians and their
property. Three Palestinians, including a 17-year-old,
were injured.
On 16 February, Israel announced the arrest of
17 Israelis in connection with those incidents. On
25 February, Israeli civilians shot and injured two
Palestinian men following a car accident near the
Yizhar checkpoint
On 2 and 3 March, two Israeli civilians were stabbed
and injured in Hizma town, in Jerusalem. The Israel
security forces subsequently arrested a Palestinian
suspected of carrying out one of the attacks.
In Gaza, Palestinian militants launched two
rockets, and there was one instance of launching
incendiary balloons towards Israel. No injuries or fires
were reported. In response, Israeli forces carried out
4/19

22/03/2022

three air attacks on what they said were military targets
in the Strip, resulting in no injuries. On 29 December,
a Palestinian opened fire towards the Gaza perimeter
fence, injuring an Israeli civilian. In retaliation, Israeli
forces fired several tank shells at what they said were
Hamas observation posts in Gaza. Four Palestinians
were injured, including a 16-year-old boy.
On 1 January, the Israel Defense Forces said that
two rockets had been fired from Gaza and landed off
the coast of Israel. In response, Israeli forces conducted
air strikes against what they said were militant facilities
in Gaza. No injuries were reported.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for the parties to
refrain from acts of provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric. Some Palestinian and Israeli
officials continued to engage in such activity during
the reporting period. In a highly provocative move,
in Sheikh Jarrah, East Jerusalem, at the height of the
tension over the potential eviction, a far-right member
of the Israeli Knesset set up a makeshift office in the
neighbourhood. Several members of the Knesset visited
the neighbourhood, expressing support for him, while
others encouraged his inflammatory actions.
In separate statements, the same member of Knesset
also expressed hope that Palestinian hunger strikers
would die and that any Palestinian who threw a stone
would get a bullet in the head. In the wake of the killing
of three Palestinians by Israeli security forces in Nablus,
Fatah social and media pages encouraged Palestinians
to increase confrontation with Israel. Hamas also called
for increased clashes with the Israeli forces throughout
the occupied West Bank. Some Palestinian Authority
officials deny the Jews’ connection to the region and to
the holy sites in Jerusalem.
Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates the call on the
Middle East Quartet for affirmative steps to be taken
immediately to reverse the negative trends on the
ground that are imperilling the two-State solution. The
reporting period witnessed some progress on civil and
economic steps, with instances of high-level official
engagement.
On 27 December, the State of Qatar announced that it
had signed an agreement with the Palestinian Authority
and the Gaza Electricity Distribution Corporation to
advance the construction of a natural-gas pipeline from
Israel to Gaza. The pipeline aims to increase electricity
generation at the Gaza power plant. In Gaza, during
the reporting period, the Israeli authorities authorized
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the issuance of permits for some 12,000 Palestinian
merchants and traders. In January, the daily movement
of workers, traders and businesspeople through the
Erez crossing was the highest since the tightening of
the Israeli closure in Gaza in 2007.
In February, technical bilateral meetings on
the Gaza reconstruction mechanism between the
Palestinian Authority, the Government of Israel and
the United Nations resumed, with steps identified to
improve the mechanism. In a welcome development,
white cement, long deemed a dual-use material, began
entering Gaza without any special monitoring.
There was a marked increase in the movement of
goods out of Gaza in recent months, peaking in January
with more than 900 truckloads passing through the
Kerem Shalom crossing to the West Bank, Israel and
other countries. That is the highest monthly figure
recorded since 2007; it comes close to the rate that had
existed prior to it and is significantly above the pre-May
2021 rates.
The United Nations continues to highlight to
the Israeli Government priority items to enter Gaza,
largely for United Nations health, water, sanitation and
other projects, some requested more than a year ago.
Significant delays in approvals, including for dual-use
materials under the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism,
impact all aspects of United Nations operations in
Gaza, the economy and the lives of ordinary people in
the Strip.
With funding from Qatar, the gradual reconstruction
of housing units totally destroyed during the May 2021
escalation, to date some 150 households, has begun.
Meanwhile, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has
completed the repair of nearly 7,000 housing units and
is currently working with 700 families whose homes
were totally demolished. On 28 December, UNRWA
announced the start of a cash assistance allocation of
$8.2 million to families whose homes were damaged
during the May 2021 escalation.
In the occupied West Bank, some actions by the
Israeli authorities have contributed to some reductions
in tension. On 11 December, the Palestinian Central
Election Commission conducted the first phase of local
council elections in several hundred small communities
in the West Bank, with more than 66 per cent of eligible
voters participating.

S/PV.9000

On 12 January and 17 February, the Commission
concluded voter registration and candidate nomination
periods for the second phase of the local council
elections, scheduled for 26 March. However, on
17 January, the Palestinian Cabinet postponed local
council elections in Gaza.
From 6 to 9 February, the Palestinian Central
Council (PCC) met for the first time since 2018, electing
a new leadership for the Palestinian National Council
and new members for vacant positions in the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization. In
its final statement, the PCC called for a halt to security
coordination and the suspension of the recognition of
Israel until it recognizes the Palestinian State based
on the June 1967 lines and halts settlement activities,
reiterating decisions taken at previous meetings of the
PCC.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
called upon all States to distinguish, in their relevant
dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel
and the territories occupied since 1967. No such steps
were taken during the reporting period. Resolution
2334 (2016) also called upon all parties to continue,
inter alia, to exert collective efforts to launch credible
negotiations. On 14 January, the envoys of the Middle
East Quartet met virtually to discuss the latest political
developments and the situation on the ground. On
19 February, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt, France, Germany and Jordan met in Munich and
expressed their commitment to supporting all efforts
to achieve a comprehensive peace on the basis of the
two-State solution, in accordance with international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and
agreed parameters.
On 9 March, the Egyptian, Jordanian and
Palestinian Foreign Ministers met on the margins of
the ministerial meeting of the League of Arab States
in Cairo to discuss efforts to launch negotiations aimed
at reaching a comprehensive and just settlement of
the conflict.
In closing, allow me to share the SecretaryGeneral’s observations concerning the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) during
the reporting period. I remain deeply concerned by
the continued settlement advancement by Israel in
the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Settlement expansion continued to fuel violence in the
occupied Palestinian territories, further entrenching the

22-295645/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

occupation and undermining the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and independent statehood
and eroding the possibility of establishing a continuous
and viable Palestinian State.
Some 670,000 Israeli citizens currently reside in
more than 130 illegal settlements and more than 100
outposts in the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. I am particularly concerned about the
increasing settlement advancement in and around East
Jerusalem. Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, have no legal validity
and constitute a flagrant violation of United Nations
resolutions and international law and are a serious
impediment to peace. I urge the Government of Israel
to cease all settlement activities immediately.
The continued demolition and seizure of
Palestinian-owned structures, including internationally
funded humanitarian projects, remain deeply
concerning. Demolitions affect not only residential
structures, but also those related to income-generation
and the provisions of essential services. I call upon
the Government of Israel to end the demolition
of Palestinian-owned property and the forcible
displacement and eviction of Palestinians, in line with
its obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
I remain particularly concerned about the potential
eviction of several families from homes in which they
have lived for decades in Sheikh Jarrah and in the Silwan
neighbourhood of occupied East Jerusalem. Many legal
cases initiated by settler organizations invoke an Israeli
law by which Israelis, but not Palestinians, may claim
land they owned prior to 1948.
I note Israeli court rulings during the reporting
period that postponed and suspended such evictions,
contributing to a reduction in tensions on the ground.
As demonstrated in recent weeks, forced evictions,
especially in such politically sensitive areas, can trigger
dangerous tensions and violence. Demolitions and
evictions entail numerous human rights violations and
have raised concerns about the risk of forcible transfers.
I am deeply troubled by the continued loss of life
and injuries, including of children, in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as well as by the overall
deterioration of the security situation, including an
apparent increase in shooting attacks during the
reporting period. The possible excessive use of force
by Israeli security forces, particularly the use of live
6/19

22/03/2022

ammunition, continues to raise serious concerns.
Security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when it is strictly unavoidable
in order to protect life. I am particularly appalled by
the continued injury and killing of children. Children
should never be targets of violence or be put in harm’s
way. I urge Israeli authorities to conduct thorough,
prompt, effective and transparent investigations into
those killings and injuries.
I remain deeply concerned about the level of settlerrelated violence in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. Israel, the occupying Power, has an
obligation to protect the Palestinian population there
from all acts of threats and violence and to ensure, as
far as possible, public order and life.
I am also deeply concerned about Palestinian
attacks against Israeli civilians. I underscore that all
perpetrators of violence must be held accountable and
swiftly brought to justice. I am particularly alarmed
by the high number of arrests by the Israeli security
forces of Palestinians, including children, particularly
in occupied East Jerusalem. I am concerned that those
arrests, particularly of children, may represent a
disproportionate response to the offences committed.
Under international law, the arrest and detention of
children should be used only as a last resort and for the
shortest appropriate period of time.
I urge all sides to refrain from actions that could
further escalate the situation across the occupied
Palestinian territories, and I call upon all politicians and
religious and community leaders to help reduce tension,
particularly in Jerusalem. I am deeply concerned that,
at a highly sensitive moment on the ground, officials on
both sides continue to stoke tensions and take actions
that have the potential to provoke more deadly violence.
Acts of terror, violence and incitement must be clearly
and unequivocally condemned by all. Officials on all
sides have a responsibility to avoid all actions that
could escalate tensions.
Palestinians continue to suffer in Gaza under Hamas
rule and continued Israeli closures. I welcome the
parties’ recent engagement on easing access, including
for workers from Gaza and the West Bank, into the
Israeli labour market. I am encouraged by the growing
volume of goods exiting Gaza, which clearly surpasses
previous years. Nevertheless, more significant steps are
needed to see durable economic benefits. I hope that
the resumption of technical-level trilateral meetings
22-29564

22/03/2022

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism will facilitate
reconstruction and the much-needed development
projects, leading to reduced aid dependency.
The physical condition of the Palestinian Authority
(PA) remains precarious. Revenues are not keeping
pace with expenditures, leading to accumulated debt,
and investments in important sectors such as health,
education and infrastructure are insufficient. In order
to address the root causes of recurring financial crises,
internal PA reforms and improvements in the economic
relationship between Israel and the PA are needed,
alongside donor support. To that end, I welcome the
current work of the International Monetary Fund
mission to support the PA’s important work on fiscal
stability and reform.
The United Nations is grateful to all donors that
continue to support the crucial work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). I am concerned, as UNRWA
will already face critical cash-flow challenges in the
upcoming three months. Any reduction or disruption
of services has the potential to trigger significant
humanitarian, political and security consequences,
impacting the broader region. As Muslims in the region
start the holy month of Ramadan, I appeal to all donors
to advance the disbursement of confirmed pledges as
much as possible. Preserving UNRWA’s services is a
joint responsibility of all Member States.
As we endeavour to support the critical needs
of the Palestinians across the occupied Palestinian
territories, it is also vital that we continue working
towards advancing intra-Palestinian unity, as it is
central to advancing a two-State solution. The United
Nations stands firm in its support of Egyptian-led
intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts. The holding of
general elections in the occupied Palestinian territories
would be a crucial step towards Palestinian unity, giving
renewed legitimacy to national institutions, including
a democratically elected Parliament and Government
in Palestine.
In conclusion, let me add that it is regrettable that
we have seen little progress in the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) since its adoption in December
2016. On the contrary, the absence of a meaningful
peace process to end the Israeli occupation and resolve
the conflict is fueling a dangerous deterioration that
is destabilizing the situation across the occupied
Palestinian territories.

In just one week, as Ramadan begins, thousands
of Muslims will come to pray at Muslim holy sites
in Jerusalem, with the Jewish and Christian faithful
following soon after to mark Pesach and Easter in April.
That should be a time of peaceful reflection, prayer
and celebration for all religions. Provocation must be
avoided. Leaders on all sides have a critical role to play
in ensuring calm.
In line with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international law and bilateral agreements, we must
keep in sight the vision of an end to the occupation and
of two States — Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, viable and sovereign Palestinian State
living side by side, in peace and security, within secure
and recognized borders, on the basis of the pre-1967
lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
I remain actively engaged in advancing those efforts
with my counterparts in the Middle East Quartet, key
regional partners and Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing. We fully support his continued and
close engagement with all parties to promote dialogue
and peace.
The United States remains committed to widening
relations between Israel and its neighbours. One way
we can do that is by deepening cooperation among
the participants in the Abraham Accords and other
countries that have normal relations with Israel. On that
front, we are encouraged by Israel Defense Forces Chief
of Staff Aviv Kochavi’s meetings in Bahrain with his
counterpart there, and we welcome the meeting between
Turkish President Erdoğan and Israeli President Herzog
in Ankara. These visits demonstrate that good faith
engagement can build mutual confidence and create a
path towards greater security and prosperity.
In addition to these visits, we welcome the efforts
of the signatories of recent normalization agreements
to bolster their relationships through working groups
and initiatives. These will help further develop trade,
cultural and people-to-people ties and offer new
opportunities and hope for people across the region.
The United States also believes that normalization

22-295647/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

agreements can enhance regional cooperation. But
let me be clear: normalization is not a substitute for
serious engagement between Israelis and Palestinians.
That is why the Biden Administration has made a
point of intensifying dialogue with both Israeli and
Palestinian leaders.
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Hady Amr
just visited Israel and the West Bank to discuss IsraeliPalestinian relations. He highlighted the need to
improve the quality of life for Palestinians in tangible
ways and reaffirmed that Israelis and Palestinians
alike deserve equal measures of security, freedom and
prosperity. We encourage all those who look for peace
in the Middle East to commit to constructive acts that
help Palestinians and Israelis coexist and prosper.
While we worked toward long-term peace, we also
remained deeply concerned about present-day tensions,
including violence in the West Bank and in and around
Jerusalem. The United States strongly condemns the
recent terrorist attacks in the Old City that injured two
Israeli policemen, and once again we deplore continuing
attacks by Israeli settlers on ordinary Palestinians. We
urge the authorities both to condemn acts of violence
and to fairly pursue justice for these acts. Individuals,
regardless of who they are or where they come from,
who commit unlawful acts of violence, should be
held accountable.
As the holy month of Ramadan and the Passover
and Easter holidays approach, we must aspire to peace,
recognizing the heightened religious sensitivities
during this time. All sides must refrain from unilateral
actions that exacerbate tensions and undercut efforts to
advance a negotiated two-State solution. In that spirit,
we welcome the recent meetings between Jordan’s King
Abdullah II and Foreign Minister Lapid and reiterate
the importance of upholding the status quo on the
Holy Esplanade.
I will close by noting that the humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains serious. Humanitarian relief,
reconstruction and recovery needs are acute, and food
insecurity could worsen in the coming weeks, owing to
the rising price of food, fuel and other commodities. In
this dangerous environment of scarcity, we encourage
all States Members of the United Nations to provide
assistance, including through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, to help meet the needs of vulnerable Palestinians
in Gaza.
8/19

22/03/2022

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his comprehensive briefing. We share
his concern about tensions in East Jerusalem and the
rest of the West Bank.
With Ramadan, Pesach and Easter coinciding
in April, it is imperative to avoid a new escalation
of violence. Israelis and Palestinians deserve to live
in security. The integrity of the holy sites and the
historic status quo in Jerusalem must be upheld and
fully respected.
We also call for respect of the rights of Palestinians,
including their right to peacefully protest. We are
especially concerned about children being victims
of violence and threats, as well as the arrests of
Palestinian children.
Among the significant drivers of conflict are Israeli
settlement activities, house demolitions and evictions.
We welcome the decision by the Israeli Supreme Court
to terminate eviction orders against four Palestinian
families living in Sheikh Jarrah. However, long-term
solutions are needed, and all evictions in East Jerusalem
must be halted indefinitely.
We would also like to highlight the situation in
Masafer Yatta, where Israeli authorities are planning
to demolish several Palestinian villages to establish a
firing zone for military training. If implemented, this
plan would displace around 1,300 individuals who
have lived in this area for generations. We urge Israel
to refrain from carrying out this plan, and I reiterate
that all measures aimed at altering the demographic
composition of occupied areas are in violation of
international humanitarian law. Let me therefore
again highlight that the establishment of Israeli
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory, including
in East Jerusalem, constitutes a flagrant violation of
international law.
With regard to Gaza, we are encouraged to see a
more stable situation. The lifting of Israeli restrictions
and relative calm from all sides have made a positive
contribution. We encourage Israel to continue the easing
of restrictions, allowing for more trade and increasing
the number of work permits for Palestinians. The
ultimate goal must be the total lifting of the blockade.
We look forward to the second round of local
elections being held across the West Bank on
26 March. The mobilization around these elections
shows that Palestinians want democracy. Norway
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

will continue our support for the Central Election
Commission. Furthermore, the Palestinian Authority
must be strengthened, and its governance spread across
Palestine. The economy must be allowed to flourish.
Finally, let me affirm Norway’s commitment to a
political horizon and a negotiated two-State solution.
Even while Ukraine dominates the headlines and the
agenda of the Security Council — and for a good
reason — we cannot abandon other ongoing crises. We
must continue to work for a long-term solution, one that
will benefit both Israelis and Palestinians. Finding a
political solution to the conflict is not only essential for
Israel and Palestine, but for the whole region.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I thank Mr. Wennesland
for his briefing on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
The Special Coordinator’s briefing highlights
the increase in violence in the occupied West Bank,
including in East Jerusalem, at this particularly
sensitive time. Ireland reaffirms its view that violence
against civilians must cease. In our last statement to
the Council (see S/PV.8973), we expressed our deep
concern at continued reports of the use of excessive
force by Israeli security forces leading to the killing and
injuring of Palestinians, including children. Such acts
have continued in the weeks since then. These killings
shatter families and communities and take us ever
further away from the possibility of a just and lasting
peace. There must be accountability for the actions of
the Israeli security forces.
Ireland also urges the Palestinian Authority to
protect and uphold the human rights of Palestinians
under its control and enhance its efforts to prevent
terrorism. As Mr. Wennesland has made clear, the
Palestinian Authority urgently needs international
support in this regard.
In the run-up to the upcoming religious holidays,
Ireland calls on all parties to exercise maximum
restraint and avoid escalation, so that these holidays can
be safely and appropriately marked by all. We echo the
Special Coordinator’s statement of 8 March, in which
he called on political, religious and community leaders
from all sides to reject violence and speak up against
those who try to inflame the situation.
We welcome the recent visit by Foreign Minister
Lapid to Amman, and reiterate our call for the status quo

S/PV.9000

at the holy sites in Jerusalem to be upheld, bearing in
mind the special and historic role of Jordan as custodian
of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem.
In keeping with Ireland’s consistent position on
respect for international law, we reiterate our call on
Israel to halt all settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem and
in Area C of the West Bank. Such settlement activity
is a flagrant violation of international law. Further
settlement expansion plans, such as those for E-1,
Givat Hamatos and Atarot, would severely undermine
the possibility of establishing a viable and contiguous
Palestinian State.
Tor Wennesland’s report highlights ongoing
Israeli demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures, some funded by donors, including by
Ireland and our European Union partners. These acts
are contrary to Israel’s obligations under international
humanitarian law and must cease. Ireland remains
particularly concerned about the Palestinian families
that remain threatened with eviction from their homes,
including in Silwan and Sheikh Jarrah, despite recent
positive developments. Israel must also address the
enormous difficulties experienced by Palestinians
seeking to obtain Israeli-issued building permits.
Children continue to endure the worst of this
conflict. We are appalled that four children have been
killed by Israeli forces in just over one month and that
many others have experienced detention and violence.
Israel must uphold international standards of justice
for juveniles. We call for an end to the administrative
detention of children and any form of ill treatment in
detention. Children must never be the target of violence
or put in harm’s way.
Ireland reiterates our concern at the designation
of six Palestinian non-governmental organizations
as terrorist organizations. Ireland’s support for civil
society is steadfast, and we recall the critical role it
plays in promoting international law, peace, human
rights and democratic values.
As a strong supporter of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA), Ireland renews its call on
the international community, including countries of
the region, to step up efforts to support the agency.
This is essential for the provision of vital services to
Palestinian refugees, as well as for regional stability.
We commend UNRWA and the United Nations family

22-295649/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for their continued work in the Gaza Strip, where the
blockade continues to hamper reconstruction efforts.
We acknowledge recent positive steps by Israel in
this context and commend Egypt and Qatar’s ongoing
contribution. However, more must be done. We renew
our call for Israel to end its illegal blockade of Gaza, in
line with resolution 1860 (2009).
Finally, the Security Council must redouble
its efforts to address the root causes of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. The situation on the ground,
including ongoing settlement expansion by Israel,
continues to erode the basis for an agreed solution.
In the absence of meaningful political progress and
in the context of a climate of impunity and denial of
basic rights, disillusionment is taking hold, especially
among young people. The role that youth can play in
bringing about a peaceful resolution to the conflict
cannot be overstated.
The Security Council must recommit to the
imperative of a two-State solution, in line with resolution
2334 (2016), as the only way to guarantee a stable,
sustainable peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for the updates brought to the Security
Council. Brazil regrets that, once more, we are hearing
reports of daily violence, unilateral actions and heated
rhetoric that undermine the prospects for viable and
lasting peace in the Middle East. Mounting tensions,
especially in the West Bank and Jerusalem, days before
the start of Ramadan are very concerning.
Brazil once more echoes the call of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process upon
all parties to exercise maximum restraint and refrain
from actions and provocations that fuel those tensions,
particularly near sacred sites during religious holidays.
All parties must urgently focus on de-escalation.
We also remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Civilians must never be the deliberate target of attacks.
Children, who are particularly vulnerable in any
conflict, should always be kept out of harm’s way.
Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is essential for
peace, and the current economic and fiscal crisis
worsens the prospects of political unity and stability.
Free, fair and transparent general elections should
be held as soon as possible to renew the democratic
legitimacy of Palestinian institutions.
10/19

22/03/2022

International cooperation aimed at the recovery and
improvement of basic infrastructure and the economic
empowerment of the Palestinian population can also
improve the prospects of reconciliation. We must not
forget that poverty and political instability constitute
fertile ground for extremist forces.
In the meanwhile, humanitarian aid must continue
to flow in a predictable, responsible and regular way to
cover the basic needs of refugees, who continue to rely
heavily on the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The financial sustainability of the agency
is more worrisome in a scenario of competing efforts
to help the growing number of refugees worldwide. We
continue to be committed to UNRWA´s valuable work.
I reiterate Brazil´s long-standing commitment
to the achievement of a just and sustainable peace in
the Middle East, with Israelis and Palestinians living
side by side in peace and security, in two democratic,
prosperous and sovereign States, within secure and
internationally recognized borders.
But without a horizon for direct talks, faith in
peace wanes with each passing day. Brazil supports
Mr. Wennesland’s willingness to re-engage key
stakeholders, including the Middle East Quartet, and
to try new ideas with the aim of building trust and
confidence among the parties in order to advance the
implementation of relevant resolutions of the Council.
Brazil will support any genuine effort to rethink the
peace process and diplomatic initiatives that contribute
to moving us away from the current stalemate, as long
as they are in line with international law and truly
aimed at sustainable peace.
Only a situation that is acceptable to all sides will be
able to pave the way for sustainable peace in the Middle
East. The Security Council must reflect on the role it
should play in reinvigorating the region’s peace process
and in paving the way for new direct negotiations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator for his briefing.
France is very concerned about the high tensions
in the occupied Palestinian territories. The approach
of the religious holidays is leading to fears of a
sharp deterioration in the situation and an escalation
similar to that of last May. France echoes the Special
Coordinator’s call for restraint and avoidance of any
incitement to violence.
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The measures taken by Israel to reduce tensions are
welcome, but must be considerably expanded to prevent
a new cycle of violence. That includes a permanent
end to demolitions and evictions, in particular in East
Jerusalem. It also requires strict respect for the status
quo of the holy sites and the proportionate use of force
by the Israeli forces. It ultimately requires an end to
the expansion of settlements. After several months
of the de facto freeze, the resumption of planning
and expansion projects since October 2021 has been
worrisome. France will never waver in its commitment
to Israel’s security and firmly condemns all rocket fire
against civilian populations and infrastructure.
France calls for the immediate implementation
of all provisions of resolution 2334 (2016). There is
an urgent need to reverse the negative trends and to
create the conditions necessary for the resumption
of negotiations between the parties. France calls for
increased cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority that will enable the implementation of
confidence-building measures for the benefit of
the people.
At the same time, we must work to recreate a
political horizon to restore hope to the people and prevent
violence from becoming their only alternative. To that
end, we are counting on the United Nations. The twoState solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both, is
indeed the only one that will allow for a just and lasting
peace in the region by responding to the legitimate
aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples.
France will not recognize any change to the 1967
lines other than those agreed by the parties. France
recalls the obligation of all States to distinguish between
the territory of Israel and the occupied territories with
regard to trade, in accordance with resolution 2334
(2016). France implements that policy of differentiation
through concrete measures that have been taken at the
European level.
France will continue to robustly support Palestinian
civil society and the strengthening of the rule of law.
It will remain vigilant with regard to the continued
deterioration of the human rights situation in the
territories controlled by the Palestinian Authority. In
particular, it calls for all light to be shed on the death of
Nizar Banat and for appropriate measures to be taken to
ensure that such incidents do not reoccur.
Furthermore, the designation of six Palestinian
non-governmental
organizations
as
terrorist

S/PV.9000

organizations by Israel is very worrisome. France
intends to continue to support them. It will continue to
work to preserve the humanitarian space, particularly
in Gaza. In that regard, we reiterate our full support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
The precariousness of the situation in the
Palestinian territories shows once again the importance
of the Council remaining ready to act. We encourage
Council members to play an active role in supporting the
relaunch of the peace process and the implementation
of the Council’s resolutions. Our credibility depends on
it. France will remain firm in upholding the principles
of international law that it has consistently promoted.
That is the reason for Minister Le Drian’s ongoing
commitment to supporting the two-State solution, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East settlement
process in the context of the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
We listened with concern to his report on the
continued impasse in the settlement process in the
Middle East and the unresolved core issue of the
Palestinian question. Unfortunately, we must note that
there has been no let-up in violence with regard to the
Palestinian-Israeli confrontation, leading to casualties
on both sides and potentially escalating into the type of
full-scale military escalation that we have seen so many
times. The situation is further exacerbated by Israel’s
unlawful unilateral actions, with their potentially
dangerous disruptive consequences for the entire
Middle East region. They include the confiscation of
Palestinian land, forced evictions, the demolition of
property, the illegal building of settlements and attempts
to change the historical status quo of the holy sites.
The announcement of Tel Aviv’s plans to expand
settlement activity in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
is deeply disturbing. The continuation of settlement
construction and the intention to double the number of
Israelis living in the Jordan Valley and the Syrian Golan
Heights by 2026 can be seen as the de facto annexation
of most of the occupied Palestinian territory. Against
that background, there has been a sharp increase in
settler attacks, as well as the disproportionate use
of force by the Israeli military against Palestinians,

22-2956411/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resulting in civilian deaths and injuries. One example
of such misconduct was the high-profile eviction
and demolition of a house in the East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah in January.
In the current circumstances, we believe that
the primary goal should be to achieve the long-term
stabilization of the situation, avoid provocations and
unilateral steps to create irreversible facts on the ground,
and restore the political horizon for reinvigorating
the peace process within the agreed internationally
recognized parameters, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative. We do not agree with those who
believe that framework to be irrelevant. The problem
does not lie with the framework itself, as its final
details in every instance should be discussed by the
Palestinians and Israelis in direct negotiations, but with
the factors that are preventing the resumption of the
negotiation process.
In that context, we are convinced of the need to step
up appropriate multilateral efforts, including within the
framework of the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators with a view to creating the necessary
conditions for the swift resumption of direct IsraeliPalestinian talks. Furthermore, it will be impossible to
advance the settlement process without restoring the
unity of the Palestinian ranks, based on the authority of
the Palestinian Liberation Organization and the holding
of elections.
Against that background, we attach great
importance to providing comprehensive humanitarian
assistance to those in need in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip, as well as Palestinian refugees in the
neighbouring Arab countries. We support the efforts
of specialized international organizations, first and
foremost the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose activities
have not only a humanitarian but also a political
dimension in providing an important stabilizing effect
in the Palestinian territories and countries of the Middle
East. In that regard, we note the Agency’s appeal to
the international community to help meet financial
shortfalls so as to maintain uninterrupted support for
the Palestinians this year.
For our part, we will pursue our efforts to build
international consensus and coordinate joint action in
promoting a just solution to the Palestinian question.
We call on our Quartet colleagues to consider our well12/19

22/03/2022

known initiatives, including the holding of a ministerial
meeting, as well as consultations in the extended
format with the participation of regional States. At the
same time, we count on the support of the international
community in carrying out those activities.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I too thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
Resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted by the Security
Council to reaffirm the international community’s firm
commitment to preventing the erosion of the two-State
solution. It calls on parties to prevent all acts of violence
against civilians and refrain from provocative acts of
incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, and stresses that
all settlement activities must cease.
We remain deeply concerned about the upward
trajectory of the violent attacks and killing of civilians.
We have consistently advocated against all acts of
violence. We urge all sides to take immediate steps for a
complete cessation of violence. The 1 March judgment
of the Supreme Court of Israel provides a temporary
reprieve to the Palestinian families of Sheikh Jarrah.
However, the issue of the potential legal eviction of the
families remains.
Tensions have remained high in the Sheikh Jarrah
neighbourhood, despite the Court’s decision that has
ruled against an immediate eviction. It is unfortunate
that the provocative actions and statements have
continued. Statements by community leaders and
public figures should aim to reduce tensions and not
incite them. We appeal for calm to be maintained and
encourage all parties to exercise maximum restraint.
We call on the parties to refrain from any unilateral
action that unduly alters the status quo on the ground
and undercuts the viability of the two-State solution.
We need to urgently build on the recent positive
developments and not slide back. The focus must
be on addressing the urgent security and economic
challenges, including the precarious financial situation
of the Palestinian Authority, and charting a concrete
path for discussing key political issues. An early return
to the political course by launching credible direct
negotiations on all final-status issues is an immediate
requirement. The absence of direct talks between the
sides on those issues is not conducive to securing longterm peace.
India has consistently called for direct peace
negotiations between Israel and Palestine based on the
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

internationally agreed framework, taking into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for
statehood and Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The United Nations and the international community,
in particular the Middle East Quartet, must prioritize
the revival of those negotiations.
India
has
been
supporting
Palestinian
nation-building and capacity-building efforts under
the India-Palestine developmental partnership for
more than three decades now. We also continue to
assist the Palestinian refugee community through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s firm and
unwavering commitment to the establishment of a
sovereign, independent and viable State of Palestine
living within secure and recognized borders, side
by side and at peace with Israel. There is no other
alternative to a negotiated two-State solution.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his briefing.
Regrettably, a little more than five years after
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), settlement
construction and expansion continue. In December
2016, when the resolution was adopted, approximately
618,000 settlers lived in Israeli settlements on
Palestinian territory. Today, the settler population has
grown by around 12 per cent. Over the last 18 months,
25 new outposts and satellite settlements were built. In
parallel, more than 1,000 structures were demolished in
2021 and 2022. Violent incidents perpetrated by settlers
have continued.
The settlements undermine the two-State solution.
They impede prospects for peace and affect the human
rights of the Palestinian people. Taking over territory
by force violates international law. Mexico deplores the
expansion of those settlements. We urge the cessation of
all settlement-related activities, including confiscation,
eviction and the demolition of Palestinian structures.
We take note of the announcement by the Israeli
authorities of the implementation of a truce in
demolitions during Ramadan and the suspension of
evictions of families from Sheikh Jarrah. While that
represents a temporary reprieve, it is no substitute for
the definitive halting of those activities, which erode
the viability of a Palestinian State.

S/PV.9000

Mexico condemns any act of violence against
civilians, including the disproportionate use of force.
In accordance with resolution 2334 (2016), we call once
again on parties to refrain from provocations, including
the use of inflammatory rhetoric.
We wish to express our concern at the fragile
nature of the ceasefire and the slow economic recovery
in Gaza. Of course, we note the favourable impact
of the economic initiatives offered by Israel, which
include work permits and an increase in exports from
the Strip. However, so long as there is no definitive
lifting of the blockade, such initiatives will be limited,
and dependency on humanitarian aid will continue.
That backdrop is compounded by the precarious
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the emergence of new humanitarian needs as a result
of conflicts in other parts of the world. Once again,
we stress the importance of the Palestinian Authority
calling elections as soon as possible. Substantive
progress in intra-Palestinian reconciliation is perhaps
today more urgent than ever.
Before closing, allow me to reiterate something that
should not be forgotten when we consider this issue in the
Council: that the only solution to the conflict between
Israel and Palestine is a two-State one that addresses
Israel’s legitimate security concerns and enables the
consolidation of a politically and economically viable
Palestinian State within safe and internationally
recognized borders, as well as the special status of
Jerusalem in accordance with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his detailed briefing.
Resolution 2334 (2016) addresses decades-old
issues, but its objectives, while being of immediate
and urgent relevance, remain largely unimplemented.
Kenya recognizes and commends the progress made
through regional mediation efforts and through the
Quartet and Munich formats. However, despite the best
intentions of the international community, little has
improved in terms of political traction on the ground
in line with the resolution. For example, Gaza, despite
the much-needed focus and recovery efforts, remains
dependent on humanitarian relief.
Kenya continues to support the principles
underlying resolution 2334 (2016). Those include

22-2956413/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

urging the stabilization of the situation and the
reversal of negative trends on the ground, which are
eroding prospects for a two-State solution whereby two
States — Israel and Palestine — live side by side in
peace and within secure and recognized borders based
on the 1967 lines.
Significant steps are also needed to create the
conditions for successful final-status negotiations.
In our persistent call for the full implementation of
that all-encompassing resolution, the hope is that the
desirable and obtainable objectives do not remain a
futuristic endeavour.
Also, in line with resolution 2334 (2016), Kenya
continues to condemn and call for accountability
and strengthened efforts to combat the acts of terror
perpetrated by Hamas and other militant groups. Such
indiscriminate acts of terror must cease.
We also call for immediate steps to be taken to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, which
have tragically claimed both Israeli and Palestinian
lives. Once again, we reiterate that no cause can justify
the deliberate targeting of innocent civilians.
The trends of the current reporting period,
including violent incidents involving children and
youth fatalities; the increasing settler population;
clashes in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem; and demolitions all point to the need to
look beyond the listing of incidents.
As Kenya has stated before, while the quarterly
reports remain essential to keeping the Council
informed, addressing cycles of conflict will take much
more than chronicling incidents and events.
In that regard and as we look to the next written
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
in June, we believe that substantive advice on clear
timelines, objectives and frameworks for resolving
pending issues from the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral would add value to the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016). That would be in line with
paragraph 11 of the resolution, in which the Security
Council

22/03/2022

Jarrah in East Jerusalem. That is a welcome
de-escalation move ahead of Ramadan and, more
importantly, a recognition of how such unresolved
issues can quickly escalate, given the events of May.
In the interest of the promotion of peace and security,
there is a need for all parties concerned to support the
daily dividends of constructive grass-roots efforts to
mitigate — practically and consistently — these cycles
of conflict.
In conclusion, Kenya urges both parties to
exert collective efforts to launch peacebuilding
and peacemaking processes that will demonstrate
commitment to the desirable and obtainable objectives
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I join others in expressing
appreciation to the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing to
the Council, as well as his commitment to the search for
lasting peace in the Middle East.
The briefing, as always, gives us much to consider
and requires of the Council a substantial engagement
in support of the political processes that are required
to find peace in the Middle East. The concerns related
to the status of implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) remain, as we hear reports of forced evictions,
demolitions and expansion of settlements, acts of
violence against civilians, settler-related violence and
provocative acts by both sides.
However, Ghana welcomes the initiative for the
recent high-level diplomatic contacts and dialogue
between the Israeli and Palestinian leadership, and
we implore both sides to maintain the momentum and
engage in meaningful and transparent dialogue that is
reflected in significant policy changes on both sides.

“[r]eaffirms its determination to examine practical
ways and means to secure the full implementation
of its relevant resolutions.”

Despite the limited but hopeful developments,
there are ongoing concerns that grate our collective
sensibilities. In that regard, I would like to focus the
Council’s attention on the dire humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including Gaza
and East Jerusalem, and highlight the need for urgent
humanitarian relief and economic assistance to the
Palestinian people. I also wish to appeal for the further
easing of humanitarian access to allow inhabitants in
the occupied Palestinian territories to have access to the
basic supplies they require and to live a dignified life.

We take note of the steps taken by the Israeli
Supreme Court decision to halt eviction in Sheikh

Ghana reaffirms its belief that the path for lasting
peace and stability in the Middle East runs through the

14/19

22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side
by side within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the 1967 lines.
We recognize the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, as well as the aspiration of the
countries of the region to live in peace and harmony
and call on the parties to desist from unilateral actions
that have the tendency to undermine mutual trust and
goodwill, which are vital ingredients if progress is to be
made on the peace process.
We urge both parties to resolve all differences
through dialogue and negotiations in a comprehensive
and mutually acceptable manner and call for the
implementation of the provisions and outcomes of
the 1991 Madrid Conference, the 1993 Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements,
subsequent agreements and all United Nations
resolutions regarding the question of Palestine.
Despite prevailing global dynamics, we encourage
the continuing engagement of the Middle East Quartet
and the wider international community in helping the
parties to implement their obligations for the settlement
of the Middle East problem.
In conclusion, I underscore the need for cooperation
and unified action within the Council, which is critical
to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, but also to the
world at large, and reiterate Ghana’s commitment
of support to find a lasting solution to the Middle
East problem.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for his
briefing today.
Let me start by once again reinforcing the need
to prevent a return to the violence we witnessed in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories last
year. We share concerns about the escalating tensions
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. We must
all work to take steps to avoid exacerbating tensions.
In that regard, we welcome the announcement by the
Israeli Police Commissioner that there will be a pause
on demolitions in East Jerusalem during Ramadan.
We are concerned about the rise in security
incidents and violence in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the death of nine Palestinians this
month by Israeli security forces live fire. Where there
are accusations of excessive use of force, we advocate
swift, transparent investigations. Israel has a legitimate

S/PV.9000

right to self-defence. In exercising that right, it is vital
that all actions are proportionate.
We welcome the dismantling of West Bank outposts
by the Israeli authorities, including Maoz Esther, Givat
Habaladim and Battir. The violence from settlers
against Israeli security forces during the operations is
inexcusable. Outposts are illegal under international
law and Israeli law and are an obstacle to peace.
As we celebrated International Women’s Day
this month, we were reminded of the importance of
ensuring equitable access to a quality education for all
children and the power of educating girls as a tool for
peace. We continue to urge the Palestinian Authority to
pass the necessary legislation to protect and advance
women’s rights, and we reiterate our strong support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its vital work
to help Palestinian refugee children, including girls,
fulfil their potential.
The United Kingdom remains focused on work to
improve the economic situation in the West Bank and
Gaza. We welcome the beginning of the electronic
value-added tax pilot and ongoing work between the
parties towards a more efficient tax system. The United
Kingdom encourages both parties to continue to make
progress on other priority fiscal issues and to reconvene
the long-stalled Joint Economic Committee in order to
enhance dialogue on economic issues.
Finally, as we look towards the convergence of
religious holidays next month, the United Kingdom
strongly discourages unilateral actions that may
increase tensions. We reiterate our support for the
historic status quo in the Old City of Jerusalem. That
is the best means of preserving the right to peaceful
worship for the three Abrahamic faiths.
It is only through dialogue that we can improve
stability across the region and build the foundations for
peace. The United Kingdom remains firmly committed
to a two-State solution, based on 1967 lines and with
Jerusalem as a shared capital.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing on
the latest developments in the Middle East, including
with regard to the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016).

22-2956415/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This meeting is being held in a particularly
tense regional context, with Ramadan, Passover and
Easter approaching.
Violence in recent weeks, particularly in the
occupied Palestinian territories and in the Old City
of Jerusalem, has raised fears of a deadly escalation
in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. Many of these violent
incidents are increasingly taking place among civilians,
particularly young people, as Tor Wennesland noted in
his briefing earlier.
The climate of tension, exacerbated by brutality,
the disproportionate use of force against civilians,
the expansion of settlements and the actions resulting
therefrom are likely to undo any prospect for peace and
fuel the cycle of instability. We encourage the Israeli and
Palestinian authorities to exercise restraint and invest
in peaceful coexistence, while giving peace a greater
chance. In this respect, the Israeli Supreme Court’s
decision to suspend the evictions of four Palestinian
families in the sensitive Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem sets the tone for appeasement.
In addition to the worrying security situation,
the humanitarian and economic situation in the
Palestinian territories remains alarming, owing to the
unprecedented financial crisis facing the Palestinian
Authority. Without significant financial support,
civilian populations risk facing extreme vulnerability,
which has a domino effect on the deteriorating security
environment, with the consequent loss of access to
health-care services, education and food. This situation
would only dramatically increase social unrest, violence
and poverty on the ground.
The need for trust between Israel and Palestine, as
well as the need for dialogue, is therefore imperative,
with a view to easing tensions, seeing the renunciation
of provocations and preserving human lives. The
dialogue between Israel and Palestine must be serious,
in good faith and as inclusive as possible. Accordingly,
the recent meeting between the Israeli Foreign Minister
and a delegation of senior Palestinian Authority
officials, the second such public meeting in less than
two months, sends an encouraging signal.
The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
requires the rapid resumption of negotiations for a real
and lasting peace, based on respect for the principles
agreed upon by the parties and on the application of
the rules of international law. This solution must also
be based on the legitimate aspiration and rights of
16/19

22/03/2022

the Palestinian people to self-determination and on
addressing Israel’s security concerns.
We reiterate our vision of a two-State solution,
which cannot be achieved without the firm political
commitment and will of the parties, as well as the active
support of the international community, including
regional actors. In this regard, the recent meeting
between the King of Jordan and the Israeli Foreign
Minister is a step in the right direction. Likewise, the
role played by the King of Morocco, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, in preserving the special status
of the Holy City as a symbol of the common heritage
of humankind, of the peaceful coexistence of the three
monotheistic religions, and as a place of dialogue and
mutual respect, is to be commended.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Special Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, and
for his efforts aimed at reviving the peace process
between Israel and Palestine, thereby contributing to
stability in the region.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Madam President, I am happy
to see you back in the chair as President of the Security
Council. I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his briefing.
Resolution 2334 (2016) represents a milestone in
the attempts by the Council to find a way out of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. What we heard is worrying
and goes against what the Security Council is seeking
to achieve. Continued violations of core provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016) make a bad situation worse
and threaten the prospects for peace and stability in
the region.
While we believe that the full implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) is important, it may not, in
and of itself, be sufficient for the peaceful resolution
of the conflict. But it is a necessary step in the right
direction. We therefore welcome any step that promotes
compliance with the resolution. In the meantime, we
oppose all unilateral decisions and actions that prevent
its full implementation, including unlawful evictions
and demolitions. The decision of the Israeli Supreme
Court with regard to four families under the eviction
process inspires hope for the law to prevail.
Provocations and acts of violence by either side
are unacceptable and must be properly investigated.
They add to the grievances that need to be overcome
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for Israelis and Palestinians to work for lasting peace
with one another. They only exacerbate an already
tense situation that can easily provoke another outburst
of uncontrolled violence. In this respect, we firmly
condemn rocket launches and balloons from Gaza.
Israel’s response in its right to self-defence must also
be proportionate.
We continue to believe that settlements and
their further expansions are wrong and illegal under
international law, and they threaten the possibility
of a future viable Palestinian State at peace with a
democratic and secure Israel. What we need instead
are concrete, continued and sustained steps that defuse
tensions and pave the way for the search for a peaceful
resolution of the conflict, which will make a two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as a shared capital, not just a
distant and dimming hope, but a reality.
We continue to believe that civil society is a vital
part and hallmark of a democratic society and a pillar
for fostering a culture of mutual understanding. We are
convinced that it is also key in the search for a peaceful
solution to the conflict, as civil society actors have a vital
role to play in fostering a culture of dialogue and mutual
recognition. The uncertainty about the designation
of six Palestinian non-governmental organizations
casts doubt upon the work of other non-governmental
organizations and makes donors reluctant to fund their
activities. This is part of a disturbing trend of shrinking
civil space for civil society, especially in Gaza, but also
in the West Bank.
We support the preservation of a status quo with
regard to the holy sites in Jerusalem. These sites must
serve their function to unite people of all faiths and
allow us to find strength in our differences rather than
reason for division and conflict. We call on all sides
to show self-restraint and mutual respect, especially
during the holy month of Ramadan, as well as during
Passover and Easter celebrations, and avoid actions that
fuel tension and confrontation.
Let me conclude by saying that what we desire is
not a secret: we want a negotiated and just solution
where Israelis and Palestinians enjoy full and equal
rights with complete respect for one another’s concerns
and aspirations. This would not only benefit the Israelis
and the Palestinians, but it would bring about enormous
positive ramifications for the region and for the world
at large.

S/PV.9000

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland
for his briefing, and we also take note of the Special
Coordinator’s 8 March statement on the security
situation in the West Bank.
Like the Special Coordinator, China is concerned
about the recent deterioration of the security situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories and is deeply
saddened by the casualties on both sides caused by
the violence, especially Palestinian children. The
protection of children in armed conflict is not an empty
slogan but an unshakeable moral responsibility and an
international obligation that must be fulfilled. We call
for a thorough investigation of the recent violence and
for effective accountability.
The upcoming month of April will involve the
celebration of important holidays for both Muslims and
Jews. We call on all parties concerned to abstain from
provocative words and deeds, refrain from incitement
to violence, jointly uphold and respect the historical
status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem, make every
effort to prevent the situation from escalating out of
control and strive not to allow the conflict in Gaza to
repeat what happened last year.
Settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories violate international law, disrupt the
contiguity of the occupied Palestinian territories,
squeeze the living space of the Palestinian people and
affect the prospects for achieving the two-State solution.
We are deeply concerned about the continued expansion
of settlements in the occupied territories, the growing
number of settlers and their increasing violence.
We once again call on Israel to halt the expansion of
settlements, stop the eviction of Palestinians, cease the
demolition of Palestinian homes and create conditions
for the development of Palestinian communities in the
West Bank, as called for in resolution 2334 (2016).
The international community should continue
to help Palestine alleviate its fiscal crisis, improve
its economy and livelihood and fight the coronavirus
disease. We support Palestinian-Israeli coordination on
economic and civilian matters, and we call on Israel to
lift the blockade of Gaza as soon as possible.
China has always been concerned about the wellbeing of the Palestinian people. Last month, China
and Egypt jointly provided 500,000 vaccine doses to
the people of Gaza. China’s 200,000 vaccine doses for
refugees outside Palestine have also been delivered

22-2956417/19

S/PV.9000

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in three batches,
arriving in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon.
Ultimately, the Palestinian issue needs a long-term
settlement on the basis of the two-State solution. We
hope that the two sides maintain the positive momentum
of the recent high-level contacts, gradually build up
mutual trust and resume dialogue on an equal footing at
an early date. We call on the international community to
make greater efforts to advance the Middle East peace
process on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and other
international agreements. The Security Council should
heighten its sense of urgency, effectively shoulder its
responsibilities and take constructive action towards
a just and lasting settlement of the PalestinianIsraeli issue.
The current security situation in Europe is of
concern to all sides, but the Palestinian-Israeli issue
is just as important. The question of Palestine must
not be marginalized, let alone remain unresolved
for a long time. Recently, the Special Envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Middle East Issue visited
the region and engaged extensively with all parties on
the Palestinian issue to promote consensus-building
for peace. China will continue to work with the
international community to make unremitting efforts
and to do its part to contribute to a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement as the representative of the United
Arab Emirates.
I would like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
for his comprehensive briefing and for presenting
the twenty-first report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Our discussion today comes as the region
approaches the month of Ramadan, as well as other
upcoming holy occasions for the three Abrahamic
religions. Such occasions represent an opportunity
to promote the values of peaceful coexistence among
different religions. As Mr. Wennesland said, we hope
that the upcoming period will be one of calm, in
contrast to the traumatic events that occurred in the
occupied Palestinian territory at this time last year. We
also support his call to the parties concerned to work
to reduce tensions, especially in the city of Jerusalem,
18/19

22/03/2022

and refrain from taking any action that may exacerbate
tensions and increase escalation. That also requires the
parties to make proactive and coordinated efforts to
consolidate and preserve the basis of the recent truce.
In that regard, my country appreciates the efforts
of Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty King
Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein, to reach a common
understanding that ensures calm and peace during
the upcoming period. While we call on all parties
to exercise restraint, especially in the light of other
tensions in the region, we stress the need to respect
the freedom of Palestinians to practise their religious
rites and the seriousness of violating them or violating
the sanctity of the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque. We also
commend the efforts of the Arab Republic of Egypt to
resume the reconstruction process in the Gaza Strip
and to maintain calm there.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), reports confirm that we have witnessed
an upsurge in settlement activities in recent years,
which significantly affects the lives of the Palestinian
population and constitutes a violation of international
law. The continued settler violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories is particularly worrisome. We
express further concern over the persistent forced
displacement of Palestinians and the demolition and
confiscation of their homes and properties. Such
acts only further worsen Palestinians’ humanitarian
conditions and undermine development efforts. We
support Special Coordinator Wennesland’s call to
halt all such practices and safeguard the prospect of
a two-State solution, whereby Israel must uphold its
responsibilities in accordance with international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
As part of the presidency’s pledge to shed light on
the pandemic, which started two years ago, we would
like to note that a mere 49 per cent of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories have been vaccinated
against the coronavirus disease. That requires
addressing the challenges that prevent achieving the
desired vaccination rate.
We stress the need to empower Palestinian women
in all sectors and support projects and programmes
that meet their needs given their important role in
promoting stability and development, as well as the
conflict’s disproportionate impact on them.
Similarly, we emphasize the important role of
young people in laying the foundations for peace and
22-29564

22/03/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9000

reinforcing the values of peaceful coexistence among
the two peoples. Realizing those objectives requires
tapping into their potential and investing in their
capabilities to enable them to build a brighter future
that serves them and their communities.

credible peace process that leads to the achievement of
a two-State solution, with the State of Palestine living
side by side with Israel in peace and security and under
mutual recognition.

In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its historic commitment to supporting an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine based on the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the Madrid terms of reference, the
Arab Peace Initiative and other agreed international
parameters. Genuine efforts are needed to relaunch a

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

22-2956419/19
