United Nations

A/RES/68/261

General Assembly

Distr.: General
3 March 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 9

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 29 January 2014
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/68/L.36 and Add.1)]

68/261. Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics
The General Assembly,
Recalling recent resolutions 1 of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council highlighting the fundamental importance of official statistics for the
national and global development agenda,
Bearing in mind the critical role of high-quality official statistical information in
analysis and informed policy decision-making in support of sustainable development,
peace and security, as well as for mutual knowledge and trade among the States and
peoples of an increasingly connected world, demanding openness and transparency,
Bearing in mind also that the essential trust of the public in the integrity of
official statistical systems and confidence in statistics depend to a large extent on
respect for the fundamental values and principles that are the basis of any society
seeking to understand itself and respect the rights of its members, and in this context
that professional independence and accountability of statistical agencies are crucial,
Stressing that, in order to be effective, the fundamental values and principles that
govern statistical work have to be guaranteed by legal and institutional frameworks and
be respected at all political levels and by all stakeholders in national statistical systems,
Endorses the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics set out below, as
adopted by the Statistical Commission in 1994 2 and reaffirmed in 2013, and endorsed
by the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2013/21 of 24 July 2013:
Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics
Principle 1. Official statistics provide an indispensable element in the
information system of a democratic society, serving the Government, the economy
_______________
1

These include General Assembly resolution 64/267 on World Statistics Day and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 2005/13 on the 2010 World Population and Housing Census Programme, 2006/6 on
strengthening statistical capacity and 2013/21 on the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics.
2
For the original preamble used on the occasion of the initial adoption of the Fundamental Principles in
1994, see chapter V of the report of the Statistical Commission on its special session (Official Records of
the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 9 (E/1994/29)). More information on the
Fundamental Principles and their history is available from the website of the Statistics Division.

13-45511

*1345511*

Please recycle

A/RES/68/261

Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics

and the public with data about the economic, demographic, social and
environmental situation. To this end, official statistics that meet the test of practical
utility are to be compiled and made available on an impartial basis by official
statistical agencies to honour citizens’ entitlement to public information.
Principle 2. To retain trust in official statistics, the statistical agencies need to
decide according to strictly professional considerations, including scientific
principles and professional ethics, on the methods and procedures for the collection,
processing, storage and presentation of statistical data.
Principle 3. To facilitate a correct interpretation of the data, the statistical
agencies are to present information according to scientific standards on the sources,
methods and procedures of the statistics.
Principle 4. The statistical agencies are entitled to comment on erroneous
interpretation and misuse of statistics.
Principle 5. Data for statistical purposes may be drawn from all types of
sources, be they statistical surveys or administrative records. Statistical agencies are
to choose the source with regard to quality, timeliness, costs and the burden on
respondents.
Principle 6. Individual data collected by statistical agencies for statistical
compilation, whether they refer to natural or legal persons, are to be strictly
confidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes.
Principle 7. The laws, regulations and measures under which the statistical
systems operate are to be made public.
Principle 8. Coordination among statistical agencies within countries is
essential to achieve consistency and efficiency in the statistical system.
Principle 9. The use by statistical agencies in each country of international
concepts, classifications and methods promotes the consistency and efficiency of
statistical systems at all official levels.
Principle 10. Bilateral and multilateral cooperation in statistics contributes to
the improvement of systems of official statistics in all countries.
73rd plenary meeting
29 January 2014

2/2
