United Nations

PLENARY
MEETING
562nd

GE
AS
.

Oficial

Thursday, 1 November 1956,
+ yq..(; pt~
at 9S0 p.m.
Records
FIRST

EMERGENCY SPECIAL SESSION

New York

7. My Government certainly has its own views on the
rights
and wrongs of the crisis before us, but we will
Agenda item 5 :
concern ourselves solely with how peace can be restored.
Question considered by the Security Council at its
We offer no formal proposal, but we will throw out
749th and 750th meetings, held on 30 October 1956
some of our views for what they may be worth. It is
(cofitinued)
. . ..w..................................
13
the view of my #Government that the world’s peace can
be salvaged within the framework of the following
Pm&dent: Mr. Rudecindo ORTEGA (Chile).
formula: First, restoration of the parties directly involved in the crisis to t,he stattis quo before the outbreak
of the hostilities ; secondly, the establishment immeAGENDA ITEM 5
diately thereafter of a modus vivendi; and thirdly,
resumption of peaceful negotiations on the issues inQuestion considered by the Security Council at
volved. These are consecutive stages, and each stage
its 749th and 750th meetings, held on 30 Octoinvolves its own practical measures.
ber 1956 (continued)
8. At the first stage, to effectuate the restoration of
1.
: We have met in
the status quo ante, two steps are necessary. First, the
extr
situation of extraUnited Kingdom, France, Egypt and Israel should imordinary urgency. We are here met to try to hold in
mediately observe a cease-fire. This accomplished-and
check, of we can, awesome events of catastrophic
Sihis is the second step-the
United Kingdom and
sibillities. The peace we Ihave thus far been seelf?‘ng
France, on the one hand, should be asked to withdraw
desperate1 to preserve has been breached deeply and
their forces from Egyptian territory within a specified
fearfully. );v e must heal that breach determinedly, by
period, and, on the other hand, Israel and Egyptian
every pacific method the Charter permits, as we should ;
forces should be withdrawn, simultaneously wherever
and by every effective method the situation requires,
possible, to their respective demarcation lines under
if we must. Now, more than ever, this United Nations
the ‘Egyptian-Israel
General Armistice Agreement.
must prove that it can be equal to the peril that is a
9.
At
the
second
stage-the
establishment of an acchallenge both to its own existence and to the peace
ceptable modus vivendi in the interim-two
issues, if
of the world, which it was organized to keep. This,
we
are
to
be
realistic,
are
immediately
involved:
the
truly, is a moment of decision. The crisis calls for
administration
of the Suez ,Canal and the enforcement
prompt remedial
action, not idle words. I shall,
of the General Armistice Agreement.
therefore, be brief.
10. The United. Kingdom and France justified their
2, There are two ways of approaching the problem
action on the plea of protecting the international waterbefore us : First, to attend to right first and peace afterway, while Egypt, on the other hand, views with hoswards ; secondly, to attend to peace first and right
tility the operation of the Suez Canal Users’ Association.
afterwards.
11. As a first step in the establishment of this modus
3. The first procedure is to ascertain the facts, devivendi,
temporarily-and
I say “temporarily”
with
termine which of the parties is in error, and then tell
emphasis-the United Kingdom and France, on the one
him to do what is right. This is the normal procedure
hand, and Egypt, on the other, could be asked to yield
in an atmosphere of calm and quiet.
the administration of the Canal to an international com4. The second procedure is to ask the parties, first,
mission to be created by the United Nations. During
to go back to their original
positions, provide an acthis interim arrangement, the proceeds of the Canal
ceptable m&us vivercdi in the interim, and, after tranoperation, after deducting the operational expenses and
quillity has been restored, determine who is right and
other obligations, would be held in trust, subject to diswho is wrong.. This is the usual procedure in an
position after the parties had come to a final settlement
environment in flames.
in the resumption of peaceful negotiations envisaged
5. If we adopt the first, I fear we shall get nowhere.
in the last stage of this proposal. This should not be
No party in the thick of the fight will ever admit that
a cause of alarm to Egypt, because, as I emphasize
he is wrong. Indeed, the more strongly you point to
here, this would be no more than a temporary expedient.
his error, the more stubbornly he would plunge into it.
As soon as a ,final settlement was arrived at by the
If we adopt the second course, we have every chance
parties in the negotiations contemplated in the last
of saving the peace-which,
for the present, is our
stage, the international
commission to be created by
primary and immediate concern.
the United Nations would yield the administration back
again to the machinery agreed upon by the parties.
6. Pos#tulates of right and wrong must yield first to
the exigencies of the moment. It pays toa know who is
12. Between Egypt and Israel, after withdrawal of
right or who is wrong only if we survive. War-and
their forces to the respective demarcation lines enthe inevitable death to which it leads-does not linger
visaged. in the first part of this proposal, the Secretaryon the witness-stand to gaze leisurely at the symbol of
General would promptly resume his functions under
justice.
the resolution adopted by the Security Council on 4
13
, A/PV.562
1,
il
g,
CONTENTS

Page

1.

14

General

Assemldy-First

Emergency

April 19.56 [S/3.575]. It would then be his task, among
other things, to confer promptly with the Governments
concerned with a view to tracing the causes of the
unfortunate incidents which have brought about the
hostilities and to seek such measures as he might deem
appropriate to ensure the effective enforcement of the
General Armistice Agreement.
13. We come now to the third and last stage. As the
machinery of the modtis vivendi envisaged in the second
part of this proposal commenced to operate, and as
calm and tranquillity were sufficiently restored, then, as
the first step, the United Kingdom, France and Egypt
would resume their peaceful negotiations on the Suez
Canal question, with due regard to the six principles
already agreed upon between them, until a satisfactory
solution had been reached. At that juncture, the advisability of adding two disinterested countries to the
negotiation group might be considered, so as to in’ traduce into the negotiation moderating and conciliatory
elements which could help to facilitate agreement.
14. Lastly, the Security Council could reconvene to
consider more effective measures to ensure faithful compliance with the General Armistice Agreement between
Israel and Egypt and devise additional measures to
cope with the alleged causes of the repeated ,breaches
of that agreement.
15. We wish to emphasize, in closing, that the formula
we have outlined is no more than a temporary expedient to restore the peace. It is not by any means
designed as a permanent solution of the outstanding
issues between the parties. No prejudgement of their
claims is contemplated. It is not intended to pre-empt
any of their rights. It is clearly understood that the
parties would be at perfect liberty to prosecute their
respective contentions after peace had heen restored.
16. My delegation is pleased that, except for the
second stage of our proposal, the draft resolution presented by the Secretary of State of the United States
[A/3256] agrees substantially with it and is animated
by the same objective : the need for the immediate
restoration of peace through the cessation of hostilities.
17. Mr. RIFA’I
(Jordan) : This emergency special
session of the General Assembly will be remembered by
future generations as one held to save right, peace and
justice from being downtrodden by aggression and
colonialism. It will go into the annals of history as a
great accomplishment of nations uniting for peace.
18. We meet today to consider an exceedingly grave
situation that has been created by a premeditated, unprovoked open aggression against Egypt. The champions of this aggression carried out their plan in complete ,disregard of human intelligence, apart from their
violations of their international
undertakings,
of the
principles of the United Nations Charter and of the
standards of civilization.
19. The plot, horrible and dismaying as it is, is so
obvious that nothing could hide it. Israel, whose Government was condemned by every evidence and by the
Security Council as an aggressor, was used as a tool
to facilitate a still wider aggression against peaceful,
independent Egypt. Consequently, Egypt became suddenly the target elf a triple aggression by Israel, the
United Kingdom
and France. The conscience of the
world was indeed shocked to see Egypt and the Egyptians come overnight under combined heavy fire and
bombardment from the air, from the sea and from the
land for no sin which they had committed.
20. It was in face of this intolerable situation that a
high sense of manhood and honour moved Mr, Eisen-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

hower, President of the United States of America, to :
press for an emergency meeting of the Security Council /
to deal with the situation when it first started with the i
Israel aggres#sion against Egypt. It was most regrettable, however, that the nob’le efforts of the majority
of the members of the Security Council failed to achieve i
the adoption of a resolution calling for an immediate 1’
cease-fire and the ,withdrawal of Israel forces from j
Egyptian territory, because of the vetoes of the United
Kingdom and France.
21. The issue ‘before us is most serious, and calls for
the speediest action by this Assembly. The world is
now witnessing a flagrant aggression carried out by
Israel against Egypt, and an armed expedition carried
out by France and the United Kingdom against Egyptian territory and its inhabitants. In violation of the
principles of the United Nations Charter, Israel, on
the one hand, is aiming to gain more territory of
Palestine, while the United Kingdom and France aim b
to occupy the Egyptian territory of the Suez Canal zone
by force of arms.
r
22. Will the international community leave the victim
at the mercy of aggression? Wi,ll the elements of virtue
and righteousness throughout the world retreat in the
face of violence and destruction? Fellow representa- :
tives, my Government appeals to you all, to your Governments and to your nations to hasten to join in a
collective effort to stop this invasion of Egypt. Apart t
from any moral consideration, let me summarize to YOU
the consequences of the present triple military action
against Egypt.
23. Israel is driving militarily
to occupy the Gaza
strip, which is the on.ly remaming part of southern
Palestine under Egyptian administration.
This strip is
an area of vulnerable fertile plain-land along the coast
of the Mediterranean,
fifty miles long and five miles
wide. It is indefensible; therefore it is difficult for any
army to hold out trying to defend it. There live in this
strip of land 300,000 Palestinian Arabs, The Israel
aggression, if not halted immediately,
will seal t,heir
fate. Once Israel succeeds in occupying the Gaza area
with its large attacking force, the Arab inhabitants
there will be thrown out either across the borders into
the surrounding desert to meet death and destruction
once again, or into the sea, or they will be ,liquidated
and annihilated under a new Israel suppression. Israel
will then get more space for the Zionist immigrants
converging on it from the four corners of the globe.
24. As to the aims of the United Kingdom and
France, they are well known. They want to occupy
the Suez ,Canal zone by force. However, an immediate
objective of these two States is to complicate matters for
the present Egyptian Government, headed by President
Nasser, who they allege is inflaming the Arab world
with nationalism and the call for freedom. Thus, by
breaking him, according to their illusions, they will be
in a position to put down the progressing nationalistic
movement in all other Arab countries and territories.
25. This is the situation in brief, This aggression by
Israel, on the one hand, and the military action by
France and the United Kingdom, on the other hand,
are therefore *directed not against Egypt alone but
against the Arab homeland and the Arab nation as
a whole.
26. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is pledged to
stand by the side of Egypt, its Arab sister State, in
defending peace and stability in our area and in repelling the aggression and invasion led against tihe
Arab peoples and the Arab territories. Jordan and
”

562nd

meeting-l

Egypt are both members of the Arab League of States,
both are parties, to a regional collective defence pact,
and both are parts of the Arab homeland and the Arab
nation. We have our undertakings to Egypt, and we
will live up to those undertakings. We shall stand
together to defend our safety, our existence, our freedam and our future. The Arab countries will meet the
situation and will meet it boldly, because we have faith
in right, in justice and in Cod.
27. That is our pledge. But there is a greater pledge,
a pledge w,hich we share with all the Members here, a
pledge in which we are all united and to which we are
all ,devoted. It is the pledge of our holy Charter, of
brotherhood and peace among all nations. In the name
of this common cause, my delegation respectfully requests the Members of the United Nations to settle the
present grave situation.
28. The delegation of Jordan has examined the draft
resolution submitted by the United States [A/3256].
We feel that a draft resolution appropriate to meet the
present situation should have gone further and should
have included the following points: a condemnation of
the military
action taken by Israel, France and the
United Kingdom
against Egypt; the application of
sanctions against Israel for its consistent aggression
and continued violations; in case an immediate ceasefire and withdrawal of the attacking forces from Egyptian territory were not effected, provision for United
Nations assistance to Egypt, the aggrieved party. Nevertheless, in view of the urgency of the present situation,
my delegation is prepared to vote in favour of the
United States .draft resolution as an immediate measure
to deal with the situation.
(translated, from
n countries were
invited fo San Francisco, we had before us the agreements concluded by the great Powers at Dumbarton
Oaks and Yalta, which in reality constituted a tripartite
alliance aimed essentially at the absolute prohibition
of the use of force by any country in the world, even
in defence of its lawful rights, except with the express
authorization of the Security Council. We opposed that
principle, because we considered that the exercise of
certain rights, such as that of self-defence, was so
sacred that it should not be made subject to a veto in
the Security Council. The great Powers accepted our
point of view, but with the express dimitation that the
right to use force without the authorization
of the
Security ,Council should apply only to cases of selfdefence, and not to selfdefence simply but to selfdefence in the case of an armed attack. It was in the
light of that principle that Article 51 of the Charter was
drafted by Mr. Dulles, Senator Vandenberg and Mr.
Rockefeller, together with the representatives of the
Latin American countries.
30. Today, however, we are faced with the situation
which I shall now describe. We do not want to embark
on a discussion of the rights which Israel, France and
the United Kingdom may or may not have. They may
indeed consider themselves entitled to demand compliance with the treaties of 1888 or 1949, but, as far
as the United Nations is concerned, those rights, whatever they may be, must never be secured by the use
of force. Ever since the ratification of the United
Nations Charter, the use of force or armed intervention
to secure rights, even lawful rights, has been strictly
Fo\&ipd
unless expressly ordered by the Security

November

1956

15

31. Nor can France and the United Kingdom allege
that they are acting under Article 51 of the Charter,
because, even if they themselves, had been victims of
some kmd of aggression, the power to take action under
Article 51 was expressly limdted at San Francisco to
cases of armed attack, and we have no information that
there had been any armed attack on France and the
United Kingdom.
32. Might has never been the source of right, but the
United Nations was founded on a new principle, expressly accepted by all the Members of the United
Nations on their signature of the Charter, namely! that,
except in cases of collective action undertaken m accordance with the provisions of the Charter, no country
might secure its rights, ‘however legitimate, by the use
of force.
33. The United Kingdom
representative explained
to us a few minutes ago that, on account of special
circumstances, his country had been obliged to act
independently, that is, outside the framework of the
Charter. However, that is precisely what the Charter
prohibits. Independent action outside the United Nations is prohibited, and it is prohibited precisely because Sir Winston Churchi’ll, Mr. Roosevelt and Mr.
Stalin so agreed at Yalta, and because the Charter so
stipulates. For good or ill, that is an obligation which
is in force and which no one has denounced.
34. We all agree that treaties, such as the Convention
of 1888 and the 1949 armistice agreements, must be
respected ; it is not for the parties, however, but for
the United Nations, or the International
Court of
Justice, to say whether those treaties have been cornplied with or violated. No country may take the law
into its own hands, and a nation loses its right to demand
compliance with other treaties if it starts off by ignoring
its obligation under the Charter.
35. The representative of China is quite right in suggesting that we must try to look at the Palestine question from a new angle. Obviously, we cannot go on
dealing only with incidents which are merely the effects
of a single main cause, that cause ‘being the general
situation in Palestine. We have already s,uggestecl in
the Security Council that the problem should be reconsidered as a whole, and it may be that in the end this
crisis will lead to a comprehensive solution and a
lasting peace.
36. As everyone knows, my delegation has defended
the legitimate rights of Israel, France and the United
Kingdom on the various occasions when it has been
called upon to take a stand, and we shall continue to
defend them whenever we consider it necessary. In the
case of Israel and Egypt, we shall support any just
solution, <but only on the condition that such a solution
is compatible with the principles of the Charter and is
discussed in the light of those principles.
37. We should not be able to support any resolution
calling for sanctions. When the Assembly was discussing resolution 377 (V) , entitled “Uniting
for
peace”, we emphatically stated that the Assembly could
not take decisions but could only make recommendations. We therefore think that the draft resolution now
proposed by the United States [A/3256] is extremely
appropriate, in that it simply repeats the principles
expressly stated in the Charter, We should adopt this
draft resolution as soon as possible,
38. I should like, however, to make one point clear,
namely, tmhat we shall vote for it on the understanding
that paragraph 1 of the operative part does not imply

16

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

any obligation upon Egypt to withdraw troops, because
that would be tantajnount to denying that country the
right of self-defence allolwed under Article 51 of the
Charter. As we see it-and
I think that that is what
the paragraph says-the intention is to prevent the
movement of major forces to the frontier, becaus’e, if a
cease-fire is requested, it is only logical to provide that
there shall be no movements of stronger forces to the
danger spo,ts.
39. This *draft resolution does not close the door to
further negotiations. I think that, on the contrary, if
accepted in good faith, it may serve to initiate.a new
approach to the problems of the Middle East, which,
as we all hope, will1 lead to a lasting and just peace in
that region.
4
t?l: It is with profound indign
ay, not only in my capacity as
representative of a Member State of the United Nations,
but also as a human being deeply alarmed by the
combined aggression of France, Britain and Israel.
41. This is an unprecedented session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations. The most dishondurable conspiracy in the history of our Organization
has been engineered hy two permanent members of the
Security Council, which employed as the tool of their
machintitions Israel,, that abortive issue of the United
Nations which Cal*& itself a State. Israel was born in
aggression, nurtured in aggression and lives on aggression. Israel is now being Used as a stooge for aggression.
42. The three conspirators have unashamedly exposed their infamous plot. It wa? a plot contrived behind
the hack of their most faithful ally, the United States,
a country whose sons sacrificed their lives to defend
+em against aggression. That country came to their
rescue in two world wars, drily to hav,e them perpetrate
the faibhless scheme now unfolded against a peaceful
country striving solely for its freedom and independence
from foreign domination.
43. In these tormenting hours in the history of mankind and of the United Nations, of peace-loving peoples
everywhere, there is little use in talk. The ‘human
conscience is alreadj aroused to a high pitch of indignation against the most flagrant and wanton aggression
of our time. For this reason; I submit that our thoughts
and energy must be directed towards one aim, that of
vindicating
the injured conscience of humanity by
condemning this aggression and foiling its schemes.
44. The Secretary-General,
in his timely statement
yesterday [751s$ nzeeting], has been the most eloquent
interpreter of the general indignation which has reverberated in the ‘hearts ~1 the Members of the United
Nations and among people everywhere. This indignation was clearly reflected in the faces of the people
who witnessed the dehate in the Security Council and
listened to the callous statements of France and the
United Kingdom. The interventions. of the French and
British representatives in the Security Council furnished the purest example of classical machiavellism.
45. Not only does the combined armed aggression
include all tile essential elements of a crime perpetrated
against peace and humanity and of armed aggression
according to Article 51 of the Charter, but there are
aggravating circumstances, which render it more villainous and which merit the utmost condemnation. This
aggression ,was carefully plotted and premeditated by
two permanent members of the Security Council, and
it was put in the service of the Israel policy of aggression which has been condemned several times by the

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Council, Rumours are already circulating about the
,distribution of booty among the three aggressors.
46. The British and French representatives who attempted yesterday, in the Security Council., to deceive
the world by stating that the real objective of their
Governments’ intervention was to ensure peace in the
area, not to serve any selfish aims, were well answered
by no less a person than Mr. Gaitskell, ,leader of the
Labour Party, in the Hous,e of Commons. Mr,
Gaitskell, said :
“I can only say that any impartial observer must
recognize that this is a clear breach of the Charter
of the United Nations. Whatever doubts there may
be about the ,degree af aggression in the Israel invasion of Egypt and the extent of the provocation
it suffered, there can unfortunately be no doubt about
the nature of the British and French aggression. It
is clear beyond all peradventure . . .
“I cannot believe that it is in the true interests of
Israel to be associated with the reoccupation of the
Canal zone. If they are dooked upon as simply the
stooges of Britain and France---a kind of advance
guard of Western imperialism-then
ar.iy prospect of
a peaceful settlement is gravely endangered.”
47; In this cqnnexion, I wish to remind the Gene4
Assembly of w’hat we have always stated before it!
various organs, namely, t,hat Israel was a ,bridgehead
for Western. imperialism.
And Western imperialism
basically is French and British. Then Mr. Gaitskcll
went on to say:
“In the ,Canal zone, we may seize territory and
may deftit+and
no doubt will quite easily-the
Egyptian forces. But then what do we do? The Prime
Minister’s own comment today that before we left
we should have to make sure this did not happen
again leads one to suppose that he has no real inter&on of evacuating at 911.”
48. Is there any doubt after this as to what the United
Kingdom and France are after? These selfkappointed
guar,dians of the peace are not after peace, They have
flouted the principles of the world. Organization, whose
pripary ,duty.is to ensure peace. They are after pieces
of territory; they aim to satisfy their colonial and.
imperialist hunger with other people’s land.
49. They thought they could satiate this appetite with
impunity, but the world conscience has reacted vehemently to their greed. It is not only the peoples of
Asia and Africa which have condemned their action,
but their principal allies as well. I need not now repeat
the wise words of President Eisenhower, which are
well known to all the representatives, in this Assembly,
but let the French and British listen to the words of
Marshal T’ito, t;he Presidenllt of Yugoslavia, of Mr.
Pearson of Canada, of the Foreign Ministers of the
Scandinavian countries, and of Germany, Italy and
Spain, and of many other leaders in the world, and let
them take cognizance of the letters from the overwhelming majority of the Members of this Organization! which have associated themselves, with the
Security Council’s decision to call this extraordinary
session to deal with this flagrant breach of the peace.
50. Mr. Ben Gurion, author of the Israel aggression,
has pushed his effrontery to the height of praising thenoble stand taken .by the President of the United
States. This is not the first example of its kind, Israel
has accustomed us to declarations of peace in the public
light, accompanied by machinations of war perpetrated’
in enveloping shadow.

562nd

meeting--l

51. The urgent convening of this body in special
session, in spite of obstructions on two occasions from
the French and British representatives against the
action of the Security Council, constitutes a brilliant
victory for the United Nations over the spirit of evil
and destruction which inspired this combined aggression, T,his victory, however, is not complete. It is, but
a preliminary
move for swift and radical action. The
hour does not call for mellifluous speeches, nor for
voluble tirades. At this very moment Egyptian cities
are the targets of intensive bombardment. Human lives
are being sacrificed. We must act immediately
and
sternly.
52. The Governments of three countries which pretend
to be at the apex of civilization and democracy have,
by their concerted action of aggression, launched an
action of contemptuous defiance against the civilized
world and democratic institutions.
53. If the United Nations does not succeed by immediate and vigorous measures in arresting the combined aggression, the conflict, at this point localized in
Egypt, will spread swiftly throughout the whole region
and beyond. Clauses guaranteeing mutual assistance
bind the Arab States to Egypt. These States wil.1 sooner
or later be called upon to exercise their legitimate right
of individual and collective defence, in accordance with
Article 51 of the Charter.
54. Even if such measures of redress are not taken to
re-establish the statzcs quo, Israel, France and the
United Kingdom will never be secure in that which
they have momentarily acquired. We will never tolerate
such a state of affairs.
55. In conclusion, I must say, &s I stated at the outset,
that the situation in which we find oucrselves calls for
tirgent action on our part. The Prime Minister of
India, in his letter dated 31 October 1956 to the
Secretary-General
[S/3720] meationed the following,
among other things:
“In view of the disastrous consequences of this
invasion of Egyptian territory, I earnestly trust that
the United Nations wiP take strong steps in this
matter to prevent the world plunging into war, and
demand immediate withdrawal of all foreign troops
from Egypt. The procedure of the United Nations
must be swifter than the procedures of invasion and
aggression.”
56. Such a procedure, in our view., must include these
basic measures: first, condemnation of the United
Kingdom, France and Israel for their armed aggression
against Egypt; secondly, immediate cessation of air,
naval and land operations initiated against Egypt by
these three aggressors ; thirdly, immediate withdrawal
of foreign troops behind the armistice lines ; fourthly,
application of sanctions against Israel for its armed
aggression against Egypt in flagrant violation of the
General Armistice Agreement; and fifthly, in case of
non-compliance by the aggressors with the resolution
which the Assembly might adopt, immediate assistance
prescribed by the provisions of Chapter VII must be
made available to Egypt, the vi&m of aggression.
57. This, in the view of my delegation, is what this
grave situation requires. However, due to the fact that
the United
States has submited a draft resolution
[A/32.56] which embodies some of the measures we
consider essential to deal with this problem, we are in
a position to lend it our support. We take this opportunity to express to the Government of the United

c

November

1956

States our deep appreciation
taken so far.
58

17

for the initiative

it has

UU

ipecial ‘se&ion of the ‘General Asskmbly faces a very
important task: the immediate adoption of measures to
end the aggression of the United Kingdom, France and
Israel against Egypt.
59. The situation in the Near East is extremely
serious. On 29 ‘October 1956, Israel, in violation of the
General Armistice Agreement, of decisions of the Security Council and of the United Nations Charter, began
aggressive military operations against Egypt. ‘On that
same day, when Israel’s aggression against Egypt was
already in full swing, the Governments of the United
Kingdom and France presented Egypt with an ultimatum which, on the pretext of preventing further
hostilities between Israel and Egypt, would have compelled Egypt to surrender to the United Kingdom and
France key positions in Egyptian territory-Suez,
Port
Said and Ismai~lia.
60. In spite of the fact that the Government of Egypt,
acting in defence of its national sovereignty and territorial integrity, rejected this unprecedented demand,
the Governments of the United Kingdom and France
did not renounce their aggressive designs. At the veiy
time that the Egyptian army was forced to repel aggtession by Israel’s armed forces, Egypt found itself
confronting the immediate danger of an invasion by
British and French occupation forces.
61. According to an announcement by the Egyptian
Command, British and French military aircraft, in the
course of 31 October and 1 November, carried out a
number of raids on Egyptian territory, bombing Cairo,
Alexandria and towns in the Suez Canal zone.
62. British and French bombers have sunk a ship in
the Suez Canal, thereby disrupting navigation through
the Canal. British warships have blockaded the Suez
Canal at both ends, Strong British and French naval
forces are moving towards Egyptian ports.
63. By engaging in armed intervention in Egypt, the
Governments of the United Kingdom and France have
hurled a challenge at the peace-loving peoples of the
whole world. They have violated the obligations assumed by tshem under the United Nations Charter, In
SO doing, these Governments
have takeu upon themselves the grave responsibility of seriously aggravating
the international situation,
64. There is every indication that the aggression
against Egypt by Israel, and the aggression by the
United Kingdom and France, is the result of a coordinated plan worked out in advance by the United
Kingdom and French ,Governments, and not of mere
coincidence.
65. Israel aggression was planned with the purpose
of creating a pretext for the seizure of the Suez Canal
by British and French armed forces. The Is,rael Government, in undertaking
aggressive action against
Egypt, proved to be a tool in the hands of the imperialistic circles which are trying to re-establish their
colonial domination in the East. In so doing, they have
hurled a challenge at all the Arab peoples, at all the
peoples of the East, which are fighting colonialism.
This action by the ruling extremist circles. of Israel
is criminal and dangerous, primarily for Israel itself
and for its future.
66. By undertaking aggressive action against Egypt,
the United Kingdom and France have entered upon a

18

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

course which is incompatible
with the purposes .a(“d
principles of the United Nations. Tlhe representatives
of the United Kingdom and France have prevented
the Security Council from taking the necessary measures to put an end to the aggression against. Egypt.
While the Security Council was considering this question, the Governments of the United Kingdom
and
France, in circumvention of the Council, started serving Egypt with threats and with an ultimatum,
and
began open hostilities against the State of Egypt.
67. The Governments of the United Kingdom
and
France are trying to justify their action by alleging
that they are protecting the Suez Canal and freedom
of navigation through the ‘Canal. The question may
legitimately be asked : who is threatening the Suez
Canal and freedom of navigation through it? If the
threat comes from Israel’s military operations against
Egypt, why is it that the United Kingdom and France
took action not against Israel but against the victim
of Israel aggression, Egypt? Why is it that their ultimatum demanded that Egypt should allow Israel armed
forces to occupy all Egyptian territory east of the Suez
Canal ? How can the protection of freedom of navigation through the Suez Canal explain the Moekading
of the Canal by the British and French navies? In what
way can concern for the Suez Canal account for British
and French air raids against installations of the Canal?
68. It is perfectly clear that the statements by the
United Kingdom and France concerning the protection
of navigation through the Suez Canal are only a pretext
to disguise their aggressive action against Egypt. In
the Security Council, too, the representatives of the
United Kingdom and France attempted to justify that
aggressive action by alleging that their respective countries were trying to put an end to hostilities in the Near
East and to restore peace and calm to that region.
69. The facts, however, indicate the contrary. The
United Kingdom and France prevented the Security
Council from taking measures to stop Israel aggression
against Egypt. The United Kingdom and France themselves opened hostilities against Egypt, thus fanning
the flames of war in that region. Such conduct on the
part of the United Kingdom and: France is incompatible
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
and is a gross violation of the solemn obligations which
gaytey
of the United Nations assume under the
70. The aggression of the United Kingdom, France
and Israel against Egypt has stirred the profound
indignation of all the freedom-loving
peoples of the
world, who have expressed their deep sympathy to the
Egyptian people in their just struggle .in defence of
their national independence and sovereignty. The peoples of the world demand the cessation of aggression
against Egypt and the immediate withdrawal of the
troops of the interventionists
from Egyptian soil.
71. The representative of the ‘United Kingdom, Sir
Pierson Dixon, speaking from this rostrum [561dlst
meetilzg], openly conceded that the French and British
were engaged in intervention in Egypt, and tried to
show that the armed forces of the United Kingdom
were invading Egypt in order to restore law and order.
He even argued that the bombing of Egyptian towns
was a peaceful police action by the United Kingdom
Government. What would Sir Pierson Dixon say if
one of the United Kingdom’s neighbours tried to carry
out “pohce measures” of this kind on British soil?
72. As to the objectives of the Soviet Union’s foreign
policy in the Near East, I shall not take the path down

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

which Sir Pierson Dixon would lead the Assembly,
the path of slander and distortion of well-known facts.
I shall only make the following points. British, not
Soviet, aircraft are bombing Cairo, Port Said and many
other towns in Egypt, killing the peaceful population.
British, not Soviet, armed forces are poised on Egyptian shores, or perhaps are already landmg and occupying Egyptian territory. Let me say to Sir Pierson
Dixon that no barrage of slander and insinuation, no
smoke-screen, can hide these facts, from the eyes of
the whole world.
73. The peoples of the Soviet Union join in the
demand of the peoples of the whole world that the
United Nations should take resolute and effective
action for the immediate cessation of the aggression
launched by the United Kingdom,
France and Israel
against Egypt.
74. The representative of the Soviet Union, in his
statement of 31 IOctober 1956 in the Security Council
[751st nzeeting], unequivocally condemned the act of
aggression perpetrated against Egypt by those three
countries, The Soviet Government considers it the
duty of the United INations, for the sake of the preservation of peace and calm in the Near East, to take
urgent measures for the cessation of military operations
by the United Kingdom, France and Israel against
Egypt, and for the immediate withdrawal of the armed
forces of the interventionists
from Egyptian soil and
from Egyptian waters.
75. The delegation of the Soviet Union urges the
General Assembly: to condemn the armed attack by
the United Kingdom, France and Israel against Egypt
as an act of aggression incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations ; to demand of
the United Kingdom, France and Israel the immediate
cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of their
armed forces from the territory of Egypt and dram
Egyptian territorial waters; to appoint a United Nations commission
to- supervise
the carrying. < out of the6
_ .
_
recommendations of the emergency special Session
Oi
the General Assembly. The Assembly must act swiftly
and resdutelv.
: I speak on a point
have perhaps about
twenty more speakers, and perhaps there will be many
more inscribed to speak as we go on. I also see that
a <draft resolution has been submitted by the United
States [A/3256]. I particularly have my eye on paragraph 3, under which it is recommended that all Members refrain from introducing military
goods in the
area. The draft resolution also urges that the cease-fire
become effective immediately.
77. I myself have a great deal to say on this matter.
I have to say that we feel in great “pain while our
brothers in faith in Egypt are being killed. I have to
say how angry we feel against the aggression committed by Israel against Egypt. I also have to say how
unwarranted we feel the attack made by the United
Kingdom and France against Egypt-the
United Kingdom and France, with whom my country has such
traditional and sacred ties. We belong to the Commonwealth. We are associated with the United Kingdom
in that wonderful association of countries, which work
for peace. With France we have traditional and cultural friendship. However, I see that while we speak
and perorate here, there is ,damage being done to
valuable property; there are people being killed.
78. With this in mind, I make a formal proposal that
we take up this draft resolution for consideration and

562nd

meeting-l

voting here and now, without prejudice to the right
of any member to speak after this draft resolution has
been voted. I move that as a formal proposal, and I
request t,he President to consult the Assembly on this
proposal.
79. The PRESIDENT
,-,#v”-nl”.“l..-.
._,.I.. (transZated frmz Spalzish) :
AZliZ?&~bly
has heard, the representative of Pakistan has raised a point of order under rule 73 of the
rules of procedm~. He proposes that the Assembly
should proceed to an immediate vote on the draft resolution submitted by the United States [f1/3256]. This
proposal has been made without prejudice to the rights
of representatives wishing to take part in the debate;
it should consequently be understoold that, if the ASsembly decides to approve the proposal of the representative of Pakistan, all representatives will have
ample opportunity to express their views.
80. I shall therefore put this proposal to the vote.
A roll-call vote has been requested.
81. The representative of New Zealand has asked for
the floor.
: As I un82
de
presentative
of Pakistan, he is moving for closure on the basis that,
after the vote, members will be able to explain their
votes. I have also heard it suggested-and I think this
would be eminently reasonable-that there should in
any.case be at least three speakers on either side before
it is put to the vote. I should think that this would be
the least that we could agree to.
83. We are discussinga great and solemn matter. We
have a draft resolution before us which has been submitted by the leader of the delegation of the United
States. This ,draft was submitted about two hours ago.
I have had some time to examine it, but I have not had
time to refer it to my Government. Nevertheless, I
have been able to formulate certain views about it.
84. I believe that there is a difference between speaking before a ,draft resolution is put to the vote and
explaining one’s vote afterward. Even though the hour
is late, surely this is not a time to act precipitately. I
should be astounded if other representatives wished
this matter to be considered precipitately. We are dealing with issues on which we should debate carefully
and with time. We surely can postpone the vote at any
rate for one hour.
85. Therefore, at the very minimum, I put to the
Assembly that, ,&fore the vote is taken, we should hear
three speakers for each side,
36.
*’ I shall be very brief.
Mv
fi e imoortance and ext&me g&v@ of t&e situation. HoGever, I want to
submit that if the Assembly presses;for a vote tonight
or during the next hour or two hours, I shall find
myself in considerable difficulty in regard to voting. I
know that there are a number of other representatives
who are in the same position. I wish to repeat that I
fully realize the gravity of the situation. I appeal to the
Assembly, however, not to press. for a vote at least
during the next two or three hours. I am quite prepared to sit Iherefor that time, if it should be necessary+
Mr. DE GUIRINGAUD
(France) (~ranslutsd
: Since I represent one of the Powers
is debate, I think it would be absolutely
the Assembly to proceed to a vote on
es draft resolution before I had had an
ting upon it. I shall not oppose
ed by the representative of New

November

1956

19

Zealand to allow three speakers in favour of the draft
resolution and three opposed to it to present their
views. In any event, I wish to be one of the three
speakers opposing the draft resolution.
88. The PRESIDENT
(translated from%Sparzish) :
I should like to ask the representative of Pakistan
whether he is prepared to accept the amendment proposed by the representative of New Zealand, to the
effect that we should hear three speakers in favour
of the draft resolution and three against it before we
proceed to a vote.
89. Mr. MIR KHAN
(Pakistan) : I certaiply intended that the parties principally concerned in the
draft resolution should have an opportunity toI speak.
If the representative of France wishes to speak, I am
sure that not only I but the whole Assembly. would be
very glad to hear what he has to say. I would say the
same thing as regards the representatives of the other
countries affected. Should the representative of !he
United Kingdom and the representative ti Egypt wish
to speak on the draft resolution, I had no intention of
suggesting that they should not.
90. The PRESIDENT
(translated frown Spustih) :
I understand that the representative of Pakistan accepts the amendment proposed by New Zealand.
91. I shall consequently give the floor to three
speakers who are in favour of the United States draft
resolution and to three who are against it. The list of
speakers will be drawn up in such a manner as to
include speakers of both opinions.
92. I now put to the vote the proposal of Pakistan
as amended by the representative of New Zealand.
93. Mr. WALKER
(Australia) (from tlze floor) :
Point of order.
ztordf;
KIDROIN (Israel) (from the floor) : Point
9.5. The PRESIDENT
(translated front Spanish) :
The voting has already started. I gave representatives
the opportunity to speak on the proposal before.
z,orE;
KIDRQN
(Israel) (from the floor) : Point
97. The PRESID,ENT (translated from .Spanish) : I
must again point out that I asked if anyone wished to
speak, and, as there was silence in the hall! I put the
Pakistan proposal to the vote. I must instst that we
proceed now with the vote.
98. Mr. KIDROlN (Israel) (f~orn the floor) : Mr.
President . . .
99. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spanish) :
We are now in the process of voting.
100. I shall have to repeat once again the proposal on
which we are voting. The Pakistan proposal has been
amended by the representative of New Zealand to
provide that a vote shall be taken on the United States
draft resolution after we have heard the views of three
speakers who are in favour of that draft and three who
are against. ’
101. I must therefore ask the representatives who are
in favour of the proposal as I have just explained it
to raise their hands.
The proposal zwasadopted by 57 votes to 2, with 10
abstetitions.
The meeting was suspended at Il.10 pm. and
resunzed at 11.50 p.yn.
102. The PRESIDENT
(traszslated from S$anis?z):
I must apologize for the ,delay in complying with the

20

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Assembly’s instru$ions.
We have had difficulty in
making up the list of speakers. We have been able to
overcome this difficulty, we think, through the cooperation of the New Zealand representative, who told
us that his proposal that the list of speakers should
include three representatives supporting the United
States proposal and three against did not mean that
the countries concerned in bhe dispute which had not
yet spoken, namely France and Israel, should not be
given the floor.
103. (On this basis I submit to the Assembly for its
approval the follawing list of speakers : Israel, Ecuador,
Australia, Yugo.slavia, France, India, Saudi Arabia and
New Zealand.
104. If the Assembly agrees to this? list, we shall be
able to carry out the decision we took just now.
It was so decided.
: On Monday, 29 October
ces took securitv measures
in the Sinai peninsula in the exercise *of Israel’s
inherent right of self-defense. The object of these
operations is to eliminate the bases from which armed
Egyptian units under the special care and authority of
Mr. Nasser invade Israel’s territory for purposes of
murder, sabotage and the creation of permanent insecurity to peaceful life. These are the only military
activities for which the Government
of Israel is
responsible.
106. Stretching back far behind the events of this
week lies the unique and sombre stpry of a small people
subjected throughout all the years of its national existence to a furious, implacable, comprehensive campaign of hatred and siege for which there is nb parallel
or precedent in the modern history of nations, Not for
one single moment throughout the entire period of its
modern national existence has Israel enjoyed that
minimal physical security which the United Nations
Charter confers on all Member States, and which all
other Member States have been able to command.
107. We meet here under the auspices of the United
Nations, a family of sovereign States organized in a
system of mutual rights and obligations, Its basic
premise is the principle of sovereign equality of all its
Members. Whatever rights are enjoyed by other Members of this Organization
belong to Israel, without
addition or diminution. Whatever obligation any, Member State owes to another, Egypt owes to Israel and
Israel to Egypt. If Egypt denies Israel the plenitude
of its Charter rights, then it inflicts a deep injury upon
Israel, and its competence to invoke the Charter against
Israel is seriously compromised and reduced.
108. What are the obligations. which Egypt owes to
Israel under the Charter? Under the Charter! Egypt
is bound to practise tolerance and live together m peace
with Israel as a good neighbour. Under the Charter,
Egypt is bound to unite its strength with Israel to
maintain international
peace and security. Under the
Charter, Egypt is bound to regard Israel as a State
endowed with sovereignty equal to its own. Under the
Charter, Egypt is bound to respect the territorial integrity and the political independence of the State of
Israel, and especially to refrain from the threat or use
of force against that integrity and that independence.
Under the Charter, Egypt is bound in advance to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council
whenever such decisions are made in favour of Israel
as of any other State.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

109. To these broad obligations, derived from the
Charter, there must be added to Egypt’s account other
obligations of a more specific nature, based on the
General Armistice Agreement of 1949. Under that
agreement, Egypt is bound to respect the demarcation
line between Israel and Egypt, to prevent any illegal
crossings of that line, to abstain from the threat or use
of force from its own side of the line against Israel’s
side, to regard the agreement itself as a transitory
measure leading to permanent peace, to respond at any
time to Israel’s request for a conference to develop
the agreement into a peace settlement or to amend
and review the provisions of the agreement, to abstain
from any act of hostility or any act of blockade or
belligerency.
110. Is there any resemblance whatever between this
list of obligations and Egypt’s actual conduct of its
relations with Israel? Can anyone imagine that, if Egypt
had been willing to carry out this system of relations
with Israel, we should have been assembled here on
this tragic and solemn occasion?
111. What we confront tolnight is a point of explosion
after seven years of illicit belligerency. Belligerency is
the key to the understanding of our problem tonight.
Egypt has practised belligerency against Israel by Sand.
Egypt has practised belligerency against Israel by sea.
Egypt has established belligerency as the juridical basis
of its relations with Israel. Egypt has held belligerency
to be the spiritual and emotional mainspring of its
conduct towards Israel. IOut of this four-fold belligerency maintained by Egypt for seven years-but
with
special vigour and intensity since the rise of the Nasser
rCgime-is born the crisis which the Assembly of the
United Nations confronts tonight. I would say a word
to the Assembly on each of these aspects of Egyptian
belligerency.
112. Belligerency by land took its origins in May 1948
on the very morrow of ‘Israel’s emergence to sovereignty. On that date, Egyptian forces, joined by the
converging forces of other Arab armies, marched into
the newly established, independent, sovereign State of
Israel with the avowed aim of its destruction.
113. Alas, the processes which now move so swiftly
in Egypt’s protection were much slower at that time.
It took us eight weeks to secure lrorn the organs of
the United Nations the establishment of an effective
and stable cease-fire. During that period, every home in
Israel stood under the direct shadow of death and
extinction. Our men, women and children fell by the
thousands while this wave of aggression threatened
to convulse us.
114. At the end of that year, negotiations were held
under United Nations auspices which led to the conclusion of the Rhodes Armistice Agreement. This agreement did not promise us an affirmative, trustful and
co-operative pattern of relationships, It did at least,
however, promise us immunity from overtly hostile acts.
Under the Armistice Agreement, every citizen of Israel
is entitled to till every inch of Israel’s soil and ta nav%.waters, without let -or
.gate
. . every . inch of Israel’s
.I
nmarance Dy any violent encroachment itrom the
Egyptian side.
11.5. Yet, throughout thi
territory has been subject
The frontier has not been
the sudden leaping forwar
night. Our toll of over 40
these incursions tells the s
which has been violated
‘~,~
1 ‘,y>,
(.<a*
? :,-<...
; ,,::s$&i~;~,+,,?,,,

562nd

meeting-l

special frequency and intensity during the past two
years, since the Nasser regime has held sway in Egypt.
The toll of dead and wounded has been augmented and
aggravated by countless pipelines blown up, by water
supplies demolished, by trees pulled down, by an inferno of insecurity and danger which has raged along
peaceful farms and homesteads in the frontmr area.
And last year, as I shall point out, to all of these
torments was added perhaps the most penetrating and
perilous of all, through the organization and mobilization of the fedayeen movement.
116. It may be difficult for natioaa assembled here,
which enjoy a normal security, to understand what has
been involved for Israel by this belligerency on land.
While much has been said about Israel’s responsibilities
to the United Nations, it is a melancholy fact that,
since 1948, any Arab State which has ever tried to kill
Israel, to plunder Israel property, to blvckade Israel’s
ports, to intercept Israel’s navigation, has never regarded itself as operating under any effective mternational deterrent. Thus the United Nations has not been
able to offer Israel the minimal of daily security enjoyed by all its other Members in nearly every sector
of their national lives.
117. Surrounded by hostile armies on all its land
frontiers, subjected to savage and relentless hostility,
exposed to penetrations, raids and assaults by day and
by night, suffering constant toll of life amongst Its
citizenry, bombarded by threats of neighbouring Governments to accomplish its extinction by armed force,
overshadowed by a new menace of irresponsible rearmament, embattled,
blockaded, besieged, Israel alone
amongst the nations faces a battle for its security anew
with every rising dawn and with every approachmg
nightfall. In a country of small area and intricate configuration, the proximity of enemy guns is a constant
and haunting theme.
118. These are the fears and provocations which hover
over us everywhere, but they faI1 upon us with special
intensity in the frontier areas, where development projects vital to the nation’s destiny could be paralysed
or interrupted by our adversaries from a position of
dominating geographical advantage.
119. In short, it is a small country where every
activity by farmers or citizens becomes a test of physical
and moral courage. These are the unique circumstances
in which Israel pursues its quest for security and peace.
120. On innumerable occasions, the active defence of
Israel life and territory has been compromised in deference to international
opinion. We know that Israel is
most popular when it does not hit back, and world
opinion is profoundly important to us. So, on one occasion after another, we have buried our dead, tended
our wounded, clenched our teeth in suppressed resentment and hoped that this very moderation would deter
a repetition of these offences. But sometimes the right
and duty of self-preservation, the need to avoid expanding encroachments, the sentiment that if the claim
to peaceful existence is not defended it wil.1 be forever
lost, prevails in the final and reluctant decision.
121. But this belligerency which assails us by land
has its counterpart by sea. In 1948, the Government
of Egypt established processes of visit, search and
seizure, began to confiscate ships and cargoes bound
for Israel ports, establis~hed restrictive regulations, assumed punitive measures against the shipping and
flags of other countries desiring to trade peacefully
with Israel and to navigate upon and between the high
seas. The flags oh fifteen nations, endowed with the

November

1956

21

unconditional right of free navigation in the Suez Canal,
have been abused and prejudiced by unlawful acts of
interception. Ships have been confiscated and sold,
cargoes have been held and sequestered, sailors ‘have
(been tormented and wrongfully imprisoned, and all of
this on the great international waterway consecrated
nine ‘decades ago to the universal right of all nations
to free commerce and navigation.
122. Thus, classic acts of war by maritime blockade
have been added to the pattern of Egypt’s land belligerency in the total pattern of Israel’s siege. Again,
through all the development of this policy during the
Nasser regime, we hsve witnessed a consequent sequence of aggravation. The processes of blockade and
interception have been extended in the name of belligerency from the Suez ‘Canal to another international
waterway, the Gulf of Akaba, and the State of Israel
has had to distort the entire pattern of its economy, to
bear unwarranted burdens running into tens of millions
of pounds, in order to compensate for the impact of this
piratical system which Egypt has established on this
great artery of the world’s communications.
123, Belligerency by land and belligerency by sea are
both expressed in a doctrine of juridical belligerency.
This doctrine has been discredited by the Security
Council of the United Nations, but it continues to be
maintained, On 12 June 1951, in the Mixed Armistice
Commission, the Egyptian representative said :
“We exercise our rights of war. We are legally
at war with Israel. This armistice does not put an
end to a state of war. It will not prohibit Egypt from
exercising certain rights of war.”
In the Security Council of the United Nations, the
Foreign Minister of Egypt declared:
“The Egyptian-Israel
General Armistice Agreement will not be interpreted by us as terminating in
any legal or technical sense the state of war between
Egypt and Israel.”
124. This jurisprudence continues to be maintained
long after it has been adjudicated and discredited. It
furnishes a basis for our contention that in juridical
and legal terms Egypt has cut itself off from its Charter
obligations towards Israel and does not even avow
a legal basis upon which this conduct towards us can
legitimately be explained.
125. The fourth aspect of this betligerency should be
studied in those statements of Egypt’s intentions
towards Israel which furnish the philosophical background to the belligerent acts which I have described.
126. Here is a typical example of the kind of utterance which bombards the ears of Israel’s population
by day and by night:
“Wait and see”-says the Egyptian dictator“soon will be proven to you the strength and will of
our nation. Egypt will teach you a lesson and quieten
YOU forever. Egypt will grind you to the dust.”
127. ‘On 11 April 1956, celebrating the exploits of
Egypt’s commando units in Israel, the Egyptian Minister of Religious Properties declared:
“There is no reason why the faithful fcdayeen,
hating their enemies, should not penetrate into Israel
and transform the lives of its citizens into a hell.
Yes, we will be victorious because our motives are
holy and our aims are the highest. We will be victorious because we are more diligent in death than
is Israel in life.”

22

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

128. IOn 14 October
1956, the Egyptian dictator
himself said :
“1 a? not: solely fighting against Israel. My task
is to deliver the Arab. world from <destruction through
Israelis intrigue,
which has its roots abroad. Our
hatred is very strong. There is no sense in talking
about pea- with Israel, There is not even the smallest
place for Ilego~;ttions.”
129. The Press and all the agencies and media of
information take up the chorus. A typical example was
contained in the leading Egyptian newspaper :
“Israel will not be saved from the Arabs. She will
be destroyed under the feet of Arab fighters and the
flag of freedom will be unfurled over Palestine.”
130. There is a tendency in some quarters to underestimate the itnportance
and the impact of these pronouncements. I can assure members of the General
Assembly that it is a unique and disquieting experience
to Jive in a country surrounded by neighbours which
bombard it by day and by night with predictions and
menaces for its physical destruction. There is no doubt
whatever that these authoritative
directives furnish the
psychological and emotional background against which
belligerency by land and by sea is organized with
growing and increasingly
explosive intensity.
131. But all these aspects of belligerency together
would not of themselves
automatically invite a drastic
response in self-defence, and I wish to explain frankly
and candidly to the General Assembly the special background against which our action of 29 October took
place.
132. World opinion
naturally asks itself: What are
these fdduyeen units? What do their activities imply
for Israel’s security?
It asks whether their actions in
the past and their plans for the future are really full
of peril for Israel, and whether the peril was really so
acute that Israel might reasonably regard the elimination
of this peril as a primary condition of its security and
indeed of its very existence.
133. The Government
of Israel represents a people
endowed with a mature understanding of international
facts. We are not unaware of the limits of our strength.
We are perhaps amongst the half dozen smallest Members of this Organization.
We fully understand how
certain measures might at first sight evoke a lack of
comprehension, even in friendly minds. Being a democracy, we work under the natural restraints of a public
opinion which compels
us to weigh ,drastic choices
with care and without
undue precipitation.
It is, in
short, a Government
which determines its actions by
its smgle exclusive
aim of ensuring life and security
for the people whom it represents, while safeguarding
the honour and trust of millions linked to it by the
strongest ties of fraternity.
134. 111 recent days, this Government of Israel has
had to face a tormenting
question: Do its obligations
under the United
Nations Charter require it to resign
itself to the existence
of unmterrupted activity to the
south and north an.d east of armed units practising open
warfare against
it, and working from their bases in
the Sinai pellinsula
and elsewhere for the maintenance
of carefully
regulated
invasions of our homes, our lands,
and our very lives. 3 Or, on the other hand, are we
acting
legitimately
within our inherent right of self.defence when, having found no other remedy for over
two years, we cross the frontier against those who have
no scruples in crossing the frontier against US?

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

135. Members of the General Assembmly may be in a
better positiou to evaluate .the choice and to identify
themselves with this situation if they hear something
of the background of this movement and its place in the
total pattern of Egyptian intransigence and aggression,
136. Let it be plain that the system of waging war j
against Israel by commando penetrations is the product 4
of Mr. Nasser’s mind. It is, one of his contributions
to the international ‘life and morality of our times.
137. After intensive preparation during the spring and ‘.
summer of 1955, this new weapon was launched in
August of that year, breaking a period of relative tran- i
quillity on the Egyptian-Israel
frontier, indeed, coming :
at a time when Egypt and Israel were engaged in :
hopeful negotiations with the United Nations ‘Chief of ’
Staff, looking towards the integral implementation
of
the 1949 Armistice Agreement.
138. Between 30 August and 2 September 1955, the
Egyptian Government proclaimed its official responsibility for those invasions. On 30 August, it broadcast:
(
“Egyptian forces have penetrated into the territory
of occupied Palestine and pursued the attackers.,’
On 31 August 1955, an official communiquk informed
the Egyptian people of this new military technique:
“Egypt has decided to dispatch her heroes, the
disciples of Pharaoh and the sons of Islam, and they
will cleanse the land of Palestine. Thus we have
decided and thus is our belief. There will be no peace
on Israel’s border because we demand vengeance,
and vengeance is Israel’s death.”
On 31 August, another official communiqud stated:
“The Egyptian fedayeen have begun their activities
inside the territory of Israel after repeated clashes on *
the border ,during the past week. The Egyptian
fedayeelz have penetrated into Israel settlements
spread out in the Negev until Beersheba and Migdal
Ashqelon, at a distance of 40 kilometres, from the
Egyptian border, and have taught our aggressive
enemies a lesson that they will not forget. The Egyptian fedayeelz sowed fear and consternation amongst
the citizens of Israel.”
On 2 September, the following official statement was i
broadcast in Cairo :
“The forces of the Egyptian fedayeelz moved
towards Israel, approached its capital and caused
$eyi;lylties
along the border between Gaza and
* ,,
139. These are some of the documents which mark ~
the origin of the fedayeen movement. United Nations
authorities have repeatedly condemned these activities,
designated them as aggression, held the Egyptian Government responsible for them and called for their cessation. As one example, I quote a statement at that
time by the United Nations Chief of Staff, General
Burns. Reporting to the Security Council, he wrote:
“The episode of 22 August was soon after followed
by an organized series of attacks on vehicles, installations and persons, carried out by gangs of marauders
in Israel territory which, according to my information, resulted in the deaths of 11 mi,litary and civilian
personnel . . .
“The number and nature of these acts of sabotage
perpetrated well within Israel territory are such as
to suggest that they are the work of organ&d
and
well trained groups,,” [S/3430, paras. 3 and #.I

562nd

meeting-l

140. That was the opening shot in the fedayeelz
offensive in the summer of 19%. In the spring of this
year, the activity of these groups took on a new scope
and intensity. This was the period during which the
arms race initiated by Mr. Nasser with external help
was running most drastically to Israel’s disadvantage.
Members of the General Assembly will recall how close
we were then to the threshold of general war, while
these units came in and out of Israel every day on their
missions of murder and plunder, accompanied by the
official exhortations of Mr. Nasser and’ his officials and
by exuberant shouts of triumph in all the media of
Arab information.
141. In an address to the Security Council on 30
October [749th meeting], I submitted a ‘detailed chronicle of acts of violence carried out by penetrating
feduyeen units, ,day by day and night by night, in the
period between April of this year and a few days ago.
Throughout the whole 08 that period, United Nations
officials concerned with security on our frontier were
devoting great attention L?CP
this problem. On 8 April
1956, the United Nations Chief of Staff addressed a
letter to the Foreign Minister of Israel. In that letter,
General Burns includes the following passages:
“I am dispatching to the Foreign Minister of Egypt
a protest against the action of the fedayeen, assuming
it to have been authorized or tolerated by the Egyptian authorities, and requesting the immediate withdrawal of any persons under Egyptian control from
the territory of Israel . . .
“I consider that if Egypt has ordered these fedayeen braids, it has now put itself in the position of
the aggressor.”
142. I will not weary the General Assembly with this
sordid chronicle in all its details. Suffice it to say that,
during this period of Egyptian belligerency, there had
taken place against Israel 435 cases of armed incursion,
nearly 2,000 cases of armed robbery and theft, 1,300
cases of armed clashes with Egyptian armed forces,
172 cases of sabotage.perpetrated
by Egyptian military
units and fedayeen in Israel. As a result of these
activities, 465 of our people have been killed or
wounded. In 1956 alone, so far, as a result of this one
aspect ti Egyptian belligerency, 28 of our people have
been killed and 127 have been wounded.
143. I have said that this activity is merely the spearhead of Egyptian belligerency,, It is a new device for
making war and for making it with safety. The doctrine
is one of unilateral belligerency. The Egyptian-Israel
frontier is to be a one-way stireet. It is to be wide open
for these armed Egyptian units to penetrate deeply
, into Israel to accomplish their mission and to return.
It is to be closed in their favour against any offensive
response.
144. It was in these circumstances that the Government of Israel faced the tormenting problems of its
duties and obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. We are not satisfied with a justification of
our actions in pure terms of national expediency. There
is perhaps no Member of this Organization more sensitive to all the currents of international opinion, more
vulnerable to the disfavour and the dissent of friendlly
world opinion, broader in the scope and extent of its
universal associations, less able to maintain its life and
its existence on any principle of self-sufficiency and of
autamh y.
145. It was with full knowledge of this. fact that we
have been forced to interpret Article 51 of the ‘Charter

November

1956

as furnishing

23

both a legal and a moral basis for such
and specifically applicable
to the dangers which we face. Under Article 51 of the
Charter, the right of self-defence is described as “inherent” ; in the French tiranslation it is “rzature2”. It
is something which emerges from the very nature of a
State and of humanity. This inherent right of self‘defence is conditioned in the Charter by the existence
of armed attacks against a Member State.
146. Can anyone say that this long and uninterrupted
series of encroachments .did not constitute in its totality
the essence and the reality of an armed attack? Can it
seriously be suggested that we made no attempt to
exhaust peaceful remedies. Time after time at the table
of the Security Council and in meetings oi the Mixed
Armistice Commission efforts were made to bring
about tranquillity
on this frontier. Yet all of this wellintentioned, enlightened, and, at certain times, hopeful
effort ended without making the life or the security
of a single citizen of Israel greater than it was before.
147. I have mentioned the problem of opinion. It is
perhaps natural that a country should interpret. its
own obligations for the preservation of security more
stringently than those who enjoy greater security far
away. If we have sometimes fotmd it ‘difficult to persuade even our friends in the international community
to understand the motives for our action, this is because
nobody in the world community is in Israel’s position.
148. How many other nations have had hundreds of
their citizens killed over these years by the armed action
of armies across the frontier? How many nations have
had their ships seized and their cargoes confiscated in
international waterways? How many nations find the
pursuit of their daily tasks to be a matter of daily and
perpetual hazard ? In how many countries does every
single citizen going about his duties feel the icy wind
c& his own vulnerability? It might perhaps require an
unusual measure of humility and imagination for others
to answer the question how they would have acted in
our place. Nobody else is in our place and is therefore
fully competent to equate the advantage and the disadvantage of our choice.
149, The Government of Israel is firmly convinced
that it has done what any other nation would have done
in our place, with the reservation that many would have
done it earlier and perhaps with greater impact of
resistance. It is especially moving to us to find that,
despite the uniqueness and the eccentricity of our position, something of it is making its way into the generous
consciousness of mankind. Since this discussion proceeds not merely from the rostrum of the General
Assembly, but also against the bar of world opinion,
I think it is legitimate to quote an eloquent and cogent
passage from one of the great organs of opinion published in this, the host city of our Organization. Yesterday’s edition of The New York Times stated:
C‘
it would be ridiculous to permit Colonel
Na.&r ‘to pose before the United Nations or the
world as the innocent victim of aggression, or to hold
a protecting hand over him. On the contrary, in so
far as there is any one man guilty of aggression, it
is the Egyptian President, for he has waged war
against Israel, Britain and France by propaganda, by
gun-running, by infiltration of murderous bands, by
stirring up rebellion in French North Africa, by
seizing the Suez ,Cand .by force and scrapprng a
treaty in the same manner in which Hitler marched
into the Rhineland, by blocking the canal for Israel
shipping in defiance of United Nations orders-fidefensive action as is literally

24

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

llally by his whole loudly proclaimed programme of
throwing Israel into the sea in alliance with other
Arab states and creating an Arab empire under his
hegemony
which would expand his influence in
concentric circles to all Africa and the whole Moslem
world”.
150. In these circumstances, both the position and the
attitude of the Israel SGovernment are clear. This
attitude is based upon our fundamental
concept of
reciprocity. If the frontier between Egypt and Israel
is to protect Egyptian territory against Israel entry,
then it must protect Israel territory against Egyptian
entry. We hold that it is a self-evident truth that the
lives of Israel men, women and children are not less
sacrosanct or less worthy of international
protection
than are the lives of the hired fedayeen groups which
are the main instruments of Nasserism in its assault
upon the peace and ,decencies of Middle Eastern life.
151. Beyond these incidents+ grave as they are? we
discern issues of even greater moment. World opmion
must surely choose between the two candidates for its
confidence: on the one hand, the farmers and workers,
the men, women and children of Israel ; and, on the
other hand, the fanatic warriors of the fedayeen groups.
Behind that confrontation
there stands the much
broader and more significant confrontation
between
IsraeI and Mr. Nasser,
152. A small people builds its society and culture in
its renascent Ihomeland. In the early days of its independence it is set upon by the armed might of all its
neighbours, who attempt to wipe it off the <face of the
earth. In the following years its neighbours continue
their assault; with warlike acts of their own choice
they attempt its destruction by armed intervention.
They send armed units into its territory to murder and
plunder. They strive by every means to ensure that
nowhere shall there be tranquillity for peaceful pursuits.
They ,blare forth the most violent threats of Israel’s
destruction. They accumulate vast armaments for bringing this about. They announce, as they did last week
from Cairo, that it is they who will choose the time and
the place for the final assault and that it is for us to wait
passively for the moment of their selection. They proclaim that a state of war with Israel already exists.
They seize the greatest of the world’s international
waterways and convert it into an instrument for unilateral national pressure.
153. Across Africa and Asia, wherever Nasserism
spreads its baneful influence, it works actively to subvert all peace and progress and to establish an ambitious
and insatiable hegemony. Now, having considered that
it has humbled
and defeated the international
community and the maritime Powers! Nasser’s action returns to its first target, Israel, whxh is to be swamped
from three sides with a new wave of fedayeeti violence.
The Assembly will recall that the new wave began
shortly following the tripartite
military alliance concerted ten days ago between the Government of Syria,
Jordan and Egypt, under Egypt’s control.
154. While studying with attention alI1 proposals for
strengthening
security in the Middle East, we must
reject with vehement indignation
the charges of aggression #launched against us here, launched by some
States whose o,wn carrent international
and security
activities are well in the forefront of today’s international attention.
155, There is aggression, there is belligerency in the
Middle East, but we for eight years have been its
victims, not its authors. That is what I mean when I

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

say that world opinion as here represented should de- ’
tide whom to trust. Shall it be the small free people :
establishing its homeland in peace and constructive
progress, or shall it be the dictatorship which has bullied j
and blustered and blackmailed its way across the international life of our times, threatening peace in many 1
continents, openly avowmg belligerency, placing its 1
fist on the jugular vein of the world’s communications,
T
bringing the Middle East and the world ever nearer
to tGe Fhreshokl of conflict, intimidating
all those who
stand in its path, all except one people, at least, which
will not be intimidated-one
people whom no dictator
has ever intimidated, the people which has risen up
against al,1 the tyrants of history, the people which
knows that the appeasement of despots yields nothing
but an uneasy respite, and that a Government which
allowed its own citizens to be murdered daily in their
homes would lose the dignity and the justification for
which Governments are instituted among men?
156. In conclusion, I would ask the General Assembly
to believe that Israel and the Arab States, the region
in which they and we must forever live, now stand at
the crossroads of their history. An aggressive dictatorship has for the first time encountered successful and
glorious resistance. Some elements of its pride have
been broken. Those whom it has outraged with impunity
have stood up and, asserted their rights, and the hope
of freedom burns brighter in the Middle East today,
not only fur Israel but for many others in our region
who have found ways of communicating to us their own
deep apprehensions of what Nasser’s encroachment
means for their own cherished sovereignty.
157, If the power of this tyranny is not artificially
revived, our region will again become a place where
men of all nations, including Israel, can ‘live and work
in peace, where legitimate universal interests will1 be
respected imder the sanction of law, where contacts
with other lands will be held in respect, where all those
in Asia and Europe whose fortune is linked by history
and geography with the Middle East will receive justice
and respect for their legitimate interests. It will be a
region where the great maritime nations will not have
to suffer the indignities which they underwent in this
b.uilding last month, when they had to hang with exaggerated deference on every wave of the hand, on
every nod of condescension Jrom the representative of
the territorial Power which had converted the unconditional right of navigation into an act of grace or a
ptivilege to he confeired or withheld at will.
158. Such a Middle East, free from domination
and
totalitarian influence, will enter perhaps soon upon its
new birth of freedom. This is the crossrogd at which
we might soon stand. We codcl have wished that we
had reached it less drastically, with smaller peril and
sacrifice. But, having reached it, surely we must go
forward and not back. This momentous discussion today
has made it plain that one thing will not do: it wi,lI not
do to go back to an outdated and crumbling armistice
rCgime desigtled by its authors to last for a few months
and now lingering for eight years in growing paralysis
of function. Least of all can we #be satisfied to return
to an imperfect armistice, distorted by unilat&al
belIigertnFy, to a system designed seven years ago as a
transltlon to peace and interpreted for seven years by
one of the parties as a continuing state of war.
159. Israel has no desire or intention to wield arms
beyond the Bmits of its legitimate ‘defensive mission.
But whatever is demanded of us by way of restoring
Egypt’s rights and respecting Egypt’s security under

562ad

meeting-l

international law must surely be accompanied by equally
binding Egyptian undertakings to respect Israel’s security and Israel’s rights under the identical law.
Egypt’s obligation to abstain from acts of hostility, to
liquidate its commando activities, to abolish its illicit
discrimination
against Israel shipping in the Suez Canal
and in the Gulf of Aqaba, is equal and identical in law
to Israel’s obligation to respect the established armistice
lines. AOur signpost is not backward to belligerency,
but forward to peace. Whatever Israel is now asked
to do for Egypt must have its counterpart in Egypt’s
reciprocal duty to give Israel the plenitude of its rights.
160. ,Beyond the moment when fire will cease, the
prospect must not be one of uniIatera1 claims by one
party against the other. The horizon must be of peace
by agreement, peace without maritime blockades in the
Gulf or in the Canal, peace without frontier raids or
commando incursions, peace without constant threats
to the integrity or independence of any State, peace
without military
alliances directed against Israel’s
independence.
161. Egypt and Israel are two peoples whose encounters in history have been so rich and fruitful for
mankind. Surely they must make their journey from
this solemn moment towards these horizons of peace.
(translated from
stance of the quesmotion which the
Assembly has approved under which three speakers
have been selected to speak for and three against the
United States draft resolution [A/3256],
over and
above the Powers directly involved. I think that those
uf us who opposed the motion were very few. The
object of the motion was to save time, sol that the draft
resolution could be approved and could have effect at
once. The net result, however, was to lose more time
and the resolution will have the same effect whether
we approve it now, in the early hours of the morning,
or many hours later.
163. The great significance of this debate is precisely
that it gives all the civilized peoples of the world an
opportunity to come to this rostrum and state their
views on a problem which is of the deepest interest to
all countries, particularly the small ones. This is the
forum of world opinion, and we must defend our right
to speak here and to show the world that we small
nations cannot assert ourselves by force. but must do
so by reason, argument and propaganda, This rostrum
must be open to all debtates and the opinion of all peoples must be .heard, especially at such a crucial moment
of history as this, when the final position of a civilization is being defined. The Ecuadorian delegatian accordingly objected to the debate #being closed, since
that would prevent those who wished from expressing
their views freely and frankly. There is a difference
between taking part in the debate and expressing views
after the debate is closed, when the vote has been taken
and it is merely a matter of explaining one’s vote. Such
statements are not even listened to with ,due attention.
164. As regards the substance of the matter, we must
analyse the facts in order to appraise them. We have
before us two cases of aggression, of a very clear aggression, which does not need to be d&ned in order
to be Immediately
understood and judged morally:
&rst, that of Israel against Egypt, and secondly, that of
the United Kingdom and France against Egypt.
165. Are the two related ? Was one the historical
antecedent of the other? My delegation refuses to believe such a thing, it rejects such a theory. It does not

November

1956

believe that Israel has lent itself to a manoeuvre of this
kind, not even on the pretext of defending its vital
interests.
166. I greatly appreciate the worth of this small State
and, as I know it and have been there, though only for
a few ,days, I am aware of the marvellous efforts that
it is making, cultivating what is little more than stones
and desert and sand and making it bring forth vegetation and produce gardens to feed the people and
beautify the country. I know this people’s worth, and
all they are doing to create their homeland and to
further universal culture, and I reject as inconceivable
the idea that they can have lent themselves to such
trickery.
167, The second act of aggression, that of the United
Kingdom and France against Egypt, followed upon the
invasion of Egypt Iby the Israel armed forces ; was it
deliberately linked to the Israel invasion? I believe that,
with their well-known political acumen, the United
Kingdom and France merely took advantage of the
political, economic and social circumstances to carry
out a plan which had been maturing for many months.
168. Both are acts of aggression, and all countries,
particularly the small countries, which have been or
may be victims of aggression, must from this ,rostrum
condemn aggression in the strongest and most emphatic
terms, whatever the motive or the pretext for that act
of aggression may be. It was for this very purpose that
this Organization was established; it was for this that
the Charter to which we are subject was drafted at
San Francisco. Either at that time, or subsequent.ly,
all the States represented here, including the present
aggressors and their victims, promised to relinquish the
threat of force, on any pretext, and to use it only in selfddence, in the case of an armed attack and never in
any other.
169. The nations, particularly the small ones, cannot
accept the argument which the representative of the
United Kingdom defended with so, much skill, but to
the alarm of the worlc$ adducing a multitud:
of apparent reasons. He mamtained that the situation was
such that the United Kingdom and France had no
alternative but to take matters into their own hands.
The Security Council-these
are almost his very
words-was unable to do anything, being always hamstrung by the veto, and, since it was impossible to rely
upon the United Nations because it was not strong
enough to enforce respect for peace and the law, It had
been necessary, urgent and degtimate to take this poIice
action whose only object was to restore and maintain
peace.
170. But there had in fact been no breach of the peace.
The Suez SCanal had been operating perfectly. On the
eve of the British and French aggression, fifty ships
had gone through the ICanal peac&lly.
It is therefoi-e
clear from a simply study of the facts that France and
the United Kingdom seized the opportunity offered by
the invasion of Egypt by the Israel army to do what
they had been thinking
of doing, what they had
threatened to do but had not ventured to do because
there had been no clear and adequate pretext.
171. They had already made it clear from the moment
that the Egyptian ‘Government nationalized the Suez
Canal Company and refused to participate in the
London Conference and later refused to accede to what
was almost an order presented by the five Foreign
Ministers who were sent to Cairo, that they did not
exclude the possibility of using force to save the
situation. But there could be no immediate resort to

26

Genera1

Assembly-First

Emergency

force, because there was no pretext to justify it; tl!e
scandal would have rocked the world, and so they bd
not dare go further.
172. The opportunity, however, quickly presented
itself and then, in defence of purely economic interests,
they violated the Charter, as well as the fundamental
rights and guarantees of peoples, and committed an act
of aggression that was doubly immoral. In -the first
place, it violates the Charter, which all countries, large
and small, are bound to respect. In the second place,
the violation has been committed by two great Powers,
two Powers in which we have all placed our confidence
as guarantors of world peace and security and which,
for that very reason, enjoy the right of veto. That right
they used a few days ago in order to prevent the
Security Council and the United Nations from coming
to the defenceof the weak and so preventing an outrage
from being committed.
173. The two cases of aggression before us must
therefore be judged differently. Both are unpardonable,
but both cannot be equally explained ; Israel’s aggression is explicable, but the attack by the United Kingdom
and France defies explanation. The civilization of these
two great nations, to which the representative of the
United Kingdom referred from this very rostrum a few
hours ago, has played a great role in the East and in
the Middle East, as well as in Europe and America.
We owe our culture to the United Kingdom and
France; we owe all our civilization to them, and it was
not to be expected that they, who gave us our civilization, and who have a moral obligation to continue
that great tradition, should have beenthe onesto violate
a sacred undertaking. Why ‘have they done so? In
order to defend purely material interests. In so doing,
they are setting a bad example to us smaller countries,
encouraging us to think that we should or could do the
same when our own interests are at stake.
174. What, then, have these two great Powers
achieved by violating the Charter? They have given
us the most barbarous of lessons; they shave told us
that the Charter is good only when it suits our purposes, and that it can be flouted when it runs counter
to our interests. Today it is the great Powers which
are doing this ; what example are they setting the
smaller Powers? Is the Charter intended only to keep
the smaller nationsin chains and obedient to its doctrine,
and not to apply to the others ?
17.5. I believe that this is one of the gravest and most
acute crises in the history of our Organization, because
of the nature of the acts committed and ob the status
of those responsiblefor committing them, I can explain,
*ovgh I do not justify, Israel’s aggression.From the
begnning, Israel’s history has been one of struggle.
It is surrounded by a group of peoples hostile to it,
peoples opposedto it on grounds of religion, language
and culture; it has to fight, and it has fought bravely.
In Israel, passions are running high ; the people are
besieged, panic-stricken, and could commit an act of
tragic folly.
176. But what are France and the United Kingdom
fighting for? Israel is fighting for its very existence,
for all that the mind and muscle of its peopIe have
create<, but what are these two great Powers, fighting
for? Simply for a matter of business, the business of
the Suez Canal. They are fighting, they say, for &e
freedom of this vital international waterway ; for freedom of passagethrough the Suez Canal, the canal which
is essential to the existence of many European coun-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

tries and on which the life of half of Europe, and of th
United Kingdom and France in particular, depends.
177, All this ia true, but at bottom it is a questio’
only of great economic interests, it is simply a matte
of big business; and peoples surely do not go to war t
defend the fat dividends of Suez Canal shareholderr
There can be no question of that. In this ,day and ag
the peoplesare not blind to that extent, and the Pro0
is that in the United Kingdom itself a large body ~1
opinion, educated people, highly reslponsibslemember
of the Britsh Parliament, have said much harsher thing
than I am saying now on ‘behalf of my ma11 natior
in this, the supreme forum of the world.
178. From the time of Israel’s establishment until th
armistice agreements, war raged. From the armis&
agreementsuntil the present day, Israel hasIhad to fat
a constant and uninterrupted struggle: it has had t
plough its fields rifle in hand; it has not known a sing]
hour of red peace. So’ that although it has conlmittel
an act which we do not approve, even if we can ex’
plain it, it is fighting for its life and for an ideal, th
ideal of being an independent country, however small
the ideal of being a State and of giving fit expressio:
to the intellectual gifts with ,which its great race ha
been endowed.
179. I believe that at this time we must, on behalf ~1
all the civilized peoples of the world, condemn thes
acts of aggression and, in the name of world peace an
security, ask that everything possibIe should be done ts
repair the evil so far committed and to solve all th
problems whose solution has been sought by violence.
180. The United Nations also has a great responsji
bility in regard to the problem of relations between th
Arab peoples and Israel. The United Nations has nci
done all that it could and should have done to preveri
the ever-increasing problems in this field from reachin,
the present explosive stage. The United Nations, i
execution of its lofty legal and moral purpose, rnul
take advantage of this opportunity and, after censurin,
the deeclwhich ,hasbeen committed, albeit only morall)
it must make every effort to settle the various problem
involved so that, once the present hostilities are halta
these problems do not remain aa seeds & discord an
of war.
181. The United Kingdom representative said [561>,
nzeeting] that after the police action undertaken by hi
country and France, it would be possible to work OLI
a settlement of these problems so that out of this greE1
evil much good might come. Here the adage ma
perhaps apply that evil is sometimesthe origin of muc
good ; there is no evi,l of which good may not come.
182. The President of the United States, in his d&
passionate and masterly statement to the America
people yesterday, made it clear that he and his Govern1
merit are taking the highest possible moral position
it is clear to us au that he has sacrificed importari
interests and risen above them in order to pass judge1
merit impartially, applying, as shesaid, the same law t
friends and to enemies, for it is true that tllere ,-at1 b
no peacein the world if we apply one code of interna
tional law to our friends and another to our enelniez
Mr. Eisenhower, although we do not agree with g
he said, has demonstrated once and for all that hi
great country is worthy of the trust which all th
Americas have placed in it. As the true standard
hearer of ,democracy, the principles of justice and tlX
Charter, he has not hesitated, even at the risk of en
dangermg the interests of his two great friends, tq utte

562nd

meeting-l

a moral but effective condemnation of the acts which
have prompted the present meeting.
183. I believe that in the midst of this crisis. we have
gained two fundamental advantages : first, that we have
been able to come here to express’ the opinion of all
peoples on acts committed by great Powers ; and secondly, that the greatest Power in the world has at this
time taken a democratic, intelligent and human stand,
thereby winning universal respect and admiration.
184. We shall vote for the draft resolution introduced
by the United States delegation [A/3256] ; but, applying Mr. Eisenhower’s observation that there should
be one law for all, I would say that the first and second
paragraphs of the preamble should have been drafted
in the same form.
185. In the first, which notes the disregard on many
occasions by the parties to the Israel-Arab armistice
agreements of 1949 of the terms of such agreements,
and the fact that the armed forces of Israel have penetrated deeply into Egyptian territory in violation of the
General Armistice Agreement between Egypt and
Israel, there is a strong condemnation of Israel. The
second paragraph, however, notes only that armed
forces of France and the United Kingdom are conducting military operations against Egyptian territory.
186. These military operations constitute the most
flagrant and open aggression, they are a violation of
the United Nations ‘Charter and they threaten the
downfall of our Organization. But they are referred to
in veiled diplomatic and tactful terms, although the
act in question violates the United Nations Charter,
whereas the other act, which is no more than a breaking of the armistice between a group of countries, is
harshly judged.
187. Are we applying the same law in our judgement
of the little State of Israel and the little Arab States,
as in our judgement of the great Powers which are at
this moment attacking Egypt? I do not think so. I wish
merely to draw attention to the fact that the carefully
worked out and subtle language used to disguise this
bitter pill simply means that the military operations
are open and flagrant aggression against a country
which had given no cause fog it and, even if it had done
so, should not have been so attacked. I wish to place
on record the view of my delegation.
188. The third paragraph of the preamble says that
traffic through the Suez Canal is now interrupted, to
the serious prejudice of many nations. Yes, traffic is
now interrupted;
it was interrupted as soon as the
United Kingdom and France began their bombing ; it
was interrupted as soon as the British-French
aggression began. The paragraph should therefore read:
“Noting that, owing to the British-French
aggression,
traffic through the Suez Canal is now interrupted, to
the serious prejudice of many nations . . .“, etc.
189. Finally, in paragraph 1 of the operative part of
the draft resolutioa, it would appear that Egypt, too,
is being ordered not to move forces within its own
territory. I do not think that was the intention of the
United States delegation : the text must surely be understood as referring to the forces which started the
aggression.
190. After these few remarks on the view taken by
my delegation in voting for the draft resolution, I will
conclude by voicing my earnest hope that the United
Kingdom and France, which have always been among
the Ieaders of the civilized world, which have done
much to spread civilization and have hitherto been its

November

1956

official spokesmen, will pause for reflection and retrace
their steps. I trust that they will see that, with the
bombs they are now raining on Egyptian territory, they
are throwing away their prestige, and that the great
evi’l they are doing is not only destroying their prestige
but causing all the peoples which formerly believed and
had faith in their greatness to lose that faith and to
consider them worthy of the sharpest censure.
: When the Secreaddressed us earlier
thii evening, he said that he spoke with a heavy heart.
I must say that I heard his statement with heavy heart,
192. In Australia we believe that the strength of the
United Nations rests principally upon two foundations :
on the one hand, the participation of the wide range
of Members throughout the world and, secondly, on
the close friendship and close co-operation of the United
States, the United Kingdom and France. It is with
very heavy heart that we recognize the division of
opinion, the very deep division of opinion, that has
developed regarding the practical measures that should
be taken at this time to deal with the tragic situation
in the Middle East.
193. Moreover, our own relations with the United
States are so close and so friendly that our hearts are
heavy as we find ourselves in opposition to a draft resolution proposed by the United States [A/3256], particularly as we know in our hearts that the objectives
sought by the United States are those that we would
seek ourselves in connexion with this grave problem.
I ,wish I could say that I were 8s sure that all those
who speak or vote in favour of this draft resolution
share profound’ly the same objective of restoring the
peace in the Middle East.
194. I propose to address myself strictly to the terms
of the draft resolution, and to refer to it as briefly as
is consistent with making the position of my delegation
clear.
195. The draft resolution must be analysed in terms
of its objective : the restoration of peace in the Middle
East. The problem out of which the present difficulties
have arisen is one that has a long history, and I do not
intend to go into it, but I do wish to emphasize the fact
that throughout a considerable number of years this
Organization has wrestled, with only very limited success, with the enormous problems involved in maintaining the peace between Israel and its neighbours.
196. Some parts of this draft resolution do not present any difficulty. Two days ago, I voted in the Security ,Council [7.5&h. meeting] for a ‘draft resolution
calling upon Israel and Egypt to cease fire and to
withdraw behind the frontiers, and we find a provision
for something of that sort in this draft resolution. But
we find other things with which we have very great
difficulty.
197. Some reference has been made already to those
parts of the draft resolution that refer to the need to
reopen the Suez Canal when hostilities have ceased,
and the draft asks us to note that traffic through the
Canal is now interrupted, to the serious prejudice of
many nations. It has even been suggested and stated
here that the traffic through the Canal has been interrupted through the military action of the United
Kingdom in sinking an Egyptian vessel. I have seen
a message from the Middle East Command that has
just recently been published, stating that an Egyptian
blockade ship which was being moved into a sinking
position athwart the Lake Timsah channel was attacked

,-

2%

Genera1

Assembly-First

Emergency

twice today by British naval aircraft and sunk at the
second attempt. It is believed that the ship is lying
outside the buoys demarcating the channel. Egyptian
reports that this was a d&liberate British attempt to
block the channel are said to be wholly unfounded.
198. We are hearing many reports of the results of
developments in the region. I mention this because I
take it that the reference to traffic through the Canal
being now interrupted is not intended as requesting
this Assembly to endorse reports being made by one
side or another before this Assembly is in a position
to establish the actual facts. We know that in times like
this some rather strange claims are sometimes made.
We know also that ships are not using the Suez Canal
and that many countries are diverting their ships away
from the Canal until it is safer to continue to use that
international waterway.
199. The main features of this ,draft resolution to
which I wish to direct attention are the second paragraph of the preamble and paragraph 1 of the operative
part. Paragraph I reads as follows:
“Urges as a matter of priority that all parties now
involved in hostilities in the area agree to an immediate cease-fire and as part thereof halt the movement of military forces and arms into the area”.
This paragraph, taking priority,
as it were, over the
other operative paragraphs
of the draft resolution,
seems to be clearly directed against the action which
has been taken by France and the United Kingdom.
It reflects a judgement which this Assembly is asked
to make on that action.
ZOO. We have heard a statement by the representative
of the United Kingdom this evening, and we have yet
to hear a statement from the representative
of France.
We have also heard statements in the Security Council,
and they have been available in the Press of the world.
The declared objectives of the United Kingdom and
France in this matter are not to wage war, but to prevent some of the consequences of war, and to prevent
the development of the conflict between Israel and
Egypt and, in particular,
to safeguard the lives and
property of the nations using the Suez Canal. Their
objectives have been stated to be to prevent the Canal
itself from becoming a battle line between Israel and
Egypt, a development which would deny the use of this
international
waterway
to the whole world.
Their
objective is to interpose forces between the Egyptian
and Israel forces.
201. The United Kingdom and France have declared
solemnly that this is temporary
emergency action, to
be terminated when peaceful conditions are restored.
They are not setting out to impose a solution to the
problems of the Middle East by force, but to establish
the conditions necessary for a peaceful solution of those
hroblems. Their objective is not to supersede the action
of the United Nations, but to reinforce the limited
measures that the United Nations is able to take in
present
circumstances.
The United
Kingdom
and
France have declared that these emergency measures
are not directed against Egypt’s sovereignty
or territorial integrity.
202. As I said in the Security Council yesterday
[751st mseti?zy], the record of the United Kingdom
and France in this Organization
is such as. to warrant
a fair consideration
of their statements. Their record
is such that I believe they have a right to have their
solemn assurances
accepted by Members
of this
0,rganization.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

203. For these reasons, a resolution drafted in the
terms that have been placed before us is not acceptable
to the Australian Government and its delegation.
204
,$avia) : The General Asin wtiat has been rightly :
sem
described as an uipreceaented emergency session. -It cs i
meeting at a moment of crucial gravity for the peace I
of the world. An act of aggression whose consequences
are incalculable is being committed against a Member
State of the United Nations. Its territory is being invaded, its cities bombed,
205. Egypt has been attacked, it is true, by three
States-by
Israel, by France and by the United King1,
dom-for
what are alleged to be different reasons.
Can there be any doubt, however, that what is now
unfolding before our very eyes is a single pattern of
aggression? The planning, the timing and the only too
apparent ulterior motives are surely conclusive in this
regard. Both the Israel attack and the attack by the ’
United Kingdom and France hav,e come after a series of
deliberate and increasingly obvious preparatory moves+
The Israel attack is the culmination of a growing series
of armed retaliatory attacks against Israel’s neighbours
in defiance of the Armistice
Agreement, of Security
’
Council resolutions and of the United Nations Charter.
!
T,he attack by the United Kingdom and France has ;
climaxed many months of threats and ominous military
i
moves openly directed against Egypt.
206. When the Israel attack occurred, the Security
‘Council was called, on the initiative of the United
States, to discharge its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security. It was considering the urgent steps required-to
achieve a ceasefire and a withdrawal
of the invading forces. Draft
resolutions to this effect were submitted. They had the
support of the majority of the members of the Council.
They were, however, vetoed by France and the United
Kingdom on the ground that those very draft resolutions, calling for a cease-fire and for the withdrawal
of
the invading forces, were inconsistent with their policy,
as explicitly stated by the representative of the United
Kingdom at the 750th meeting of the Security ~Council.
Even as they did so, as they themselves frustrated
even
the mildest form of Security ,Council action, they argued
that the Council was clearly incapable of effective
action.
207. Thereupon, they took the law into their own
hands. They presented Egypt, the victim of the original
attack, with an ultimatum. They enjoined the Egyptian
Government to renounce its inherent right of self‘defence witbin the meaning of Article 51 of the Charter.
They also summoned Egypt to accept the occupation
of a part of its territory by two foreign and obviously
hostile Powers. This, surely, was going back to the
methods of 1940, or even 1914. Egypt, of course, rejected this ultimatum, as any self-respecting
sovereign
State would have done. A few hours later, the attack
by the United Kingdom and France, the second phase
of aggression, began.
208. The impact which this aggression is bound to
have, if it is not halted in time, upon the fabric of world
peace is still difficult to surmise to the full extent of
its implications. France and the United Kingdom have
sought to justify their armed intervention in Egypt on
the grounds of a desire to extinguish, or at least to
circumscribe,
the Israel-Egyptian
conflict. What they
have in fact done is to start a conflagration of even more
alarming proportions.
They have claimed that their
action was necessary to ensure freedom of navigation

562nd

meeting-I

in the Suez Canal. What this action has in fact done is
to block the navigation which had been proceeding in
a perfectly normal manner. It is hard, indeed, to find a
plausible excuse for aggression in a world in which
the United Nations has become a reality.
209. It is encouraging on this dark occasion to note
that a swelling tide of revulsion at the British-FrenchIsrael aggression is already sweeping the world. Public
opinion and responsible statesmen have not been slow
to react to this deliberate assault on the peace of the
world.
210. It is hard+ necessary for me to stress the momentous responsibility
which has now falIen on the
General Assembly. Our task here is to stop the fighting
and to halt what might be irreparable while there is still
time to save the peace, All other considerations fade
before these overriding tasks. On this much we are
surely all agreed-the attack on Egypt must cease, and
the attacking forces must be withdrawn. We all know
full well, of course, that this will not in itself settle
the basic issues which have so long tormented the
Middle Eastern scene. We shall, however, have created
the elementary preconditions for any settlement.
211. It is surely obvious that one cannot hope to
advance towards a solution while fighting is goin on
and while invading armies are on the march. In Lfeed,
should the present situation persist or worsen, the
issues may well become insoluble. Therefore, as Mr.
Dulles so rightly pointed out, first things must come
first.
212. The draft resolution proposed by the United
States ‘delegation fully meets the immediate reqnirements of the situation, and it has the full and warm
support of the Yugoslav delegation. I am confident that
this draft resolution will meet with an overwhelmingly
favourable ,response in this Assembly, and that it will
be adopted as speedily as possible. Let us hope that
the voice of the General Assembly will not remain
unheard, and that peace will yet be restored.
213
) (translated
ng on behalf
of my Goverhment, I made spe%c ;eservgtions as to
the legality of any resolutions this Assembly might
adopt concerning the item now under discussion. I feel
obliged to reaffirm those ,reservations, particularly since
part of the draft resolution now before us exceeds the
scope of the item submitted to the Assembly.
214. I think, however, that X should now state the
position of my ‘Government. I deem it necessary, first
of all, to recall the events ,of the last two days and the
reasons for the attitude adopted by France in the
Security Council.
215. The French Government approved the request
for an urgent meeting of the Security Council made by
the United States delegation ,during the night of 29
October 1956. The French Government has never questioned the fact that, given the gravity of the situation,
an urgent meeting of the Security ‘Council was called
for, It took the view that the fighting going on between
the Israel forces and the Egyptian army should be
stopped immediately. It also believed that it was necessary to take all appropriate steps to ensure that the
hostilities which had just begun would in no event
impede free navigation through the Suez Canal. We
all kn,ow how vitally important this international waterway is to France and to many other countries.
216. The Security ‘Council was convened on 30
October 1956 [749th meetirzg], and the United States

November

1956

delegation immediately
submitted a draft resolution,
the text of which I shall not read to the General Assembly because that very resolution afforded the basis
for convening this Assembly. We opposed the adoption
of that draft resolution. We did so because we felt
that it covered only one phase of the problem and that
from the entirety of an extremely dangerous situation
it singled out one incident, a most serious one to be
sure, but merely an incident.
217. The United States delegation answered by saying that the Assembly should first ,deal ,with the incidents in the Sinai peninsula and then, if the Council
deemed it.appryriate,
discuss the Suez question +d
tgu;$Fer items included in the agenda of the Security
218. In the French Government’s view, this approach
did not take account of the political situation. The
French Government considered, in fact, that the tension
in the Middle East had progressively assumed so grave
a nature that it was imperative to view the situation
in its entirety and act accordingly. The French Government, in close co-operation with the Government
of the United Kingdom, decided to take the necessary
action. The members of the Security Council were
apprised of that Idecision while it was in session.
219. The French Government did not lightly embark
on measures which at first glance might appear to be
inconsistent with its traditions, It did so because it
felt, in full agreement with the United Kingdom Government, that the tragic and rapid turn of events called
for vigorous and immediate decisions.
220. Who can in all honesty dispute the fact that ten
years’ work by the United Nations, innumerable resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, and even the noteworthy efforts of our Secretary-General, have been powerless not only to eliminate
the danger of war in the Middle East, but even to
prevent that danger from increasing to the point where
it became a threat to world peace?
221. In reality, the United Nations has proved powerless to settle the Palestine question, because the
action of the Security Council has been paralysed by
the veto of one of its permanent members. Two years
ago, for the first time, the Soviet Union delegation
exercised its right of veto to prevent the condemnation
of an Arab stand in the Palestine question. Subsequently
it persistently prevented any condemnation, no matter
how justified, from being pronounced against any one
of Israel’s neighbours.
222. The impunity thus vouchsafed to certain States
has intensified the intransigence of some of them. The
inibility of this Organization to enforce its decisionsor even sometimes to take such 8decisions--and to induce the parties concerned to conclude a perm&nent
peace, has had the result of giving free rein to inordinate ambitions, based on increasingly modern srmaments, the source of which should provide serious
cause for concern to those who would regard the
situation we are considering today as a mere border
incident,
223. These are not unfounded allegations. There is
abundant proof in the writings and statements of Mr.
Nasser and his spokesmen, and also in a number of
indisputable facts. The Umted Nations need hardly be
reminded of statements to the effect that Israel must
be wiped off the map, or appeals made to Islamic
solidarity, which, under the guise of strengthening the
religious ties of all Moslems-ties
which in themselves

30

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

are worthy of respect-were
actually designed to serve
Egyptian national interests exclusively since, to quote
Mr. Nasser, that solidarity was without a doubt destined to be the gigantic scaffolding of Egyptian power.
224. In so far as Egypt’s African ambitions are concerned, suffice it to recall Mr. Nasser considered that
“we cannot forswear
the task of expanding Egyptian
civiIization, even into the heart of the virgin forest”.
225. The August 1956 issue of an economic and polliitical review published in Cairo contained a statement
of the measures to be taken by Egypt in order to achieve
its objective. In addition to systematic
propaganda
efforts, there were two very specific projects. In the
first place, a pan-African
conference was to be held at
Cairo chiefly for the purpose of reaching decisions
ensuring Egyptian ,domination over the entire African
continent. Secondly, the publicatio,n recalled that the
Supreme Council for African Affairs had been established at Cairo in 1955 in order to make that policy
a reality.
226. These ambitions are as inordinate as those which,
twenty years ago, were nourished by another dictator
whose megalomania ultimately led to the death of more
than 25 million human beings. This manifold aspiration
is no longer at the stage of individual dreams or academic projects. It has already taken the form of a series
of aggressive acts aimed, like the plan which conceived
them, in various directions.
227, Against Israel, the activities of so-called death
volunteers have been organized on a strictly military
basis. Is there any need to recall that, on the very eve
of what is now called the “Israel aggression”, a number
of Egyptian comman*dos had carried out raids deep
into Israel’s
territo,ry,
causing numerous
casualties
among the civilian population?
228, The Members of the United Nations will surely
not have forgotten the forcible seizure of the Suez
Canal last July, which constituted not only a violation
of international law and commitments undertaken, but
also one of the most serious blows ever directed against
international confidence.
229. Lastly, the recent seizure by the French navy
of a cargo of armaments loaded at Alexandria by Egyptian soldiers and designed to supply the forces of rebellion in North Africa demonstrated without a shadow
of doubt that the Egyptian Government,
not only by
means of propaganda and by sending sabotage experts,
but also by shipments of supplies and armaments, is
fanning the flames of revolt against the established
order. The French Government
signified the gravity
of this ‘question by requesting that it should be placed
on the agenda of the Security Council. The Council
members unanimously ‘decided to do so.
230. Thus, before our very eyes, day in and day out,
notwithstanding
our decisions, Egypt has been openly
and cynically helping to aggravate the situation and to
prepare the way, within a relatively short time, for
developments even more serious than those which we
are witnessing today.
231. Could traditional
methods prevent this march
towards the point of no return? I regret to say that
we were no longer able to believe it. When, on the
night of 29 October
1956, Israel forces, retaliating
against the provocation
of the Egyptian death commandos, penetrated into the Sinai area, the French
Government
considered
that this time it would no
longer suffice to add to the collection of Security Council resolutions
another page containing recommenda-

Specinl

Session--Plenary

Meetings

tions which would remain a dead letter. What was called
for was action, and swift action. Those who! now blame 1
us for that action should recall the continued flouting :
of the provisions of the Security Council resolution
concerning the free passage of Israel’s ships through
the Suez Canal [S/2322]
and the Council’s inability
to act effectively when, hardly a month ago, the question of the seizure of the Suez ‘Canal in violation of
international
agreements was placed before it. Precedents of this order left no hope that substantial and
lasting results could be expected from recourse to
traditional
procedures.
These procedures
have also
proved incapable of putting an end to a situation which,
as Mr. Dulles remarked earlier in this meeting, has
existed for eight years.
232. France and the United Kingdom then decided
to intervene, not in a manner contrary to the purposes
of the United Nations as ,defined during the past few
days by the majority of the members of the Security
Council, but because it seemed to them essential-as
at
the time of the Korean situation--that
a Power or
group of Powers should resolutely take the initiative
of facing the real problems. It has been alleged that we
have violated international law,, and even that we have
committed an act of aggression. But as Mr. Mollet,
Prime Minister of France, stated on 30 September
1956, “the spirit of the ‘Charter is not a spirit of capitulation; the quest for peaceful solutions cannot mean
the acceptance, out of inertia, of faits accompW.
It
was in that spirit that we felt in duty bound to intervene.
233. Those were the motives which impelled the
French Government to take its decision, jointly with
the United Kingdom Government. We are aware that
it is in the interests of some people not to understand
those motives. But we also know that the majority of
the members of this Assembly are convinced that the
greatest international
catastrophes have been caused
by the fact that those who were to be the victims were
unable to take the necessary decisions in time. As I
have already said, the France-British
intervention
in
the Suez Canal zone is ‘designed; in the first place, to
call an immediate halt to hostilities between Egyptian
and Israel armed forces by setting a screen, as it were,
between the belligerent forces, and, in the second place,
to protect the Suez Canal and establish lasting peace
in the Middle East,
234. The French Government will not maintain its
forces in the (Canal area beyond the time required for
the fulfilment of the objectives I have just enumerated.
This operation in no way jeopardizes Egyptian
sovereignty. We affirm that in taking the decisions which
have been forced upon usI we in no way intended to act
in a manner incompatible with the principles of the
Charter. The situation facing us today can be properly
appraised only in the light of all its elements, historical,
geographical and political. It is within this general
framework
that the ,decision taken by my Government,
in the interests of the free world and of that just peace
which Mr. Dulles invoked a short time ago, must
be placed.
235.
n this hour overcast with
cloud
I rise to make these b,rief
remarks on behalf of the aGo;ernment of India because
my Government
remains convinced that the horror
which is upon us can be arrested, and a major catastrophe averted, if immediate and effective action is
taken by this emergency special session of the General
Assemply, which has been called by vote of the Security
Council and for which supporting request3 have been

56&d

meeting-1

G-i,
made by as many as forty-nine Members of the United
lame

eing
ltion
Dugh
3ility ;
Iues- j
n of
PRand
e ta
ak0

hi&,
has !
Jcted
loses
few
11rity

as at
r or
dive
.t we
have :
diet,
nber
pitu- j
nean i
I’. It :
rene,
the
with :
that
itand
;y of 1
: the
USf!d

were
9s 1
n in
e, to
$ian
vere,
date,
jeace
3 its
I far
ated.
sovrhich
3 act
: the
3erly
&xd,
WA
nent, L
,eace
must 1
with
brief

:

:UXie

)rror
atasIn is
neral
Lrrity
been

5

Ibt;/:

tht

is, by well over half of its total mem-

236. Let: me say immediately
that I do not propose
at t-his late hour to engage in a discussion 011 the rt+
nlarks Of the representatives of France and the United
I<ingdom, except to say that if they would only re-read
parts of their speeches side by side with the Charter,
they would be amazed at the wide gulf between the
two sets of documents and would find no support or
sanction whatsoever for their self-imposed role of
policemen in the Middle East.
237. At this very moment, the people and the Government of Egypt are the victims of a triple invasion,
and our deepest feelings go out to them in sympathy.
They are being subjected to the brutal facts of war.
Their sovereignty is being violently curtailed and their
territory is being occupied by the armed might of a
neighbour and of two powerful countries. There has
been released over Egypt a manifestation of the law of
the jungle instead of the ,law of peace and the law of
nations as enshrined in our Charter. Thus on the territoq of Egypt is mockery #being made of the Charter of
the United Nations, and there the organs of the United
Nations are being affronted by aggression and invasion.
It is this appalling state of affairs which confronts us
and which ,demands, through our united efforts, an immediate remedy, a remedy which will directly replace
folly and inhumanity by peace and justice.
238. There cannot, there must not, be the slightest
delay in applying such a remedy, and that is why in
our opinion we must waste no time in proceeding to
a vote on the draft resolution before us.
239. For the United Kingdom and France, in this
moment when we are in total disagreement with the
actions of their Governments and completely repudiate
the course on which they have embarked, we have
feelings. Those feelings reflect our conviction that
those two countries are capable of an entirely different
and immeasurably
superior quality of international
action. We believe that in this moment of clouded vision
they will wish us to remind them of their own capacity
to seek solutions by peaceful means which they themselves have brought to bear with success in other situations which, if handled as they are handling this one,
could have become equally grave and equally perilous
to the peace of the world. We believe that the interests,
not only the best interests but the basic interests, of
France and the United Kingdom cannot be served by the
course they have chosen. That course is self-defeating
and destructive for them as much as for anyone else.
240. We in fact ask France and the United Kingdom
to apply now those standards of objectivity and good
sense which they would expect of other nations, and
much more strongly does all this apply to Israel., a State
that owes its very existence to the United Nations and
which should most appropriately, therefore, be foremost
in its adherence to the Charter.
241. Speaking of this situation, the Prime Minister
of India, Mr. Nehru, has said:
“The sudden invasion of Egypt by Israel was a
breach of the armistice and of the United Nations.
It was clear and naked aggression. In such circumstances, when e+ery United Nations Member should
have tried to stop the invasion, Britain and Fmm
issued an ultimatum to Egypt . . .
“Remember here that Israel was the aggressor who
was attacking the Suez Canal, which was then func-

November

1956

tioning Properly. If there was danger to the Cma],
it was from Israel, which overran ninety miles inside
Egypt . . .
‘<We are going back in this twentieth century to
the predatory methods of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The difference today is that there
are self-respecting independent nations in Asia who
are not going to tolerate this kind of incursion.”
242. There has been much talk of the protection of
vital interests, but we ask ourselves: how can the protection of the vital interests of some so blatantly crush
the vital interests of others, and how can this protection
be achieved by a course which sows the seeds of increasing strife and war? We do not ask for the resigning of these vital interests, but we do ask that those
countries which have deluded themselves into the view
that their present actions will protect their interests
recognize immediately how futile is the course they are
following.
243. Their argument is that their invasion is meant
to protect the Suez #Canal and to ensure free passage,
but this argument has no force, for the first result of
this invasion is that traffic in the Canal has ceased. This
has actually happened as a result of the military action
of France and the United Kingdom, and these countries
have added to their other follies their disregard of the
Constantinople Convention of 1888. As was to be expected, this violent approach to the safeguarding of vital
interests is thus plunging the world into chaos.
244. It is for this reason that we demand of the nations concerned that they immediately seek to pursue
their vital interests only through the measures allowed
to them by the Charter and sanctioned by all codes of
civilized and humane behaviour.
245. It is with these feelings and with a deep sense
of urgency that we ask this Assembly to act immediately and to adopt the draft resolution before it.
246. This draft resolution calls for the very minimum
that is required at this stage. The aerial and sea bombardment and other operations of this character against
Egypt must stop forthwith. The armed forces of Israel,
France and the United Kingdom must leave Egyptian s
territory an’d waters immediately and this Assembly,
which has met here to f&i1 the objectives of peace,
must remain in session until this purpose has been
achieved. We must, one and all, be determined that
there will be no repetition of 1935 or of 1939. We must
remember that the engines of war today are immeasm-ably more destructive than they were before. We must
rescue ourselves immediately from the vistas of horror
which face us, lest there be no returning for mankind
to the paths of peace.
247. Only determined and immediate action Will now
suffice us. Again, as Mr. Nehru said in his message to
the Secretary-General
yesterday [S/3720],
the Procedure of the United Nations must be swifter than the
procedures of invasion and aggression.
248, Thanks to the initiative of the United States,
we have before us a draft resolution which, for the
most part and with the interpretation given to its first
operative paragraph by the representatives of Colombia
and Ecuador, fulfils the immediate requirements of the
situation. It decides, furthermore, that we remain in
emergency session pending compliance with the resolutiotl. We strongly urge this Assembly, including the
parties main,ly concerned, to accept the draft resolution
by unanimous vote as a first step towards settling the
issues involved.

32

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

249.
: Were I to
take t
e representative of the United Kingdom has done, maybe many
thousands 05 lives would be lost. Therefore it is not
my intention to deliver a long speech, because now,
more than ever, time is of the essence.
250. Nonetheless it is imperative that Saudi Arabia
make its position clear in this struggle between right
and wrong. If this crisis, which directly affects us, is
not promptly resolved by the United Nations, it will
undoubtedly lead to dangerous consecluences in all the
Arab countries, which consequences indeed may easily
extend to other areas of the world. Saudi Arabia, as
well as the other Arab States, are allied to Egypt in
accordance with the Charter of the Arab League and
the mutual military pact that bind them together in
peace and in war. Furthermore, Saudi Arabia has contracted a treaty of defence with Egypt, whereby any
attack on Egypt would be considered as a direct attack
on Saudi Arabia.
251. The whole United Nations is confronted by an
immoral act of aggression, not only against one of its
sovereign States, but, as has been said time and again
during the last few ,days, against the principles of the
United Nations Charter. An unprovoked act by any
aggressor is nowadays fraught with great danger because it tiay well spread into a global conflagration. It
is therefore heartening that the Security Council did
not allow itself to be frustrated by a veto in this most
serious situation. It is also heartening that the General
Assembly has met in an emergency special session with
the hope of putting an end to the unwarranted aggression by two Member States on another Member State
of our world Organization.
252. It is not now a question of peace or war; it is
war. What can the United INations do to stop it? We
have met here under resolution 377 (V) of 3 November
1950 entitled “Uniting for peace”. This resolution provides for collective measures to maintain or restore
international
peace and security. How can we achieve
this goal? The said resolution is clear about the methods
to be used. It stipulates the employment of force, when
necessary.
253. All the Members of this Organization enjoy a
juridical
equality. But it so happens that two of the
strongest Powers, Member States, have resorted to the
use of force in this act of aggression against Egypt.
Those of us who do not possess the technology of the
modern ‘war machine which these two aggressors are
deploying against Egypt would be powerless to stop
their aggression and that of their stooge which they
used as a pretext in this unwarranted and inhuman act
in the Middle East. Hence the United Nations has no
other choice but to pool its resources and, at. the same
time, to urge concerted action, even to the extent of
using force, ta resist aggression, not only to defend the
sovereign rights of one of its Member States, but to
save the United Nations as the only effective instrument
for maintaining
world peace.
254. I am sure that the members of the General
Assembly would agree that the United Kingdom and
France have chosen a path that should have been
avoided by all means. They have utilized a State of
their own creation as a vehicle for their attack on
Egypt, justifying their intervention in the name of security of traffic in the Suez Canal. Whom do they think
they are fooling ? It is the height of folly to consider
it reasonable to request Egypt to withdraw to a distance
of ten miles from the Suez Canal for the alleged pur-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

pose of avoiding a clash with the Zionist State. Obviously this will provide the United Kingdom and
France with a free hand to occupy Egypt and to assert
their own rule and suzerainty over that country.
255. One would have expected the United Kingdom
and France to refrain from allying themselves with
Israel against the Arab countries, all the more so because of the repeated treacherous attacks committed
by that State, which has been repeatedly condemned
by the United Nations. Unfortunately,
however, they
decided to conspire ,with Israel against Egypt and the
Arab countries in order to pursue their own egotistical
interests,
256. If we are to dismiss this conspiracy and conclude
that the United Kingdom and France were seriously
concerned about the Suez Canal as a result of Israel’s
aggression, is it not reasonable to inquire why they did
not confine their ultimatum to Israel, ,by blocking its
advance towards the Canal, and order their troops to
stop the Zionist aggression? Is that not logic? We are
also impelled to ask the United Kingdom and France
why they ,did not direct their naval and aerial attacks
against the ports and air-fields of the Zionist State
instead of sending them against Egypt. And they have
repeatedly accused Israel from this rostrum of having
infringed the armistice agreements and violated the
Charter. Why ,do they do that?
257. In the whole history of the United Nations, I
am not aware of a similar unprovoked aggression as
has been perpetrated by two great Powers, permanent
members of the Security Council, whose primary duty
is to set an example in respecting the provisions of the
United Nations Charter and to be against the aggressor.
Instead, what did they do? They sided with the aggressor. They became aggressors themselves.
258. The United Kingdom
and France issued a
twelve-hour ultimatum to the Egyptian army to withdraw all its forces ten miles west of the Canal. Do you
realize the significance of this? It is really ridiculous.
It means that a million Egyptian civilians would be
left in the area without any security, without any food
and without any communications, At the same time,
such a situation would place those refugees at the mercy
of the enemy.
259. Who can guarantee that genocide will not be on
the march again on a larger scale than that which was
committed at Deir Yassin? Would the two aggressor
States abet such a plan ? Can they guarantee that no
pretext would be invented to slaughter refugees? Who
knows? They may say that there are fedayeert there.
Inventions. Even in the Gaza strip.
260. Second, the twelve-hour ultimatum would signify
that all communications would be severed-relations
between the bulk of the army and those 250,0&and
I hear that there are about 300,000-refugees
between
the Suez ,Canal and the ‘Gaza strip, That would leave
them at the mercy of the Zionist aggressors without the
support of Egypt-and they are Egypt’s responsibility.
261. Third, the twelve-hour ultimatum would signify
that Egypt would be compelled to hand over bases,
aerodromes, depots and warehouses of food to the
enemy, thus paralysing the Egyptian army and makingit unable to resist Zionist aggression and the apgression
of the colonial Powers. @o one in the worrdy would
accept such an ultimatum. Such ultimatums could emanate only from tyrants and dictators in order to get
the law into their hands so as to enable them to pounce
upon their p;@y..;While paying lip-service to democracy,
.,..,

:.::

I

562nd

meeting-l

France and the United Kingdom are unabashedly playing the role of such tyrants and dictators in Egypt
today. Egypt’s sovereignty has been attacked. Gtres
have been ravaged and bombarded from the air. What
has befallen Egypt is a stab in the hearts of all the
Arab peoples and, I am sure, of many Asian and
African peoples.
262, When this ultimatum was being handed to the
Egyptian Ambassador in London with diplomatic decorum, ships were passing through the Canal in a
regular manner, notwithstanding
the various acts of
sabotage designed to ,render the operation of the Canal
a failure.
263. That the attack on Egypt was conspired in and
concocted by the British and French can clearly be
demonstrated by citing many dispatches. But I will
cite one that appeared in The New York Times of 1
November 1956. It was a dispatch from Paris and
stated :
“Highly responsible and well-informed circles here
cited evidence today to indicate that a British-French
occupation of the Suez Canal zone had been planned
for weeks and awaited only a suitable occasion.”
264. We know what the suitable occasion was-some
difficulties in Hungary and the elections in the United
States. The motives can be summed up as being the
result of a frustrated France in North Africa, stuck
in a colonial war and trying to divert attention from its
abject failure by fighting another war in Egypt where,
with the United Kingdom,
they enlisted Israel as
their ally.
265. It is evident that both the United Kingdom and
France were quite perturbed to see the renaissance of
the Arab world, and they *were dismayed to discover
that Egypt was able to ensure passage through the
Canal without external assistance. They failed to understand these developments, and therefore they SUCcumbed to their selfish desires and hypocrisy in using
force, completely disregarding the dangerous consequences to the whole Middle East.
266. The United Kingdom and France, in their perfidious attack against Egypt, have committed a grave
breach of the Charter of the United Nations, both in
its :letter and in its spirit-the
Charter which urges all
countries to resolve their disputes by pacific means.
267. The United Kingdom and France have also renounced the agreement previously made to co-operate
with the United States to come to the assistance of
victims of aggression. Unfortunately,
those two countries conspired with the Zionist State to commit this
crime and refused to heed the pleas of President
Eisenhower calling upon them to refrain from the
use of force.
268. The world today is witnessing the real motives
of those two imperialistic Powers in their attempt to
reassert their idomination over Egypt, the Arab world
and other areas of Asia and Africa. However, nothing
that the United Kingdom and France may commit
against the Arab lands in the form of destruction and
intimidation
will diminish Arab resolve to resist such
attacks, and we have the support of our Asian and
African friends in this struggle to free ourselves from
the last vestiges of abject colonialism.
269. It is obvio.us that the consequences of their
blunder-it
has been called an error; we call it a
blunder; some call it a crime-will
have great repercussions for many years to come, the more so because
the world has denounced those attacks. Notwithstand-

November

1956

33

ing that, many innocent Arabs will be sacrificed. The
United Kingdom and France will undoubtedly suffer
great losses in blood and treasure which to many of
them-their
Governments-is
more important
than
blood because they have been sacrificing in North Africa
a lot of their blood and the blood of others-and
treasure too.
270. By this act of folly they will ,lose all their
friends-if
they still have any-among
the Arab countries, It is shocking indeed to note that until the last
minute the United Kingdom has been distorting the
truth through Press releases in which it says that Egypt
was negative in responding to the Secretary-General’s
communication with regard to the Suez Canal problem.
At 8.15 p.m. on 1 November the British circulated a
Press release which is full of untruths, which they think
will influence the world, to the effect that President
Nasser and the iGovernment of Egypt have not responded to any attempts to solve the Suez question.
271. A message from the Secretary-General belies
such a Press release. I have a copy of it here and, if
I may, I shall ,read it out to this Assembly:
“A message from the Secretary-General to the
Foreign Minister of Egypt was sent in the afternoon
of 24 October. A preliminary reply was received 29
October indicating that the message was to be studied.
In view of later events, no further reaction was to be
expected in the few days which have elapsed.”
272. And still the United Kingdom, which has highly
developed media of information, disseminates untruths
about Egypt and the Government of Egypt at thrs last
moment.
273. Furthermore,
we have the testimony of none
other than the Secretary of State of the United States,
who only a few hours ago delivered to us a most momentous statement, in which he said “it seemed that a
just and peaceful solution, acceptable to all, was near
at hand”. Every word uttered by the Secretary of State
is carefully weighed, and he would not have said “was
near at hand” and “it was hoped that those negotiations
would continue”, if he had not so intended.
274. Mr. Dulles went on to say-and although we all
listened to what he said, it is worth repeating in order
to show the flagrant distortions that are being carried
out by the United Kingdom and France--France naturally trailing along :
‘I . . * at the close of that series of Security Council
meetings, I made a statement, which was acquiesced
in by all present, to the effect that the Security
Council remained seized of the problem and that it
was hoped that the exchange of views by the three
countries most directly concerned-Egypt,
France
and the United Kingdom-with
the assistance of the
Secretary-General,
would continue. They did not
continue, although I am not aware of any insuperable
obstacle to their continuance”. [561st meeting, pwa.
147.3
275. Having said this, I shall now address “myself
very briefly to the United States draft resolution
[A/3256]. As much as we regret that in its preamble
some Arab States are placed on the same level as the
aggressor, and as much as we regret that paragraph 3
recommends that all Member States refrain from introducing military goods without naming the aggr.essors, who are known to all, we have no’ choice at this
very late hour but to agree to this draft resolution and
to vote for it.
276. There is hope for us in that? if the aggressors
do not heed the warning of the United Nations, para-

Genernl

34

Assembly-First

Emergency

Special

graph 5 of the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to observe and promptly report on the compliance with the resolution to the Security Council and
to the General Assembly for such further action as
they inay deem appropriate in accordance with the
Cllarter. It is only because of this paragraph 5 that we
feel that we .can vote for the draft resolution despite
the ,&crepancies which I have just mentioned.
: The
277
gravity of the situation which faces this special session
of the General Ass,embly leads me to speak with a
deep sense of responsibility. I speak as the representative of a country which has always given devoted support to the objectives of the United Nations Charter,
which is a fellow-member
‘with the United Kingdom
in the Commonwealth, with all that that implies, and
which is closely and enduringly associated with the
United States, not only by formal

treaty

arrangements

in the Pacific and South East Asian areas but also
by ties of respect and friendship.
278.
My Prime Minister yesterday issued a statement
in which he expresses full confidence in the intentions
of the United Kingdom in moving forces into the Suez

Canal zone. He notes that the United

Kingdom

Gov-

ernment has given an undertaking
that its operations
are designed solely to protect the Suez Canal and to

halt the fighting

between Israel and Egyptian forces,
and are intended to be of limited duration. It is my
Prime Minister’s hope that there will in due course be
wider understanding of the motives of the present action
as explained by the Prime Minister
of the United
Kingdom.
279. My Government is confident that the measures
taken by France and the United Kingdom constitute

an emergency action of a limited nature designed to
deal with a situation of great political danger, a situation
likely to deteriorate still further unless checked by
drastic action.
280. May I add one word in particular about the
position of the United Kingdom, with which our ties
are never closer than in times of stress and danger, My
Government does not accept any charge or imputation
of insincerity in the motives of the Government of the
United Kingdom. Still less does it accept the charge
of British complicity

in the Israel attack

a charge which was, in

our opinion,

upon Egypt,

convincingly

answered by the representative of the United Kingdom
in the Security Council [75&h nzeeting] and again in

this Assembly [.56&t nzeeting] .
281,

With

these considerations

in the forefront

of

our minds, my delegation has careful1 examined the
United States draft resolution [A/32 Y61. Let me say
at once that we do not feel able to support proposals
which, as so many speeches reveal only too clearly,
gravely reflect upon those on whom now rests a principal responsibility for the restoration of peace and
order in the Middle East.
282. The United States draft resolution is at present
the only draft before us. It raised issues which are at
least as important as, and perhaps more difficult than,
any on which my Government has been required to
take a ‘decision since the foundation of the United
Nations. As I read the draft resolution, it appears to
raise more questions than it answers.

Who, for example,

is ZO take steps to reopen the Suez Canal and restore
Secure freedom of navigation? The most serious defect
in the draft resolution, it seems to my delegation, lies
in the absence of any proposal for dealing effectively
‘with the situation

in the Middle

East as a whole,

a

Session-Plenary

Meetings

situation which has been so seriously aggravated by
the action of the Egyptian ,Government in seizing the
Suez Canal.
2S3. The Prime Minister of my country has been at
pains to emphasize that the New Zealand Government
cannot but regard with the utmost concern what
appears to have been complete disregard by Israel of
the existing General Armistice
Agreement
between

Israel and Egypt. There is no doubt about our concern
on that point. There is equally no doubt about our
concern over the various past events which are part
of the whole unhappy story contributing to the incursion
of Israel forces into Egypt.
284. I should have liked, moreover, to have heard
some response to the constructive suggestions of the
United Kingdom in regard to the desirability of a conference to negotiate a lasting settlement of the problems
which have thrown the Middle East into turmoil. There
is obviously not time tonight for niy delegation, or
for many others, to obtain instructions based on the
present text of the United States draft resolution.
Despite the undoubted urgency of the situation,
it
Would, I believe, be proper and justifiable
for the
Assembly to adjourn before a vote is taken. If, how. _
ever, we are obliged to cast a vote tonight, my &I+
gation will regretfully

be constrained,

for the reasons

I have given, to oppose the draft resolution.
285. May I say, finally, that New Zealand’s interest
in this issue is a vital but not a selfish one. Our sole
aim here and elsewhere will be to do what we can to
tintribute
to a solution of Middle Eastern problems
which will be swift, which will be effective and which
will be ,lasting. Whatever our vote here tonight, let
us not regard our work in this place as finished I make
a suggestion for serious consideration, that the whole
problem of Arab-Israel
,relations should be fully ad
effectively considered at the forthcoming session of the
General Assembly. I go further: we shall get nowhere

if the parties to the Arab-Israel dispute are not prepared to meet and to negotiate. They owe it to themselves and to the whole world to do no less.
286. The PRESIDfENT
(trutislated from .S$anisFr) :
With the statement just made by the representative
of New Zealand, we have exhausted the list of speakers
who were entitled to take the floor before the vote.
We shall therefore proceed to vote on the draft resosolution submitted by the United States [A/32.56].
A
roll-call vote has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.

Panama, having been drawn by lot by the Presidenf,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Romania, Sau,di Arabia, Spain, Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States of
America,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina,
Austria,
Bolivia,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet So&J&t
Republic, Cambodia, <Ceylon, Chile, China, Col&bia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Domillican
Republic, E.cuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
‘J?inland, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Mexico, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan.
Against: United Kingdom of Great By-&in
and
Northern
Ireland, Australia,
France, Israel,
NW
Zealand.

562nd

meeting-l

Abstaining : Portugal,
Union
of South Africa,
Belgium, Canada, Laos, Netherlands.
The draft resolution was adopted by 64 votes to 5,
rwith 6 abstentions.
287. The PRESID’ENT
(translated
from Spanish) :
In accordance with the Assembly’s
earlier decision,
I shall now give the floor to any other representatives
who wish to speak in the debate.
288. Mr. VITETTI
(Italy) : I have asked to speak
on a point of order.
289. Document A/3251, which has just been circulated, has brought to our attention a letter addressed
to the Secretary-General
by the Hungarian
People’s
Republic. This letter contains a protest against the
entry of further
Soviet troops into Hungary
and an
urgent appeal to, the United Nations.
290. The events in Hungary,
which have already
been discussed by the Security ICoancil, are of the
utmost gravity,
arousing deep emotion all over the
world. It is my belief that we shoulsd immediately
demonstrate to the Hungarian people our real concern
in their destiny. Let us not forget that, at this very
moment, in Hungary
a desperate struggle for freedom-that
very freedom which the United Nations
Charter guarantees to all the peoples of the world-is
in progress. Hungary asks for the help of the United
Nations. We cannot be deaf to its appeal.
291. I hope that the United Nations-and,
if qecessary, this special emergency session-will
immeQately
take whatever
action is possible with regard to the
request of the Hungarian people.
292. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Sjanish) :
The #Chair takes note of the statement made by the
representative
of Italy.
293, Mr. BELAUNDE
(Peru)
(from the floor)
(transzated from Spanish) : I ask for the floor.
294. The PRESIDENT
(tralzslated from Spuni&) :
The ‘Chair has a list of speakers and we must adhere
to it.
29.5’. Mr. BELAUNDE
(Peru)
(fro++% the floor)
(translated from Spanish) : A point of order has been
raised and I wish to support it. That is all I have to say.
296.
: I rise not to take
ate is over; the vote
part
has ‘been taken. But I do wish to explain the abstention
of my delegation on that vote.
297. It is never easy to explain an abstention, and in
this case it is particularly
diffic$$ because we are in
favour of some parts of this resolution, and also because
this resolution deals with such a complicated question.
29%. Because we are in favour of some parts of the
resolution, we could not vote against it, especially as,
in our opinion, it is a moderate proposal couched in
reasonable and objective terms, without unfair or unbalanced condemnation; and also, by referring to violations by both sides to the armistice agreements, it
puts, I think, recent action by the United Kingdom and
France-and
rightly-against
the background of those
repeated violations and provocations.
299. We support the effort being made to bring the
fighting to an end. We support it, among other reasons,
because we regret that force was used in the circumstances that face us at this time. As my delegation
sees it, however,
this, resolution which the General
Assembly has thus adopted in its present form-and
there was very little chance to alter that form-is
inadequate to achieve the purposes which we have in

November

1956

35

mind at this session. Those purposes are defined in the
resolution of the General Assembly under which we are
meeting-resolution
377 (V) , entitled “Uniting
for
peace”-and
peace is far more than ceasing to fire,
although it certainly must include that essential factor.
300. This is the first time that action has been taken
under the “Uniting for peace” resolution, and I confess
to a feeling of sadness, indeed even distress, at not
being able to support the position taken by !wo COUPtries whose ties with my country are and will remam
close and intimate ; two countries, which have contributed so much to man’s progress and freedom under
law; and two countries which are Canada’s mother
countries.
301. I regret the use of military force in the circumstances which we have been discussing, but I regret
also that there was not more time, before a vote was
taken, for consideration of the best way, to bring about
that kind of cease-fire which would have enduring and
beneficial results. I think that we were entitled to that
time, for this is not only a tragic moment for the countries and peoples immediately affected, but it is an
equally difficult time for the United Nations itself. I
know, of course, that the situation is of special and,
indeed, poignant urgency, a human urgency, and that
action could not be postponed by dragging out a discussion, as has been done so often in this Assembly.
I do feel, however, that had that time, which has always,
to my knowledge, in the past been permitted for adequate examination of even the most critical and urgent
,resolution, been available on this occasion, the result
might have been a better resolution. Such a short delay
would not, I think, have done harm but, in the long
run, would have helped those in the area who need help
most at this time.
302. Why do I say this? In the first place, our resolution, though it has been adopted, is only a recommendation, and its moral effects would have been
greater if it could have received a more unanimous vote
in this Assembly-which
might have been possible if
there had been somewhat more delay.
303. Secondly, this recommendation which we have
adopted cannot be effective without the compliance of
those to whom it is addressed and who have to carry
it out. I had ventured to hope that, by a short delay
and in informal talks, we might have made some headway, or at least have tried to make some headway, in
securing a favourable response, before the vote was
taken, from those Governments and delegations which
will be responsible lfor carrying it out.
304. I consider that there is one great omission from
this resolution, which has already been pointed out by
previous speakers- more particularly by the representative of New Zealand, who has preceded me. This resolution does provide for a cease-fire, and I admit that
that is of first importance and urgency. But, alongside a
cease-fire and a withdrawal
of troops, it ,does not provide for any steps to be taken by the United Nations
for a peace settlement, without which a cease-fire will
be only of temporary value at best. Surely we should
have used this opportunity
to link a cease-fire to the
absolute necessity of a political settlement in Palestine
and for the Suez, and perhaps ,we might also have been
able to recommend a procedure by which this absolutely
essential process might begin.
305. Today we are facing a feeling of almost despairing crisis for the United Nations and for peace, Surely
that feeling might have been harnessed to action, or at
least to a formal resolve to act at long last and to do

36

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

something effective about the underlying causes of this
crisis which has brought us to the very edge of a tragedy
even greater than that which has already taken place.
We should then, I think, have recognized the necessity
for poIiticaI settlement in this resolution and done something about it. And I do not think that, if we had done
that, it would have postponed action very long on the
other clauses of the resolution. Without such a settlement, which we might have pushed forward under the
incentive of fear, our resolution, as I see it, may not
make for an enduring and real peace. We need action,
then, not only to end the fighting but to make the peace.
306. I believe that there is another omission from this
resolution, to which attention has also already been
directed. The armed forces of Israel and of Egypt are
to withdraw or, if you like, to return to the armistice
lines, where presumably, if this is done, they will once
again face each other in fear and hatred, What then?
What then, six months from now? Are we to go through
all this again? Are we to return to the statzls qtio?
Such a return would not be to a position of security,
or even a tolerable position? but would be a return to
terror, bloodshed, strife, incidents, charges and countercharges, and ultimately another explosion which the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization would
be powerless to prevent and possibly even to investigate.
307. I therefore would have liked to see a provision
in this resolution-and
this has been mentioned by
previous speakers-authorizing
the Secretary-General
to begin to make arrangements with Member States for
a United. Nations force large enough to keep these
borders at peace while a political settlement is being
worked out. I regret exceedingly that time has not been
given to follow up this idea, which was mentioned also
by the representative of the United Kingdom in his
first speech, and I hope that even now, when action
on the resolution ‘has been completed, it may not be
too late to give consideration to this matter. My own
Government would be glad to recommend Canadian
participation in such a United. Nations force, a truly
international peace and police force.
308. We have a duty here. We also have---or, should
I say, we had-an opportunity.
Our resolution may
deal with one aspect of our duty-an
urgent, a terribly
urgent, aspect. But, as f see it, it does nothing to seize
that opportunity which, if it had been seized, might
have brought some real peace and a decent existence,
or hope for such, to the people of that part of the world.
There was no time on this occasion for us to seize this
opportunity in this resolution. My delegation therefore
felt, because of the inadequacy of the resolution in this
respect, that we had no alternative in the circumstances
but to abstain in the voting,
309. I hope that our inability to deal with these essential matters at this time will very soon be removed,
and that we can come to grips with the basic score
of this problem.
31
sP
that we have been discussing. fi wasno less true that
all delegations faced a grave decision in ,determining
how they should vote on the draft resolution which
was before us. It was a decision to be taken not by delegations but by Governments. South Africa has the
closest of ties with the United Kingdom and France.
It also has cordial relations with both Egypt and Israel.
The draft resolution submitted by the United States
delegation became available only a few hours ago. My

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Government obviously had no time whatsoever to consider it in all its far-reaching implications,
many of
which have been referred to in the statement made by
the previous speaker, the ,representative of Canada. In
these circumstances, it would have been neither right
nor proper for me to record South Africa’s vote either
for or against the United States draft resolution. My
delegation therefore abstained.
311. Sir Pierson DIXOIN
(United Kingdom) : Since
the draft resolution was circulated at what in Europe
was already a very late hour, and was put to the vote
this morning, I have had no opportunity
to consult
my Government on it. I therefore felt obliged to vote
against it, since it seems not consistent with the policy
of mv ,Government.

in the past few days.
313. It could hardly be otherwise, for Mexico has at
all times unswervingly upheld the purposes and Principles of the United Nations ,Charter and has steadfastly advocated that Member States should refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political in&pendence of any State. Mexico has constantly maintained that all the nations of the world should endeavour
to bring about by peaceful means, and in accordance
with the principles of justice and international
law, the
settlement of international disputes or situations Which
might lead to a breach of the peace.
314. Mexico condemns the use of force as an instrument of the international
policy of States, But the
reports received from official sources and from the
Press and, in particular, the statements made in the
Security Council by the representatives of two permanent members with whose countries and peoples we
are bound by ancient ties of friendship, unfortunately
leave no room for doubt that Israel, the United Kingdom and France are conducting military operations in
Egyptian territory which constitute a flagrant violation
of the Charter, whose provisions all Members have
undertaken to fulfil in good faith.
315. In view of those facts, my delegation voted in
favour of the draft resolution submitted by the Secretary of State of the United States, because we believe
that it is designed to bring about a cessation of hostilities against Egypt and the withdrawal from Egyppan territory of all the foreign troops that have invaded
It, so that at a later stage a pacific settlement may be
sought within the framework of the United Nations
and in accordance with the obligations assumed by
its Members,
316. I should like to place on record the fact that we
could have wished that some paragraphs of the draft
resolution had been couched in stronger terms ; we
accepted it without amendment because of our earnest
desire that the General Assembly should lose no time
in assuming its responsibilities under the “Uniting
for
peace” resolution [377 (V)] ,
317. The blood of thousands of human beings is at this
very moment being shed on Egyptian soil, It is the
inescapable duty of the United Nations to give effect
to the first of the purposes set forth in the Charter, to
maintain international peace and security.
318. Mr. PALAMAS
OGreeq)
(translated
from
French) : The Greek delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution presented by the United States de=.+

1
1
i

:
+

1

i
:
i/
:
j
i
’

\
:

~

562nd

meeting-l

gation. At so grave a juncture, this resolution represents
the least that the General Assembly could do to try to
stop the conflagration and facilitate the restoration of
peace in the Middle East. As I did not have an opportunity to take part in the debate precedmg the vote,
I should like briefly to explain my Government’s
position on this important matter.
319. Israel, the United Kingdom and France have
invaded Egyptian territory. They have resorted to force,
to war, for reasons which there is no point in discussing
now. Under the Charter, there is no valid justification
for the unilateral use of force. We know of only one
case where the Charter authorizes the use of force:
that provided for in Article 51, which sanctions the
exercise o.f the right of self-defence. In the present
instance, Egypt alone is exercising that right, for it is
defending itself against invaders, In any other case,
according to the Charter, the use of force is admissible
only as a collective measure. It can be used only to
ensure respect for obligations arising out of the Charter,
in pursuance of ‘decisions taken by the competent organs
of the United Nations.
320. Aggression in itself is an international
crime.
Nothing can justify a breach of the peace, as defined
by the Charter. Even the best reasons lose their validity
if such a breach is committed. The Charter was designed
td abolish the law of the jungle. So’me have not understood that, and they are jeopardizing
the United
Nations, world peace and their own fate.
321. We all have our friendships, our ties, our alliances. We have not come here to judge the present
case in the light of those friendships, ties and alliances,
important
though they are to us ; we have acted as
Members of the United Nations. The only cause with
which we are concerned now is that of peace and our
community of free and independent nations.
322. In this spirit, the United States has set the world
a shining example. It has taken the initiative and placed
itself at the service of peace, setting aside all extraneous
considerations of expediency and political interest. In
this dilemma, with the future of the United Nations
at stake, the only encouraging sign is that this truly
great Power in the world today is supporting the
United Nations and its principles of law.
323, In this hour, when Egypt is defending itself
against aggression, the Greek delegation extends to the
people and Government of Egypt its deepest sympathy,
born of a close and age-old friendship. The Egyptians
are now living in the shadow of fear, and our thoughts
and hearts go out to them. Greece knows full well the
price of independence, It has always opposed aggression
and has always rallied to the cause of international
law and. order. The reckless adventure of this illconsidered action against Egypt is the result of illusion
and a wistful harking-back to a colonialism which refuses to face reality.
324. Some purblind political leaders persist in ignoring the changes which have occurred since the last
war and the new conditions created by the entry into
force of the United Nations Charter. It is the same
colonialism which still continues to dominate the people of Cyprus by force, and from Cyprus is now
attempting to extend its dominion over other civilized
peoples. Colonialism has proceeded from its static phase
to an expansionist phase, Half a century ago, the
appearance of a squadron was enough to stifle any
shred of inolination on the part of a nation or people
for independence, However, times have changed. We

November

1956

37

fervently hope that the resolution which has just been
adonted will exercise its salutary effect.
1.. (tram
325:
abstained
lated
from Goting for the following -reasons. 326. The Belgian Government fully appreciates the
reasons which prompted the resolution jus,t adopted
by the Assembly. The ‘Charter condemns resort to
force in the settlement of international disputes. Consequently, the Belgian Government regrets that FrancoBritish military intervention occurred before any decision was taken by the United Nations, However, the
Belgian Government considers that this intervention
cannot properly be the subject of a recommendation
which fails to take account of the entire body of facts
and responsibilities which led up to it, In the opinion
of the Belgian Government, the recommendation cannot
attain its stated objective unless it is coupled with the
satisfactory settlement, under United Nations auspices,
of the international dispute concerning the Suez Canal,
which has seriously affected security and order in the
endangered area.
) : The Polish
the decision of
the Security Council to co&en&-an emergency special
session of the General Assembly. We gather here at a
moment when Egypt, a Member of our Organization,
has become the victim of a concerted armed attack by
three other Members of this Organization. I take this
opportunity to express on behalf of my Government
and the people of Poland our deep sympathy for the
people of Egypt which is now subjected to the horrors
of modern warfare.
328. It is a tragic thought that, at the very moment
when the Security Council was prevented by two vetoes
from acting in the conflict, bombs started falling on
Egyptian territory, and they are falling now. We here
are Ideliberating, and over there casualties keep mounting. The principles of our Charter have been brutally
violated, The basic principle of international relationship has received a serious blow indeed. A breach of
the peace has been committed.
329. What makes the situation even more tragic and
dangerous is that all this is happening in the midst of
what seemed to be a general improvement in the international situation, It seemed that we were entering a
new era of improved and more normal relations ,between
nations.
330. We knew that in the Middle East the situation
was a tense one. The United Nations had been continually seized of the problem, and only two weeks ago
six Foreign Ministers gathered in this very building in
order to find a satisfactory sblution.
331. Nothing
extraordinary
has .happened on the
Israel-Egyptian
border since to justify such sudden
and violent steps as those undertaken ‘Dy Israel. We
must, therefore, consider the invasion of Egypt by the
Israel forces as absolutely unwarranted. It constituted
an act of plain aggression.
332. But this is only a fragment of the whole problem.
Further developments bring us to the conclusion that
the Israel invasion is only part of a concerted action
backed and inspired by third Powers.
333. The course of events has proved that the whole
military action was planned and prepared for quite a
while. Even before the representatives of the United
Kingdom and France had a chance to veto the draft
resolution, and while the Council was in session, the

38

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Governments of those two permanent members of the
Security Council presented an ultimatum to Egypt and
Israel giving them a twelve-hour limit in which to
comply. In connexion with this I should like to stress
two points.
334, First, we were witnessing an attempt on the
part of the United Kingdom and France to take the
situation out of the hands of the Security Council and
into their own-in other words, to present our Organization with a fait acconzpli. Who, may I ask, has authorized the United Kingdom and France to take such
arbitrary action? Neither country can claim to have
such authority or legal power.
335. Second, what was the essenceof the ultimatums?
That addressed to the aggressor virtually invited the
Israelis to advance towards the Suez Canal and to stop
at a ,&stance of only ten miles therefrom. The second
ultimatum, addressed this time to the victim of aggression, demanded not only the surrender of its
inherent right: of self-defence, but also the withdrawal
of Egyptian forces from then- own territory, the surrender of key positions along the Suez Canal and the
acceptance of the return of British forces to the Canal
zone.
336. All this is presented to the world under the
smoke-screen of concern for the freedom and1security
of navigation in the ‘Canal. But if there existed any
threat to that navigation, it was the drive of Israel
forces towards the Suez Canal. Therefore the only way
to protect free navigation was to stop hostilities and
make Israel troops withdraw from the Sinai peninsula.
It was just such a solution which the two Powers
vetoed at the Security Council meeting on 30 October
1956 [75&k 4neetingJ. Thus they demonstrated clearly
that they were opposed to all measures for restoring
peace in the area, and showed the world that, furthermore, they were interested only in the continuance of
the conflict and in the occupation of the Canal.
337. It appearsthat these three Powers are determined
to achieve their aims at any price--not only at the
price of the sovereign rights of one particular State,
but even at the price of flagrant violation of the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter,
even at the price of internatiohal peace and security,
338, Egypt had no choice but to reject the ultimatum,
as every Government in the world would have done.
What followed was the launching of a well-prepared
and well-planned attack by British and French forces
upon Egypt, the victim of Israel aggression. Now both
the French and United Kingdom Governments assure
us that their intervention is only temporary. Cons+
quently, a new ,definition has been introduced in international law---the notion of temporary aggression.
339. I cannot [believe that this: aggression has the
whole-hearted support of the British peoplba great
people which merits our respect and sympathy. This
belief of ours has been confirmed by the words pronounced yesterday in the House of Commons by the
leader of the ;Oppositior+ who said that th.is attack was
an “attack on the principles and the letter of the
Charter” and an attempted breach of the Charter.
340. Those were the words of the leader of the Op-’
position, but now let me quote the words of the Prime
Minister himself, Less than a year ago, on 9 November
1955, speaking about the situation in the Middle East,
Sir Anthony Eden said:
“Her Majesty’s Government and I personally are
available to render any service in this cause. If there

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

is anything that we can do to help, we would gladly
do it for the sake of peace.”
And now we are asked to accept a flagrant aggression
as an action for the sake of peace.
341. But the General Assembly has today refused to
do that, The Polish delegation deeply regrets that the
Security Council proved unable to act effectively in
this case.We believe, however, that the holding of the
present special session of the General Assembly will
,result in the prompt restoration of peace in the Middle
East, in the cessation of the armed attack, in an immediate cease-fire, and-what is morein an immediate
evacuation of Egyptian territory by foreign troops.
342. For that reason, the Polish delegation voted iu
favour of the United States draft resolution, which,
despite certain omissions, provides for the most immediate objective of restoring peace in Egypt.
: When the
343.
Presi
session of the
United Nations ,General Assembly this evening, we all
realized that the session had been called to meet an
emergency situation.
344. War is going on in Egypt. Egypt is the victim of
an armed aggressioncommitted by three Powers, Israel
France and the United Kingdom. People are being
killed by bombs, by air attacks. Many of these people
are defencelessagainst the brutal forces of aggression.
Hence, this special session of the Assembly is really
called upon to take immediate steps to bring the aggression to an end, to restore peace and the integrity of
Egypt-even if this is only the first step to a further
solution of this grave problem.
345._ When, however, I listened to someof the speeches
,*
made during the first part of this evening’s meetmg1
and specially the speech of the United Kingdom representative-it seemed almost as if there were no war
at all, asif the killing of people by the British and other
invading forces should be allowed to continue, in .violation of the United Nations Charter. Moreover, the
United Kingdom representative’s defence of the ag- 1
gressive action of his Government was really an insult !
to the intelligence of man. This is truly tragic.
346. My delegation appreciates the fact that the draft
/
resolution introduced by the United States deIegation I,
was put to the vote as soon as possible, so that at least /
some definite measuresto stop the aggression could 3x b
taken this evening. Had the draft resolution not been I
put to the vote quickly, my delegation would have had
much to say about the aggressive action committed by ’
France, the United Kingdom and Istael. The actions f
of those three Governments have provoked the indignation, and indeed the condemnation, of all the freedomand peace-loving peoples of the world, including even
those in the three countries themselves.
347. My Government and people were, needless to ‘1
say, shocked by the recent developments, not only be- II
cause they have the closest and most friendly relations
with Egypt, but also-and no less because they clearly
’
recogmze the cruaal Issue at stake in this crisis. Tlley
cannot but view with profound consternation this mall- i
cious conspiracy, not only against Egypt, but indeed I
against the very aims and purposes of the Unit&
j
Nations.
348. The draft resolution introduced by the United
t
States delegation was, in my delegation’s view, riot
entirely satisfactory, since it did, not express the real :
feelings of the overwhelming majority of the members
of this Assembly. We should have liked to see sOme

562nd

meeting-l

provisions of the draft resolution altered or amended
in order to make it more effective and unmistakablly
clear concerning the serious aspect of the issue created
by the actions of the United Kingdom and France. I
agree with the remarks made on this point by the Tepresentative of Ecuador. However, my delegation, wishing to co-operate fully in this Assembly’s efforts to
decide upon a course of actio#n as quickly as possible,
voted in favour of the draft resolution in order to make
it possible for the necessary first steps to be enacted
immediately-that
is, this very night. We are thankful
to the United States delegation for the initiative it has
taken in submitting the draft resolution which has now,
happily, been adopted.
349. The condemnation of the aggressive action against
Egypt which has been expressed both in the Security
Council and, tonight, in the ,General Assembly will, I
hope, give added moral strength to the res.olution.
350. In this moment of trial for the Egyptian people,
we have the deepest sympathy for the courageous stand
of the Egyptian ,Government and people in defence of
their sovereign rights, their independence, their freedom, the very life of their nation ; and, indeed, at the
same time, in defence of the very principles and purposes of this Organization,
The Asian-African gro)lp
at the United Nations has already expressed in unrmstakable terms the sentiments of our countries and peoples, in conformity with the principles and purposes of
the Bandung Conference. I believe that this will give
the Egyptian people moral strength in their fight to
ensure the very principles enunciated at Bandung.
351. I should not like to conclude this brief statement
without making the following observations.
352. The issues at stake in this grave situation iydeed go beyond the fact of military aggression. Nor 1s
it simply a question of the flagrant violation d the
United Nations Charter. It is much more than that.
What is happening now should, I believe! be regarqed
as a turning point in history. We of Asra and Africa
have experienced the cruelty and senselessness of colonial imposition and diktat. The aggressive actions of the
three Governments-and
in particular of the Western
colonial Powers-confirms
once again for our people
the righteousness of our struggle and our continuing
fight for freedom everywhere. The action of the aggressors has, in fact, again taught us a lesson. It 1s
painful to note that Powers such as the United Kingdom and France, which are reputed to represent Westem civ%zation, have acted here in this incredible
manner, carrying out the very policies against which
all Asia and Africa have fought in recent times. The
recent history of my own country is a vivid memory
of the expression of this kind of policy and behaviour.
This action does a disservice to the cause of Western
civilization, indeed, to civilization as a whole.
353. I feel, ho.wever, that this action opens the eyes
of those who, up to now, have ,believed in and supported the actual policies and behaviour of these aggressors. Moreover-and
this is very important-it
may
also mean a turning point, a move in the direction of
a neti political orientation in the world, the benefits of
which these Powers have apparently not yet quite
recognized,
354. The Egyptian people’s fight against these aggressors has, therefore, this deeper meaning, namely,
that it is a fight not only for the freedom and life of
the Egyptian nation and people, but also for a new and

November

1956

39

better foundation fog the political relationship among
nations. It is heartening that this fight has the full
support of the United Nations.
355. We have never doubted the eventual outcome of
this struggle. At this crucial time, we feel the deepest
sympathy for the great sufferings being endured by the
gallant Egyptian people. This futile action of. the a$$gressors will only hasten the arrival of the victory 1~
the human struggle for freedom and equality. This IS
our belief: that from the sufferings of Egypt today,
from the present dangerous and crucial situation, and
from this momentous decision of the Assembly tonight,
there may arise the new hope of mankind-a
real
United Nations world practising freedom and equa!ity
and bringing about a better order and a new evaluation
among nations.
of Americal:
I
~~helegation that it was possible for it to formulate a resolution which gave expression to what seems to have
been the overwhelming wishes of this Assembly, a
resolution which I, think will have historic significance.
I know that the resolution was far from perfect and
far from satisfactory to all of us, including, perhaps,
myself. I felt that it was a situation where the lmportance of acting promptly was very great.
357. In my opening remarks, I spoke of the importance of a constructive and positive development of
this situation, and not merely attempting to turn the
clock Iback. Mr. Pearson, the representative of Canada,
also spoke rather fully upon that point, and I want to
emphasize my complete agreement with what he said,
and not only my personal agreement, but the feeling
of President Eisenhower, with whom I talked a few
hours ago about this aspect of the matter. It is a phase
of the situation which we deem of the utmost importance, and the United States delegation would be very
happy indeed if the ‘Canadian delegation would formulate and introduce as part of these proceedmgs a
concrete suggestion along the lines that Mr. Pearson
outlined.
358. Before leaving this rostrum, I want to express
my endorsement of the intervention made by the r&presentative of Italy with reference to the Hungarian
situation. I think we must not allow our preoccupation
with what is going on in the Middle East to keep US
from also observing with equal intensity what goes on
in that part of the world. We have had encouraging
reports of the withdrawal of foreign forces from Hungary, but there have also come in tonight disturbing
reports about the reintroduction of foreign forces mto
Hungary, in face of the fact that we have before US
the declaration of the Prime Minister and the Foreign
Minister of Hungary that they have declared their
neutrality and no Ilonger invite the presence of foreign
forces.
359. I hope that this matter, which is on the agenda
of the Security Council, will be kept urgently before
it and that we shall not be preoccupied with the Middle
East to the exclusion of assisting the State of Hungary
to regain its independence.
: On 17 October
Council, I subn&t&l the Libian
Government’s <iew on the Suez
Canal dispute for the consideration of the members
of the Council [S/3684]. I should like now to read out
some paragraphs from that statement ol my Government’s view :

,
40

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

“The Government of Libya . . . watched with deep
regret the economic measures taken by France and
the United Kingdom against Egypt, and the movements of certain navy, army and air force units of
the French and British armed forces to the EasQern
Mediterranean sea, as well as the possibilities of military action taken by France and the United Kingdom against Egypt, which are opposed to the Charter
of the United Nations , . . and which may endanger
to a great extent the peace in the Middle East and in
the whole world.
“There is no doubt that colonialism, which is responsible to a large measure for poverty in the Middle
East and for the bloodshed and daily loss of life
in Algeria, as well as Zionism which created the
problem of Palestine, put the Arab States in a very
.difficult situation which requires justice and wisdom
to be overcome, Any measures which may be taken
and which neglect this fact, and fail to respect the
dignity and sovereignty of Egypt or any of the Arab
States, may ,be the cause of many unseen troubles. . .
“T’he Government
of the United Kingdom
of
Libya supports the resolution adopted unanimously
by the Security Council at its 743rd meeting stating
the six Ibasic principles on which Egypt, the United
Kingdom and France, through their Foreign Ministers, agreed.
“It is the view of the Libyan Government that, in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, the
Suez Canal dispute must be settled by peaceful means
through negotiations which will respect the sovereignty of Egypt and the interests of the users of the
Canal.”
Let us now see what has taken place since.
361. Five ,days ago, the Israel army invaded Egypt
and penetrated deep into Egyptian territory, aiming at
occupying the Suez Canal. The Israel Government
falsely alleged that it was doing this as a defence
measure against the Egyptian commandos. At the same
time, both the British and French Governments took
this opportunity to send their strange ultimatum
to
Egypt, asking permission for the Israel, British and
French troops to invade Egypt. As a matter of fact,
two days ago those troops began invading Egypt by
air and lay sea, thus challenging United Nations resolutions and the Charter.
362. All this happened in delicate international
circumstances, with which we are all familiar. The United
Kingdom, France and Israel took advantage of this
deIicate international situation and agTedd among themselves on the unwarranted invasion of Egyptian territory. This action shows clearly the aggressive attitude
which Zionist IsraeI and colonialist Britain and France
have towards that area. It is now clear that the real
reason which made Israel insist on buying arms was
to fulfil its imperialist ambitions at the expense of the
neighbouring Arab countries. That was why the Arab
States continuously warned the world of Israel’s imperialist ambitions for the expansion of its State at
the expense of Arab territory.
Moreover, it is now
obvious why the United Kingdom and France raised
such an outcry at the nationalisation of the Suez Canal.
This was their opportunity for a last attempt to restore
their colonial policy in the Arab world, oblivious to
the changing times and the determination of the world
to wipe out colonialism.
363. The Security Council convened several times
recently in an attempt to reach a fair decision with

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

respect to the withdrawal of Israel troops from Egypt
and to ensure the non-recurrence of such invasions,
But the use of the veto by the United Kingdom and
France made such a decision impossible, and the matter
was put before the General Assembly for appropriate
measures.
364. Similar acts of aggression occurred during the
time of the League of Nations, when the fascist troops
invaded Ethiopia in 1936 and when Nazi troops invaded Eastern Europe in 1938. This, as we all know,
led in turn to the Second World War, for the simple
reason that the League of Nations was too weak to stop
the aggressors. The Prime Ministers of Israel, the
United Kingdom and France are now repeating the
same tragedy, threatening world peace and paving the
way for a third world war, which may destroy the
whole world.
365. The world at large.now looks to this ,Organization, which represents worlsd opinion?, and asks what
it will ,do to ‘defend the victims of tlus aggression and
what measures it will take to stop the aggressors.
366. The Libyan Government affirms its complete
support of Egypt in its defence against the aggressors
by all means that are in accordance with the United
Nations Charter, and holds the United Kingdom,
France and Israel entirely responsible for the bloodshed,
loss of life, damage and destruction committed as a
result of their aggression.
367. With respect to the resolution adopted some
minutes ago, which was supported by my ,delegation
and the delegations of the other Arab States, I should
like to make the following reservations on behalf of
my (Government.
368. It was neither fair nor just to treat. e ually the
aggressors and the victim. Israel, which has 1 een condemned again and again by the United Nations for
breaking the armistice agreements of 1949, now plays
with the Charter of the United Nations, commits the
biggest ?ggression and slays thousands of peace-loving
people. The allies, France and the United Kingdom,
which, in 1950, ,declared with the United States that
they would guarantee the :borders between the Arab
States and Israel, and pledged their honour to combat
the aggressor, whoever it might be, are now invading
Egypt, a Member State’of this world IOrganization, and
bombing the peaceful cities of Cairo, Alexandria and
the three big cities of the Suez Canal, killing thousands
of innocent people just for the victory and the enjoyment of Mr, Ben *Gurion, Sir Anthony Eden and
Mr. Mollet.
369. This equality of treatment between the aggressors
and the victim was noticeable in the spirit of the resolution, as well as in its provisions. My country believes
that the aggressors-Israel,
France and the United
Kingdom-are
entirely responsible for the murders,
damage and destruction they have already committed
against Egypt, and for the bad seeds of hostility which
they have sowed against the Arab States in particular
and the whole world in general by this new and
dangerous way of dealing with international matters.
370. Mr. ESKELUND
(Denmark) : I wish to raise
a point of order. I just want to have a point cIarifi&
We have ‘decided to remain in emergency session. In
the President’s opinion, does that mean that we tiu
have to stay here without any interruption or &fjournment for two, three or four days?
3
translated front &-en&)
:
I
n and apprehension that

562nd

meeting-l.kwexnber

the Romanian people learned of the invasion of Egyptian
territory by Israel, French and British troops.
372. Using as a pretext the unjustified attack launched
by Israel armed forces, the United Kingdom and French
Governments served upon the victim of Israel aggression
an ultimatum imposing upon Egypt conditions which
no independent State could accept without losing the
essential attributes of its sovereignty and national
honour.
373. As might have been expected, Egypt refused to
bow to the unacceptable demands of the France-British
ultimatum, and at 6 p.m. on 30 October 1956 heavy
bombers of the United Kingdom and French forces
dropped bombs upon Egyptian cities. As we deliberate
her:, in this chamber, the planes of the aggressors are
sowmg death and destruction in the towns and villages
of Egypt, that cradle of civilization. A French journalist at Nicosia reports the following statement by a
British Ayer returning from his mission of destruction:
“We were oGer Egyptian territory by exactly 5
minutes and 5 seconds past 6 p.m. It was already
dark. We dropped all our bombs. It was all over in
thirty seconds.”
These words, tragic in their military simplicity, reveal
the suffering inflicted on the Egyptian population.
374. It is obvious that the aggression against Egypt
is only another phase of the Suez Canal affair, a bloody
military sequel to the economic and political pressure
phase. Because Egypt insists that its sovereignty and
national independence must be respected in the question
of the Suez Canal, the United Kingdom and French
Governments decided to use force to ,break the heroic
will of the Egyptian people.
375, The events leading to the unwarranted aggression against Egypt are too well known to require mention here. It is also common knowledge that, in order
to achieve their designs, the two Western Governments
found a docile and willing cat’s-paw in the Israel Government, which furnished a pretext for their joint intervention. No one has any doubts about the true motives and aims of the British-French
action, or the
nature and purpose of the aggression by Israel.
376. The aggression against Egypt is a threat to
world peace. Since peace is indivisible and there can be
no international security when war is ravaging part of
the globe, and since, too, the Middle East is of tremendous economic, military and political importance,
the ho$tilities in Egypt are of concern to all States and
are clearly a threat to all.
377, Since the tripartite aggression may well shake
the very foundations of our Organization arid, what is
more serious, the very principles of the United Nations.,
as the Secretary-General pointed out, it is only natural
that this question should greatly disturb the conscience
of the world. This resort to force has abruptly ended
the possibility of a solution under the auspices of the
United Nations, which provided for continued negotiations on the Suez problem.
378. My country is a firm supporter of the cause of
peace, and, owing to its position on the Black Sea, is
situated close to the Mediterranean.
It is therefore
natural that it ,shotvld be profoundly concerned at the
situation in the Middle East, and declare solemnly here
and now that the tripartite action constitutes unjustified aggression which it is the duty of the United Nations to stop by all the means at its disposal.
379. The preamble of the Charter proclaims equality
of nations, large and small. It stipulates that armed

1956

41

force shall not be used save in the common interest. I
am sure that the representatives here are far more familiar with this text than I am, and if I venture to
mention it it is because at this grave hour of historic
responsibilities it is imperative that these provisions
should be borne in mind. We are bound under the
Charter to settle disputes in conformity with the principles of justice and international law. In condemning
the tripartite aggression against Egypt we shall, at the
same time, be paying tribute to the principles of justice
and international law ; for what Egypt wants is respect
for its rights, honour, independence and liberty.
380. The ,General Assembly of the United Nations,
convened in emergency special session after the significant and eloquent vote of the Security Council, is
in duty bound to proclaim the principles of the Charter,
to bring effective assistance to the Egyptian people, and
to declare unequivocally that, in invading the ancient
land of Egypt, the tripartite forces have committed
unjustified and unprovoked aggression.
381. We do not identify the noble French and British
nations with those who launched the aggression against
Egypt. Many voices in the United Kingdom and France
have been raised against these acts of aggression and
have demanded that the attack against Egypt be
stopped.
382. The General Assembly of the ,United Nations
has therefore clearly and firmly condemned the acts of
aggression and has taken the necessary measures to
put an end to the bloodshed in the Middle East. The
era of colonialism has ended, but some Governments
have not yet ,realized this. They must be told that we
are lliving in the era of the Charter of the United
Nations.
383. Since the draft resolution presented by Mr.
Dulles noted that the armed forces of France and the
United Kingdom were engaged in military operations
against Egypt, and called for an immediate cessation of
hostilities followed by immediate measures to put an
end to the bloodshed in Egypt, I voted in favour of it;
: This is a sad and
38
he United Nations.
Two great nations, which hoid permanent seats in the
Security Council, and Israel, have launched armed attacks against the territorial integrity of Egypt. The
armed forces of Israel have penetrated deeply into the
territory of the victim. Egyptian cities are subject to
bombardment by the air forces of the United Kingdom
and France.
385. Such are the deplorable circumstances in which
the resolution we have just adopted was presented to
this Assembly by the delegation of the United States.
These are facts and, in our view, they are very deplorable facts.
386. We listened to the statements by the delegations
of the three Powers which are engaged in hostile acts
against Egypt. The whole world knows that all these
three countries have grievances against Egypt. It may
also be that there are many other nations that have
grievances against one or more States. Does such resentment against a State justify the use of force by the
parties which claim to be injured? The answer to the
question is set out clearly in the United Nations Charter, which prohibits the use of force as a means of
settling international differences, or grievances for that
matter.
387. We have been told that the military action undertaken by Israel against Egypt is in self-defence. Ac-

42

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

cording to the Charter of the United Nations, selfdefence js permissible only when it is exercised in accordance with the principles laid down in the acharter.
Such is not the case in the present instance.
388. We are told also that the British and French
actions were undertaken against the people of Egypt
in order to separate the two hostile parties, that is,
Israel and Egypt. My delegation, among others, finds
it difficult to see why it was necessary to bombard
Egyptian cities in order to separate the two parties.
We can hardly acquiesce in this type of argument. The
plain fact is that a clear case of a breach of the peace
has taken place, and this Assembly is duty bound to
act with speed and determination.
389. This Assembly cannot accept the claim of France
and the United Kingdom that they are acting as international police. We do not think that in all honesty they
themselves believe in this theory.
390. My country has a long tradition of opposition to
aggression and to the use of force in international relations. In 1935, Ethiopia sacrificed millions of its sons
and daughters and lost its independence defying aggression and upholding the rule of law. Today, in this
dark hour for the United Nations and for the people
of Egypt, my delegation can do no less than to add its
voice to others in support of the rule of law and in
opposition to the use of force.
391. We believe that the present resolution does accompIish the required job, and that is why my delegation voted for it. We hope that the three countries
involved in hostile acts against Egypt will find it possible to comply with the provisions of the resolutioti.
To do so, I believe, will increase their prestige and
will be in accordance with their long-standing tradition
of compliance with the rule of law. Not to comply with
the resolution, in my opinion, could certainly injure
not only the prestige of those countries, but also their
long-term interests.
392
: The present
dev
st, which has
culminated in an armed attack against a Member country of the United Nations, Egypt, has created a most
serious situation which may entail far-reaching consequences for all mankind and the United Nations.
393. In this situation, this emergency special session
of the General Assembly has been convened, for the
first time since its existence, in accordance with the
resolution adopted <by the Security Council. Intemational peace and the system of security created by the
United Nations are still facing an imminent
crisis
caused by forces and interests hostile to peace, which
have inspired and launched an unprovoked armed attack against Egypt, thus committing
a flagrant breach
of the peace within the meaning of Article 39 of the
Charter. Such a breach of the peace is bound to receive
a proper answer from the United Nations by the efficient measures provided under the Charter,
394. The aggression against Egypt has been denounced with indignation
by ali1 peace-loving nations
as an attack against peace and security. It is well known
today to the international public that what has occurred
is an action deliberately prepared behind the backs of
United Nations Members and Idirected against the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of a Member State,
39.5 Such an action on the part of Israel, the United
Kingdom and France, which places their interests and
selfish goals above the basic principles of the Charter,
calls for a resolute denunciation .by all other Member
countries. What is particularly alarming is the fact that

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

a serious situation in the Near East has been caused,
apart from Israel’s initial invasion of Egyptian terri;
torv, bv the joint actions of two great Powers.
398.’ ?he Charter lays do,wn clearly that all Members
of the United Nations shall settle their international
disputes by peaceful means and that all Members of the
United Nations shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force. The aggressive
actions against Egypt constitute a gross violation of
the particular obligations assumed by both the United
Kingdom and France, two great Powers which, under
the Charter, are permanent members of the Security
Council, bearing special responsibility for the maintenance of peace and international
security.
397. The Czechoslovak people emphatically condemn
these acts of aggression directed against Egypt and
express their sympathy with the just and sacred
struggle of the Egyptian people for their freedom and
independence. The Czechoslovak Government issued a
declaration yesterday in which it condemned the aggression committed against Egypt by the Governments
of the United Kingdom and France, which have made
the Government of Israel their tool, In its declaration,
the Czechoslovak Government states that the aggressors bear full responsibaity before the whole world for
this breach of peace and for all possible consequences,
398. On behalf of its Government, the Czechoslovak
delegation associates itself with those who have demanded the condemnation and immediate cessation of
the aggression unleashed against Egypt and the peaceful solution of the Suez question, a solution that will
respect the sovereignty and national interests of Egypt,
We are convinced that measures taken by the General
Assembly to that effect will receive the whole-hearted
support of peace-loving nations.
399. With this main consideration in mind, we voted
in favour of the draft resolution submitted by the
United States delegation.
: I have a few brief
tion of Italy voted in
favour of the *draft resolution presented bjT the d&e- ’
gation of the United States. We share the views and
1
ideas which are behind this resolution.
j
401. It is not necessary for me to state how much :
the Italian Government and the Italian people have
been worried about the situation which has developed i
in the Middle East. We have watched with the greatest /
concern the chain of events which has led to this 1
alarming situation.
402. I shall not go into an examination of all the 1
facts. The problems that we are facing are not new in I
their origin. They have been accumulating over a pe- 1
riod of time, and during the past two months have 11
moved at such speed and with such intensity that we
are now facing conditions which are fraught with the
gravest dangers. It is not my intention to reconstruct
the chain of those events. The important thing now is ~
not to have discussions to establish the ori’gin and cause
of these events ; we must see how to break this chain
of events, and how to put an end to the fighting,
403. I was very much interested in what was said by
the representative of ,Canada. There are problems
which have to be considered and settlements and solutions which have to be found. Those views are, I think,
shared by my ,Government. The Cabinet, which met: in
Rome yesterday, has addressed an earnest appeal to the
countr!es ?f the Near East and to the allied and friendly
countries in order that an effort be made to reach an

562nd

%
meeting-1’November

agreement rapidly which might put an end to military
action. We consider that negotiations must be started
as soon as possible to obtain a peaceful solution, not
only to the present controversy, but also to all the
questions *which have for too long a time been disturbing peace in that area. Naturally, first of all, we
affirm that our first duty, the duty of every country, is
the observance of international treaties and obligations
deriving from membership in the United Nations,
which obligations must ,be respected in order that they
may represent a warranty of international
lawfulness.
404. I am not saying these words to minimize the
situation in any sense. What I wish to emphasize is
that we are convinced that we have to act in a direction
which will lead us to affirm the fundamental rules of
international
conduct, the obligation of every State
under the United Nations Charter, and which will at
the same time also lead-and this is by far more important-to
putting an end to the conflict which is
taking place and bring hostilities to a close.
405. U WIN (Burma) : As there was an overwhelming desire on the part of the great majority of members
here to proceed with the voting on the United States
draft resolution in view of the extreme urgency of the
situation, my delegation refrained from taking part in
the debate. However, we feel it necessary to state the
very strong views of my Government in this Assembly
and explain why my delegation voted for the resolution.
406. At the conclusion of the Second World War,
which brought the Nazi and fascist Idictatorships to an
end and helped to liberate the 600 million people in
what ‘has here been called the arc of free Asia, the
major allies, France, the USSR, the United Kingdom
and the United States, pooled their energies to help
create the United Nations.
407. A war-weary world gave thanks once again. It
was hoped that international peace and order would be
maintained *by the international Organization. The purpose of the United Nations, carefully written into the
Charter, was to abjure force as an instrument of national policy. It is true that the United Nations has
not yet been able to agree on a definition of aggression,
but it is also true that the Charter, in Article 2, explicitly denies to its Members any sanction for “the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State”.
408. Today we are once again meeting because international peace and order have been gravely disturbed
by the actions of some Members of the United Nations.
My Government firmly believes, on the face of the immediate evidence-which
all the world knows-that
the
United Kingdom,
France and Israel have not discharged their obligations under the terms of the Charter which they solemnly and democratically approved.
Such dubious international
morality cannot be condoned, nor is it to be expected from its perpetrators.
The perils and evils of war-the big war, the little war,
the hot war or the cold war-which
have afflicted the
peoples of the world for so many years of this half
century, once again loom ominously on the Middle East
horizon. Therefore, my delegation strongly supported
the resolution of this Assembly which brings its moral
suasion to bear on the participants. Let us once and
for all time put an end to “gunboat diplomacy”.
409. To support this resolution, however, is not
enough, for, as I have just indicated, we are today
dealing only with the immediate situation. We must
be aware of causes and provocations on all sides antecedent to the events of this week. We feel that incon-

1956

43

clusive armistice arrangements lasting eight years do
not make for peace. We feel that armistice and inspection commissions which are’ not allowed to function
freely, or even to function, do not make for peace.
410. When associated nations are continuing raids
and reprisals across boundaries, that does not make
for peace. When nations asmciated with one or another
of the so-called East and West blocs aid and abet an
armament race in which small countries spend precious
currency, better used for upgrading their levels of living, that does not make for peace. Freely uttered
threats by one nation to annihilate another, in a crusade, do not make for peace either. Nor does a truculent
response which leads to so-called “preventive war” or
self-appointed police action make for peace. Nationalization of vital property is obviously within the competence of any sovereign nation. But, with equal obviousness, when the use of such property vitally affects
the economic health of many nations, prompt and effective negotiations on its use, for all users, seems to be
indicated.
411. In short, the passage of this resolution is not
enough. It may stop the shooting-and
that will be a
great boon-but
unless the United Nations is able to
use its abilities to eliminate or adjudicate or compromise or otherwise remove the antecedent causes for
the shooting, unless, in other words, it helps to bring
solutions of peace to the turmoil of the Middle East,
it will not have done its most important work.
412. When Burma was admitted as the fifty-eighth
Member of the United Nations, a few months after it
had reattained its independence, Burma decided then,
and .has never deviated from it, to subscribe unconditionally to the Purposes and Principles of the United
Nations Charter.
413. To this end Burma has always voted to support
non-partisan resolutions and actions which would advance the cause of peace through all legitimate means.
From time to time my Government and our people
have expressed their disappointment
at the results.
But, in the words of our former Prime Minister, U Nu,
on the occasion of his United Nations visit in July 1955 :
“The United Nations has survived the first ten
years of its existence. I venture to suggest that these
formative years are the most precarious and that we
may expect from now onward that this youngster
will rapidly gather in stature and strength and :begin
to assume for itself the kind of role which was intended for it in the first place.”
414. I suggest that the issue of peace in the Middle
East-genuine
peace, not just the absence of a shooting,
undeclared war; not just the presence of an uncertam
cease-fire and armistice-is
a critical test of the survival
potentiality of the United Nations. To ensure that the
United Nations will ‘(gather stature and strength and
begin to assume for itself the kind of role which was
intended for it in the first place”, my Government will
gladly and hopefully join the Member States in seeking
a solution for our present problem and its antecedent
causes, in seeking that genuine peace capable of p!eserving the sovereignty of all nations and the dignity
of all DeoDles.

LBaw.1

of the
should
like very. rapidly to explain why my deiegation voted,
whole-heartedly and without reservations, in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by the representative of
the United States.

I
44

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

416. We all thought that after the signing of the
Charter at San Francisco the use of force in the old
arbitrary way had become a thing of the past. We
believed that, in accordance with the Charter, force
could be used only in the common interest.
417. We voted for the United States draft resolution
because, in the first place, it refers to the armed attacks
which have been made against Egyptian territory and
Egyptian sovereignty.
418. However, OS the representative
of Ecuador
pointed out, we believe that, in considering aggression
in the situation with which we are concerned, a distinction must be made between two completely different
factors: the attack and penetration of Egyptian territory by the armed forces of Israel, and the action taken
against Egypt by the United Kingdom and France after
an ultimatum
which, gave Egypt a period of hours to
comply with the demands it contained or suffer the
acts of force that have led to the convening of this
emergency special session of the General Assembly of
the United Nations.
419. We believe that the problem of Israel and the
Arab States must be viewed in its own context. Those
of us who have taken part in the discussion of this
distressing problem in United Nations bodies since
1947 have sought only the unity and progress of the
Arab States and of Jsrael. We have sought not to
destroy them but to ensure their peace and progress.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

We have sought not strife between them but an identity
of aims for the sake of future generations.
4.20. Therefore! if any fruit is borne of this first L
emergency speual session of the ,General Assembly, i
which has decided to maintain unimpaired the prim I
ciples of law embodied in the Charter, let it be a !
reaffirmation of our desire, not for an armistice, but for 1
peace between the Arab States and the State of Israel.
421. As regards the other problem, it is not enough 1
for any Member State to say that it can act as a police- f
man and resort to force in a police action of its own d
choosing. We do not believe that it is possible to take 1
such action outside the framework of the United I
Nations and contrary to the provisions of the Charter. 1
The democratic principles laid down in the Charter are
the fruit of the immense sacrifice of the flower of mankind in the last world war, and, as we have supported 1
the use of force in the common interest, in self-defence 1
through the United Nations, we could not, tonight, do 1
otherwise than vote in favour of the United States draft 1
;;eassolu~u~ as the great majority
of the Assembly
422. May our vote tonight affirm, on behalf of those
who believe in democracy, the principles of the Charter,
which has become, and must for ‘all time be, the new
law of the world.
The meeting rose on Friday, 2 November, at 4.20 a.m,

I

Printed in U.S.A.

S-31331-December

19.5~2,500
