A/64/PV.108

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

108th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 28 July 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Maldives), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 112 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(i) Appointment of the Under-Secretary-General
for Internal Oversight Services
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/873)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly, in its resolution 48/218 B of 29 July
1994, decided to establish an Office of Internal
Oversight Services under the authority of the
Secretary-General, the head of which would be at the
rank of Under-Secretary-General.
By that resolution, the Assembly further decided
that the Under-Secretary-General for Internal
Oversight Services should be an expert in the fields of
accounting,
auditing,
financial
analysis
and
investigations,
management,
law
or
public
administration and should be appointed by the
Secretary-General, following consultations with
Member States, and approved by the General
Assembly. For this purpose, the Secretary-General
should appoint the Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services with due regard for
geographic rotation and in so doing should be guided
by the provisions of paragraph 3 (e) of resolution

46/232 of 2 March 1992, in which the Assembly
decided, in particular, that as a general rule no national
of a Member State should succeed a national of that
State in a senior post and that there should be no
monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any State or
group of States. The Assembly also decided that the
Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight
Services should serve for one fixed term of five years
without possibility of renewal and may be removed by
the Secretary-General only for cause and with the
approval of the General Assembly.
In light of the provisions of resolution 48/218 B,
the Secretary-General proposes to appoint Ms. Carman
Lapointe of Canada as Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services for one fixed term of five
years beginning on 13 September 2010 and ending on
12 September 2015.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to approve this appointment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I call on those
representatives who wish to speak on this matter.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of African States on the
consideration by the General Assembly of the
appointment of Ms. Carman Lapointe of Canada as
Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight
Services for one fixed term of five years to succeed
Ms. Inga-Britt Ahlenius of Sweden, whose term of
office ended this month.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-46629 (E)

*1046629*

A/64/PV.108

The establishment of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services (OIOS) in 1994 under resolution
48/218 B aimed at strengthening accountability and
oversight functions within the United Nations. OIOS
has an essential role to play in improving internal
control accountability mechanisms and organizational
efficiency and effectiveness, in accordance with its
mandate as set out in the relevant General Assembly
resolutions.
The African Group recalls paragraph 19 of
resolution 64/232 on the report of the activities of the
OIOS adopted in December 2009 (A/64/326 (Part I)),
urging the Secretary-General to “ensure that timely
arrangements are made to find a successor in full
conformity with the provisions of paragraph 5 (b) of
resolution 48/218 B”.
As mentioned in the related note of the SecretaryGeneral (A/64/873), paragraph 5 (b) of resolution
48/218 B stated that
“the Under-Secretary-General for Internal
Oversight Services shall be appointed by the
Secretary-General, following consultations with
Member States, and approved by the General
Assembly. For this purpose, the SecretaryGeneral shall appoint the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Internal Oversight Services with due
regard for geographic rotation and in so doing
shall be guided by the provisions of paragraph
3 (e) of Assembly resolution 46/232 of 2 March
1992, in which the Assembly decided, in
particular, that as a general rule, no national of a
Member State should succeed a national of that
State in a senior post and that there should be no
monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any
State or group of States.”
Based on that text, the said resolution gave the
South the opportunity to assume this post, taking into
consideration the fact that the previous UnderSecretary-General holding this position was from the
North. Approving the current nomination will mean
that, out of four Under-Secretaries-General for that
position, three have been from the North. In our view,
that does not fulfil the principle of geographic rotation
stipulated in the resolution establishing OIOS, in
particular, and the standing practice in the United
Nations as a whole.
In this regard, the African Group, which is
underprivileged and underrepresented in senior

2

positions within the United Nations system, believed
that it had a strong claim to that position. The Group
also expected that more time would be allowed for
consultations with and within the regional groups,
particularly when, at this time, most African permanent
representatives have not returned yet from Kampala
after participating in the fifteenth ordinary session of
the Assembly of the African Union.
The African summit in Kampala reaffirmed the
instructions to the African Group in New York to work
towards
addressing
the
issue
of
African
underrepresentation in senior positions at the United
Nations. The Chair of the African Group, Egypt,
clearly expressed this position during the meeting of
the Secretary-General with the Chairs of the regional
groups, informing them of his choice of the new
Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight
Services. Egypt, as the Chair of the African Group,
wishes today to reiterate and reaffirm that same
position.
We truly believe in the importance of keeping
unity and a positive spirit of agreement within the
United Nations, especially at this time of serious global
challenges, in the light of our confidence in the
leadership of the Secretary-General, our understanding
of the particular circumstances of the case at hand
despite the clear provisions of the related resolution,
and out of our belief that the Member States under the
leadership of the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretariat under the leadership of the
Secretary-General are effectively in the same boat. If it
navigates smoothly, we will all be safe, but if it is
shaken, we will all be endangered.
The African Group went with the consensus on
the approval by the General Assembly of the
appointment by the Secretary-General of Ms. Lapointe
as the new Under-Secretary-General for Internal
Oversight Services. We wish her success during her
tenure in this important and critical position in the
United Nations and express our confidence that she has
the high qualities necessary to carry out the
responsibilities and mandates of that position to the
fullest. We will cooperate with her to the benefit of the
United Nations and all its Member States.
On the other hand, the African Group highlights
the need in the near term for African candidates to find
their way to and their fair share in senior positions
within the United Nations system. In this regard, we

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

request the Secretary-General to look into ways and
means to correct the current imbalance in the near
future. Furthermore, geographical rotation is not solely
an African issue and should be respected when it
comes to the South as a whole. In this regard, we
expect that the next appointment to Under-SecretaryGeneral for Internal Oversight Services will be
allocated to the South for two consecutive terms, or
compensated for in other senior-level positions.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Office of Internal Oversight Services has an
important role to play in the work of the United
Nations. With respect to the post of Under-SecretaryGeneral for Internal Oversight Services, Cuba believes
that resolution 48/218 B of 29 July 1994 is very clear.
Appointment to that post must take geographical
rotation duly into account.
Cuba regrets the fact that the important principle
of geographical rotation has not been duly taken into
account in this opportunity, although we did not oppose
the appointment of Ms. Carman Lapointe. In reiterating
the importance of compliance with the provisions of
resolution 48/218 B, we hope that today’s appointment
will not set a precedent for the future.
I conclude by wishing every success to the new
Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight
Services in her new tasks.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (i)
of agenda item 112.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly concluded its consideration of
sub-item (e) of agenda item 111 at its 35th plenary
meeting on 3 November 2009.
In order to enable the General Assembly to
consider sub-item (e) of agenda item 111, it will be
necessary to reopen its consideration.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (e) of
agenda item 111?
It was so decided.

10-46629

Agenda item 111 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(e) Election of twenty-nine members of the
Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme
Letter dated 22 July 2010 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the General
Assembly (A/64/869)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
proceed to a by-election to elect one member of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme under sub-item (e) of agenda item 111.
Members will recall that, at its 35th plenary
meeting on 3 November 2009, the General Assembly
elected 29 members of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme for a term of
office beginning on 1 January 2010 and ending on 31
December 2013.
I would like to draw the attention of members to
document A/64/869 containing a letter dated 22 July
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Croatia to
the United Nations, announcing that Croatia would like
to relinquish its seat on the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme as of 31
December 2010 for the remaining term in favour of
Belarus.
As a result, a vacancy will occur and a new
member must therefore be elected to fill the unexpired
term of office of Croatia, commencing on 1 January
2011 and expiring on 31 December 2011.
In accordance with paragraph 1 of resolution
2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, and taking into
account that the vacancy will occur from among the
Eastern European States, the new member should
therefore be elected from that region. The President has
been informed that the Group of Eastern European
States has endorsed Belarus as the candidate for the
vacancy.
As members are aware, in accordance with rule
92 of the rules of procedure, all elections shall be held
by secret ballot and there shall be no nominations.
However, I should like to recall paragraph 16 of
General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for
elections to subsidiary organs when the number of

3

A/64/PV.108

candidates corresponds to the number of seats to be
filled should become standard, unless a delegation
specifically requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I therefore take it
that the Assembly wishes to declare Belarus elected a
member of the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme for a term of office
beginning on 1 January 2011 and expiring on 31
December 2011?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate Belarus on
its election as a member of the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 111.
Agenda item 48 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/64/L.63/Rev.1*)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda
item 48 jointly with agenda items 114, 120 and 121 at
its 47th plenary meeting on 16 November 2009, as well
as jointly with agenda item 114 at its 88th plenary
meeting on 20 May 2010. Members will also recall
that, under agenda items 48 and 114, the Assembly
adopted resolutions 64/184 and 64/291 at its 66th and
107th plenary meetings on 21 December 2009 and
16 July 2010, respectively, and decision 64/555 at its
82nd plenary meeting on 15 April 2010.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1*.
Mr. Solón (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to begin my introduction of
draft resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1* by recalling that
human beings are basically made of water.
Approximately two thirds of our bodies is composed of

4

water; 75 per cent of our brains is water, and water is
the main vehicle for the electrochemical transmissions
within our bodies. Our blood circulates throughout our
bodies like water flowing in a network of rivers. The
water in our blood helps transport nutrients and energy
throughout our bodies. Water also carries away waste
products excreted by our cells. Water helps regulate
body temperature. The loss of 20 per cent of the body’s
water can lead to death. We can survive for several
weeks without food, but we cannot survive more than a
few days without water. Water, without a doubt, is life.
That is why, today, we introduce this historic
draft resolution for the consideration by the General
Assembly at this plenary meeting. The following States
are sponsors of the draft resolution: Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Congo, Cuba,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Fiji, Georgia, Guinea, Haiti,
Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Paraguay, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Seychelles,
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tuvalu,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Yemen.
The right to health was originally recognized in
1946 by the World Health Organization. In 1948, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights declared,
among other rights, the right to life, the right to
education and the right to work. In 1966, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights recognized, among other rights, the
right to social security and the right to an adequate
standard of living, including adequate food, clothing
and housing.
However, the human right to water has gone
without full recognition despite the existence of clear
references to such a right in several international
instruments, including the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, the Convention on the
Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities.
The sponsors of the draft resolution present it
today to ensure that the human right to water and
sanitation at a time when diseases caused by the lack of

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

safe drinking water and sanitation result in more deaths
than any war. Each year, more than 3.5 million people
die from diseases transmitted by contaminated water.
Diarrhoea ranks second in the causes death among
children under five years of age. Lack of access to safe
drinking water kills more children than AIDS, malaria
and smallpox combined. Approximately one in eight
people around the world does not have safe drinking
water. In a single day, women spend more than 200
million hours collecting and transporting water for
their homes.
The situation resulting from the lack of sanitation
is worse still, affecting as it does some 2.6 billion
people, which is equivalent to 40 per cent of world
population. In her report, the independent expert on
safe drinking water and sanitation, who made an
important contribution to the draft resolution and who
will contribute further to its implementation, states:
“Sanitation, more than many other human rights
issue, evokes the concept of human dignity;
consider the vulnerability and shame that so
many people experience every day when, again,
they are forced to defecate in the open, in a
bucket or a plastic bag. It is the indignity of this
situation that causes the embarrassment.”
(A/HRC/12/24, para. 55)
The vast majority of diseases in the world are
caused by fecal matter. It is estimated that sanitation
could reduce the number of child deaths from diarrhoea
by more than two thirds. At any given moment, half of
the world’s hospital beds are taken up by patients
suffering from diseases linked to the lack of access to
safe drinking water and sanitation.
Human rights did not come into being as fully
developed concepts; they are the fruit of a constructive
process shaped by reality and experience. For example,
the human rights to education and to work, which are
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, were built up and fleshed out over time with
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and other international instruments. A
similar process will take place with the human right to
water and sanitation.
We therefore welcome and endorse the provision
under the paragraph 3 of the draft resolution that the
independent expert should continue working on all
aspects of her mandate and report to the General
Assembly on the principal challenges related to the

10-46629

realization of the human right to safe and clean
drinking water and sanitation and their impact on the
achievement of Millennium Development Goals.
The world summit on the Millennium
Development Goals is drawing ever nearer, and we
must send a very clear signal to the world that access
to safe drinking water and sanitation is a human right
and that we are going to do everything possible to
achieve that goal in the five short years we have left.
Hence the importance of the paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution, which calls upon States and
international organization to provide financial
resources, capacity-building and technology transfer,
through international assistance and cooperation, in
particular to developing countries, in order to scale up
efforts to provide safe, clean, accessible and affordable
drinking water and sanitation for all.
There is a heart to every resolution. And the heart
of this draft resolution is in its paragraph 1.
Throughout the numerous informal consultations, we
sought to accommodate the various concerns of
Member States, leaving aside issues that are not crucial
to this draft resolution and always striving to strike a
balance without losing the essence of the draft
resolution.
The right to drinking water and sanitation is a
human right essential to the full enjoyment of life. Safe
drinking water and sanitation are not only principal
elements or components of other rights, such as the
right to an adequate standard of living. The rights to
safe drinking water and sanitation are independent
rights, which must be recognized as such. It is not
enough to urge States to fulfil their human rights
obligations relating to access to drinking water and
satiation. It is necessary to call on States to promote
and protect the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation.
Once again, in the spirit of always transparently
seeking a broad understanding, and without losing our
perspective on the very essence of the draft resolution,
on behalf of the sponsors we wish to propose an oral
revision to the paragraph 1, in which the term
“declare” should be replaced by “recognize”.
Before the Assembly proceeds to consider the
draft resolution, I should like to draw the attention of
all delegations to the fact that, according to the 2009
report of the World Health Organization and UNICEF

5

A/64/PV.108

entitled “Diarrhoea: Why children are still dying and
what can be done”, every day 24,000 children die in
developing countries from causes that could be
prevented such as diarrhoea caused by contaminated
water. This means that a child dies every three and a
half seconds. One, two, three. As they say in my
country, now is the time.

made by the European Union during the negotiations.
We would have appreciated a clearer message on the
primary responsibility of States to ensure the
realization of human rights for all those living under
their jurisdiction, complemented, if needed, by external
support coming from the region or other parts of the
world.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1*. Before giving the
floor to speakers in explanation of vote before the vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made from
delegations from their seats.

However, the draft resolution contains an
important recognition of the ongoing process on water
and sanitation in the Human Rights Council in Geneva
and the work of the independent expert in particular.
The draft resolution encourages her to continue
working on her mandate to clarify the content of the
human rights obligations related to access to safe
drinking water and sanitation.

Mr. Wittig (Germany): Some 884 million people
worldwide lack access to safe drinking water, and over
2.6 million people do not have access to basic
sanitation. Every year, around 2 million people die
from diseases caused by unsafe water and sanitation —
most of them small children.
Germany is committed to the realization of the
Millennium Development Goals, including that of
reducing by half by 2015 the proportion of people
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
sanitation. Germany is one of the main proponents of
the right to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation. We consider access to safe drinking water
and sanitation to be a component of the right to an
adequate standard of living recognized in article 11 of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights, alongside food, housing and others.
This is the reason why we took the initiative, together
with Spain, to create the mandate of an independent
expert on human rights obligations related to access to
safe drinking water and sanitation in the Human Rights
Council in Geneva. And this is the reason why we shall
vote in favour today.
We regret that consensus on this text could not be
achieved and that a vote has been called for, thus
introducing an element of division on a very important
issue. Some Member States have also voiced concern
about the possible effect of the draft resolution on the
Geneva process. We do not share this assessment, but
see the draft resolution rather as a complement to the
ongoing important process on water and sanitation in
Geneva.
The text of the draft resolution before us is a
compromise. We would have appreciated it if the
resolution had taken into account more of the proposals

6

We also welcome the flexibility of Bolivia, as the
main sponsor, to meet the concern of some Member
States, including Germany, on paragraph 1.
To conclude, Germany invites delegations to
continue to actively support and participate in the
Geneva process in order to understand the full human
rights dimension of access to safe drinking water and
sanitation and the obligations linked to the provision
and protection of both. Germany engages itself to
continue this process in the open, transparent and
inclusive way that has marked the mandate since its
inception.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
would have wished that the suggestions and alternative
texts presented by the European Union, first by Spain
as a rotating President of the European Union and then
by the current Belgian Presidency, had been taken into
account by the delegation of Bolivia. In this respect,
Spain regrets the fact that, first of all, almost none of
these suggestions have been included in the final text
of the draft resolution and that, predictably, we will not
achieve a consensual adoption of the draft resolution. A
consensus is crucial if there is to be an effective
guarantee of any initiative that the United Nations may
carry out with respect to human rights.
In particular, I would like to refer now to
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution. In this regard,
Spain welcomes the oral revision presented by Bolivia
whereby the word “declares” would be replaced by the
word “recognizes”. This amendment introduced by
Bolivia, which we highly welcome, creates a stronger
link between the draft resolution and the work of the
independent expert, whose ultimate objective is to

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

conclude that this right exists and to invest it with
substance.
In any case, Spain would like to give an explicit
interpretation of the content of paragraph 1. For Spain,
as for Germany, water and sanitation are two
components of the right to an adequate standard of
living, recognized in article 11 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. In
this respect, my delegation firmly supports the content
of General Comment No. 15 of the Committee for
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the report on
this matter presented by the independent expert,
Ms. De Albuquerque, to the Human Rights Council in
September 2009 concerning the human rights obligations
related to access to sanitation (A/HRC/12/24).
Spain regrets in particular that the proposal to
include a paragraph 1 bis that would expressly
reference the work of the independent expert on this
matter has not been taken into consideration.
With respect to paragraph 2, Spain would like to
clarify that its wording creates open confusion by not
pointing out, as the sixth preambular paragraph does,
that the responsibility to promote and protect all human
rights falls upon States themselves.
Despite that, Spain acknowledges the important
role that is played by technical assistance and
cooperation for development in helping developing
countries improve access to drinking water and
sanitation for their populations. We should recall that
Spain has, in the Spanish Agency for International
Development Cooperation within the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, a water and sanitation
fund for Latin America, of which Bolivia is the second
greatest beneficiary.
Having said this, the delegation of Spain would
like to announce that we will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
Mrs. Horváth Fekszi (Hungary): Hungary
attaches great importance to access to safe drinking
water and sanitation, which is closely connected to the
realization of such fundamental rights as the right to
life and human dignity. We consider access to safe
drinking water and sanitation to be a component of the
right to an adequate standard of living. Those are the
main reasons why we shall vote in favour of the draft
resolution, despite the concerns we have regarding the
text and the way it was negotiated.

10-46629

I wish to emphasize that Hungary fully supports
the mandate of the Independent Expert on the issue of
human rights obligations related to access to safe
drinking water and sanitation, which was established in
March 2008 by the Human Rights Council. We are
convinced that the process initiated in Geneva by two
States members of the European Union should be the
one to clarify the content of human rights obligations
related to access to safe drinking water and sanitation.
We are determined to support the Independent Expert
in her endeavours.
For the aforementioned reasons we deem it
unfortunate for the General Assembly to declare a
human right to water and sanitation, since in our view
the draft resolution before us prejudges the outcome of
the Geneva process. We are convinced that the overall
aims of the Geneva process would be better served if
this draft resolution were adopted by consensus. We
would also have appreciated it had proposals by
interested delegations, including those of the European
Union, been more positively considered. We regret that
the text as it stands provokes division among Member
States, in spite of the fact that we are all aware of the
importance of access to safe drinking water and
sanitation. We firmly believe that this text could have
been further improved and that it could have been the
object of consensus.
Before I conclude, allow me to reiterate the
important role of the Geneva process and to encourage
all Member States to participate in it actively and
constructively.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): The
United States is deeply committed to finding solutions
to our world’s water challenges. We support the goal of
universal access to safe drinking water. Water and
sanitation issues will also be an important focus at
September’s Millennium Development Goal summit.
The United States is committed to working with our
development partners to build on the progress they
have already made in these areas as part of their
national development strategies.
Water is essential for all life on Earth.
Accordingly, safe and accessible water supplies further
the realization of certain human rights, and there are
human rights obligations related to access to safe
drinking water and sanitation.
The United States supports the work of the
Human Rights Council’s Independent Expert on the

7

A/64/PV.108

issue of human rights obligations related to access to
safe drinking water and sanitation. In fact, we joined in
sponsoring Human Rights Council resolution 12/8, on
human rights and access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, last September in Geneva. We look forward
to receiving the next report of the Independent Expert.
We also look forward to a more inclusive, considered
and deliberative approach to these vital issues in
Geneva than we have unfortunately experienced on
draft resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1* in New York.
Let me add that these concerns are not alleviated
by the fact that just this morning we have seen a
revision made, from the floor, to what the lead sponsor
viewed as the core operative paragraph of the draft
resolution. This, again, is an imposition on all of us
who have not had sufficient time to really consider the
implications of this. I think that it would have been far
better, under the circumstances, not to bring this draft
resolution forward for action today.
The United States had hoped to negotiate and
ultimately join consensus on a text that would uphold
and support the international process under way at the
Human Rights Council. Instead, we have here a draft
resolution that falls far short of enjoying the
unanimous support of Member States and that may
even undermine the work under way in Geneva. This
draft resolution describes a right to water and
sanitation in a way that is not reflective of existing
international law, as there is no right to water and
sanitation in an international legal sense as described
by the draft resolution.
The United States regrets that this draft resolution
diverts us from the serious international efforts under
way to promote greater coordination and cooperation
on water and sanitation issues. The draft resolution
attempts to take a short cut around the serious work of
formulating, articulating and upholding universal
rights. It was not drafted in a transparent, inclusive
manner, and the legal implications of a declared right
to water have not yet been carefully and fully
considered in this body or in Geneva.
For those reasons, the United States has called for
a vote on this draft resolution and will abstain.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Brazil recognizes the
human right to water and sanitation as a right that is
intrinsically connected to the realization of the rights to
life, to physical integrity, to health, to food and to
adequate housing. It is the responsibility of States to

8

guarantee those rights to their citizens. We consider
that the human right to water and sanitation is
compatible with the principle of the sovereign right of
States to use their own water resources, as reflected in
the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and
Development.
Brazil has been developing technical cooperation
projects aiming at promotion of access to water in
countries where water resources are scarce, focusing in
particular on low-income communities. Brazil supports
the efforts of Catarina de Albuquerque, the
Independent Expert on the issue of human rights
obligations related to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation, aimed at clarifying the nature and content of
the obligations associated with the right to water and
sanitation.
We would like to recall that the treaty-based and
non-treaty-based bodies of the United Nations human
rights system are based in Geneva. For that reason, the
Human Rights Council is the appropriate forum for
discussion of this subject in a more objective and
better-informed manner. But Brazil today will support
draft resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1*.
Mr. Şen (Turkey): My delegation wishes to
explain its vote before the vote on draft resolution
A/64/L.63/Rev.1*. On 28 March 2008 the Human
Rights Council adopted by consensus its resolution
7/22, entitled “Human rights and access to safe
drinking water and sanitation”, in which the Council
established the mandate of the Independent Expert on
the issue of human rights obligations related to access
to safe drinking water and sanitation. On 1 October
2009, the Council adopted by consensus a second
resolution, Human Rights Council resolution 12/8, on
the same subject. The Independent Expert has been
working on the issue of the human rights obligations of
States related to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation. The issue is before the Human Rights
Council, and there is an ongoing process. Therefore,
that Council should have been allowed to continue its
work on this important, but also complex, issue.
The draft resolution before us prejudges the
outcome of the ongoing work of the Council and
prevents its further deliberations.
In view of what I have said, Turkey will abstain
in the voting on draft resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1*,
entitled “The human right to water and sanitation”.

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1*, entitled “The human right
to water and sanitation”, as orally revised. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Italy, Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Mali,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Montenegro,
Morocco,
Myanmar,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tunisia, Tuvalu,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,

10-46629

Estonia, Ethiopia, Greece, Guyana, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Lesotho,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Slovakia,
Sweden, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Zambia
Draft resolution A/64/L.63/Rev.1*, as orally
revised, was adopted by 122 votes to none, with
41 abstentions (resolution 64/292).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Belize and the
Philippines advised the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of
Albania advised the Secretariat that it had
intended to abstain.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
those representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
members that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mrs. Bianchi (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina supports the progressive development of
international human rights law, taking into account the
fact that the main international human rights treaties in
the areas of civil and political rights and of economic,
social and cultural rights have become important pillars
of the Argentinean legal order, having been raised to
the constitutional level through the reform of the
national Constitution in 1994. In this context, the
importance of access to drinking water and basic
sanitation services to protect human health and the
environment have been recognized by many
international documents that enjoy the support of
Argentina.
Similarly, Argentina understands that it is one of
the main responsibilities of States to guarantee its
inhabitants the right to water as a fundamental aspect
of guaranteeing the right to life and ensuring an
adequate standard of living. As a consequence of that
position, Argentina voted in favour of resolution
64/292. Nonetheless, Argentina maintains that the right
to water and sanitation is a human right that every
State must ensure for the individuals within its
jurisdiction and not with respect to other States.

9

A/64/PV.108

Mr. Løvold (Norway): Norway gives high
priority to the right to water and sanitation, and we
voted in favour of resolution 64/292. In General
Comment No. 15 (2002) on the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, it is stated
that ensuring that everyone has access to adequate
sanitation is not only fundamental to human rights, but
is one of the principal mechanisms for protecting the
quality of drinking water supplies and resources.
Furthermore, the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights explains that measures to
prevent, treat and control diseases linked to water, in
particular ensuring access to adequate sanitation, are
part of the core obligations under the right to water.
Norway regards the right to water and sanitation
as being among the fundamental rights already
recognized in existing human rights norms, such as the
right to the possible highest standard of physical and
mental health, the right to an adequate standard of
living and the right to life. However, Norway regrets
that it was not possible to achieve consensus on
resolution 64/292 and the split this resolution has
created. Nevertheless, we hope that this situation will
not have a negative impact on the process on the issue
in the Human Rights Council in Geneva and the future
work of the Special Rapporteur.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala welcomes the efforts made by the
delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the
other sponsors of resolution 64/292, as well as the
flexibility shown even at the very last minute to come
up with a text acceptable to the majority of countries.
As a result, Guatemala would have preferred that the
resolution be adopted by consensus, but we decided to
vote in favour because we agree with its essence, if not
with all of its specific content.
At the same time, we voted in favour of the
resolution on the understanding that our recognition of
the right to drinking water and sanitation is in
accordance with our existing national legislation
guaranteeing the effective management and governance
of waters as goods and services in the aim of
contributing to the maintenance of essential ecological
processes, access to a safe and secure environment,
economic growth, compliance with the Millennium
Development Goals, and improved quality of life for
the present and future generations of the people living
on our national territory. Similarly, Guatemala

10

understands that the adoption of resolution 64/292 will
create no international or inter-State right or obligation.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): I take the floor in
explanation of vote on resolution 64/292, entitled “The
human right to water and sanitation”, just adopted as
orally revised.
Egypt believes that all human rights are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
and must be treated globally in a fair and equal
manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis. In this light, Egypt voted in favour of the
resolution, which focuses on the right to access to safe
and clean drinking water and sanitation, based on the
understanding that it does not create new rights or
sub-categories of human rights different from those
stipulated in the internationally agreed human rights
instruments.
Egypt appreciates the dedication of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia to this noble cause, and
welcomes the efforts of the sponsors to take on board
our major concerns. We also welcome the fact that the
provisions of the resolution deal solely with this
important issue, despite the shorter title, which we had
sincerely hoped the sponsors would streamline to
reflect the focus on the right to access to safe and clean
drinking water and sanitation, in line with the
provisions of the resolution itself.
Egypt believes that guaranteeing the full
enjoyment of this basic human right is the obligation of
all States towards all their citizens — a matter that
reaffirms the need to concentrate on local and national
perspectives in considering the issue at hand. This is
surely dependent on the varying capacities of States,
and as such is not expected in many instances to be
achieved overnight or without the international
cooperation necessary to support efforts to provide
safe, clean, accessible and affordable drinking water
and sanitation to all, particularly in developing
countries.
We acknowledge the need, highlighted by many
delegations during the course of the negotiations, to set
aside controversial questions of international
watercourse law and transboundary water. Egypt
regrets that the resolution on this important issue was
put to the vote, and is mindful that certain aspects of
human rights obligations related to access to safe
drinking water and sanitations have yet to be further
studied, as pointed out in the report of the United

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on the
scope and content of the relevant human rights
obligations related to equitable access to safe drinking
water and sanitation under international human rights
instruments (A/HRC/6/3).
However, we trust that the resolution will bring
these issues to the forefront and provide added impetus
to the efforts under way in Geneva to resolve them so
as to achieve consensus in the near future.
Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): New Zealand
takes this opportunity to explain its abstention in the
voting on resolution 64/292.
New Zealand fully appreciates the importance of
clean water and sanitation to development and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
We recognize that safe drinking water and sanitation
are essential to good health. We wish to see progress in
this area. However, we are concerned that the
resolution was introduced before New Zealand and
others had an adequate opportunity to fully consider its
implications in terms of both our domestic and our
international obligations.
We support the work of the Human Rights
Council, and in particular of the independent expert, to
clarify the content of human rights obligations related
to access to safe drinking water and sanitation. New
Zealand believes that the work of the independent
expert raises issues that require further consideration
by States.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Chile voted in favour of resolution
64/292, introduced by the delegation of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia. We recognize the
importance of drinking water and sanitation to human
dignity and believe that the aim of the resolution is to
promote compliance with the Millennium Development
Goals with respect to water and sanitation.
In that regard, we understand that the resolution
does not determine or prejudge the way in which States
decide to administer water and sanitation, which are
regulated by domestic legislation. Similarly, we
interpret the recognition of the right to drinking water
and sanitation strictly in the context of efforts to
promote access to those vital resources, again subject
to the domestic legislation of every State.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Access to water
and sanitation is fundamental to the realization of a

10-46629

range of human rights. Globally, some two thirds of
those without reliable access to clean water live in the
Asia-Pacific region, and of our region’s 3.8 billion
people, over half do not have access to sanitation.
Australia also acknowledges that access to water and
sanitation is of critical importance to the achievement
of the Millennium Development Goals. Therefore,
Australia has increased development assistance for
water and sanitation by $300 million in the past two
years.
We appreciate the sincerity of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia as the lead sponsor of resolution
64/292, and we respect Bolivia’s commitment to this
issue. Nevertheless, Australia has reservations about
the process of declaring new human rights through a
General Assembly resolution. In particular, we are
concerned that the precise status and nature of such
rights will be uncertain, and uncertainty makes
consensus difficult. Of course, when we recognize new
human rights, consensus is very important.
Australia supports the work of the independent
expert on the issue of human rights obligations related
to access to safe drinking water and sanitation. We
have followed with interest the progress of the
independent expert’s work in clarifying the content of
rights related to access to water and sanitation.
Resolution 64/292 has now been adopted, but we
would have preferred that the independent expert had
been allowed to finalize her work before the
introduction of a resolution so that her work on this
subject could have been fully taken into account by the
General Assembly.
Ms. Zamora (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica joined the majority of the Members of our
Organization with our vote in favour of resolution
64/292, but we would like to point out the reasons for
our position and the procedural reservations that we
still maintain.
In Costa Rica, access to water is an inalienable right
and has been guaranteed as such by the Constitutional
Court of the Supreme Court of Justice, which has also
acknowledged the international developments in this area.
As constitutional jurisprudence consistently indicates,
“[t]he Court recognizes, as a part of the
Constitutional Law, a fundamental right to
drinking water, derived from the fundamental
rights to health, life, the environment, food and

11

A/64/PV.108

adequate housing, among others, as has been
recognized as well in international instruments on
human rights which are applicable to Costa
Rica”.
For our country, every State has the primary
responsibility to guarantee its inhabitants access to
water pursuant to the principle of social and
intergenerational equity and solidarity. Costa Rica
therefore supports the work on this issue being carried
out in the Human Rights Council in Geneva, and in
particular by the independent expert on the matter of
human rights obligations related to access to water and
sanitation. This process seeks to establish with greater
clarity the content of human rights obligations,
including the obligation to ensure non-discrimination
with respect to access to drinking water and sanitation,
specifically with the ultimate purpose of recognizing
access to water and sanitation as a human right.
In this respect, my country would have liked to
see more clearly reflected in the text of the resolution
an acknowledgment of the work that is yet to be done
to establish the content and scope of this right at the
international level. Nevertheless, we understand that
with the revision introduced, the resolution represents
recognition by the General Assembly of the legal
developments concerning this fundamental right in
various international and national forums.
Costa Rica regrets the fact that this recognition
was not adopted by consensus. The issue at hand is
extremely important at a time when we are preparing to
review the Millennium Development Goals. It is not
advisable to stray from our goals; rather, we must
devote ourselves to speeding up the implementation of
the Goals related to access to water and sanitation and
to carry the process begun in Geneva to a successful
conclusion.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor to explain my delegation’s position
on resolution 64/292, which the Assembly has just
adopted.
Though we fully recognize the importance of the
provision of water and sanitation infrastructure in the
context of the Millennium Development Goals, we
regret that we were unable support the resolution in its
present form. Botswana also regrets that such a vital
resolution should have been subjected to a vote instead
of being adopted by consensus. My delegation feels
strongly that sufficient time should have been allowed

12

for consultations and for the ongoing process in
Geneva, under the auspices of the Human Rights
Council, to take its full course. We also feel that the
intended objectives of the resolution could be achieved
through many ongoing multilateral initiatives,
including the International Decade for Action, “Water
for Life”.
In Botswana, water is a precious natural resource.
We are a country that has a semi-arid climate; we have
highly unreliable rainfall; we experience recurrent
droughts and high rates of evaporation due to extreme
temperatures. Just to demonstrate the extent to which
we attach importance to water, we have named our
national currency “pula”, which literally means “let
there be rain”. This is an expression which is also used
as a form of national greeting or to signal public
approval or consent.
Over the years, the provision of water in
Botswana has been of utmost national priority. This is
reflected in the consistently high rates of budget
allocations for water and sanitation over the successive
periods of our national development plan. It is on this
account that my delegation abstained in the voting on
this otherwise vital resolution.
Ms. Freedman (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom abstained in the voting on resolution 64/292
today for reasons of both substance and procedure. On
substance, the United Kingdom does not believe that
there exists at present sufficient legal basis under
international law to either declare or recognize water or
sanitation as free-standing human rights. Neither a
right to water nor a right to sanitation has been agreed
upon in any United Nations human rights treaty, nor is
there evidence that they exist in customary
international law.
The United Kingdom does believe that there is a
right to water as an element of the right of everyone to
an adequate standard of living. We also believe that
inadequate sanitation has a negative impact on the
protection of human rights, such as the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health.
On procedure, we are disappointed that this
resolution cuts across and pre-empts the work under
way in the Human Rights Council in Geneva on this
very subject. We supported the Council’s resolutions
7/22, which established the post of independent expert
on the issue of human rights obligations related to

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

access to safe drinking water and sanitation, and 12/8
on human rights and access to safe drinking water and
sanitation of October 2009. In view of the complexities
of the issue at stake, the work in Geneva has been
progressing in a careful and consensual manner, and it
is unfortunate that this initiative today has pre-empted
the outcome of this work.
The United Kingdom is very concerned about the
impact that inadequate access to water and poor
sanitation has on the full enjoyment of human rights.
Furthermore, sanitation and drinking water underpin all
aspects of human and economic development. If
current trends continue, it is estimated that the
Millennium Development Goal on sanitation may not
be met globally until 2049. The United Kingdom takes
this extremely seriously. We place a very high priority
on providing the poorest people in the world with clean
water and sanitation as part of achieving the
Millennium Development Goals. Since March 2008,
our bilateral programmes have delivered safe water to
2.7 million people in Africa and 3.1 million in South
Asia and have helped 1.8 million people in Africa and
25.5 million people in South Asia gain access to basic
sanitation. We are also actively striving, through our
support to the Sanitation and Water for All initiative, to
strengthen the global response in the sector, bringing
together Governments, multilateral agencies and global
civil society. We very much hope that September’s
summit on the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) will provide much-needed attention and
impetus to expedite progress on this and other related
MDG targets. We simply regret that this initiative here
today was not pursued with consensus in mind.
Mr. Suárez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia attaches special importance to the
progressive improvement of access to drinking water
and basic sanitation services. Our constitution and
laws, as well as our national courts, have established a
significant legal framework regarding the delivery of
these services. Colombia voted in favour of resolution
64/292; it considers that, in spirit and in scope, it is an
aspirational political declaration that, as it is not
binding, creates no legal obligations for a State that
differ from those established in treaties and other
human rights instruments to which a State subscribes.
Hence, Colombia will interpret the scope of the
resolution in accordance with its constitution,
obligations assumed under human rights treaties we

10-46629

have ratified and with national laws related to the
matters covered in the resolution.
My delegation wishes also to make the following
points. First, Colombia agrees with delegations that
have expressed concern over the effect of the
submission and adoption by the Assembly of a
resolution on a matter that has been the subject of
careful study and consideration in the Human Rights
Council, in particular considering the high level of
technical expertise and conceptual discussion that has
characterized that specialized body’s consideration of
this issue. In that regard, my delegation hopes that the
processes under way in the Human Rights Council will
continue, in line with the appropriate technical and
legal approach.
Secondly, my country notes that we did not agree
with certain aspects of the consultation process. During
that process, Colombia presented — in a constructive
spirit and in line with solid legal arguments — a
number of proposals that do not appear to be reflected
in the final text, even though we heard no opposition
from other States. My country does not know why the
sponsors did not accept our proposals, and we regret
that the limited opportunity to discuss this very
important issue led to a vote having been taken on
today’s resolution, which sets an unfortunate precedent
on international matters related to human rights and the
internationally agreed development goals.
As to the content of the resolution, we note that
the content of operative paragraph 1 does not clearly
identify the basic components of the concept of the
right to drinking water and sanitation. For instance, it
does not define the scope of the right to drinking water
and sanitation in terms including the uses to which the
water will be put, the definition of its characteristics
and the identification of the modalities or beneficiaries
of services that would be covered under this right. Nor
does it make reference to aspects of this right that
should enjoy immediate protection, such as
non-discrimination in access, as compared with those
that should be promoted progressively, such as public
services and various social rights.
Hence, we reaffirm that States should interpret
the elements and characteristics of the right to drinking
water and sanitation in conformity with obligations
established in human rights instruments they have
ratified and their various constitutional regimes,
national legislation and relevant jurisprudence.

13

A/64/PV.108

Moreover, we note that paragraph 1 defines the right to
water and sanitation as “essential for the full
enjoyment of life and all human rights”. Here, it is
Colombia’s interpretation that the General Assembly’s
intention was to recognize the right to water and
sanitation as a right derived from or viewed in
connection with other rights, because the definition
emphasizes its nature as an essential component in the
enjoyment of the right to life and other rights.

Geneva will continue so that this right can be fully
implemented.

Colombia’s political constitution does not
explicitly refer to the right to drinking water and
sanitation. But the jurisprudence applied by our
constitutional court in particular cases indicates that
the right to water is a fundamental right only as it the
water is for human consumption in connection with the
enjoyment of the right to life in conditions of dignity
and the right to health. That court has indicated too that
the right to water is not protected when the water is
intended for other activities on which human life,
health or welfare do not depend. In its decisions, the
court specified instances in which protection must be
required of public authorities and individuals as
regards proper, efficient and timely delivery of public
sanitation services.

Ms. Fujimoto (Japan): Japan appreciates the
initiative that the Bolivian Government has taken, but
it regrets that the right to safe and clean drinking water
and sanitation was recognized through a vote. Japan
knows that this is a profoundly important issue: since
the 1990s Japan has been the world’s largest donor in
the water and sanitation sector. And Japan knows that
the Human Rights Council has been considering this
issue since 2006, as it has actively participated in the
discussions in that body. Furthermore, Japan was
among the sponsors of the Human Rights Council
resolution on human rights and access to safe drinking
water and sanitation.

It is Colombia’s understanding that the provision
of drinking water and environmental sanitation
services is among the services for which the State is
responsible. Under our system, it is the State’s duty to
ensure the efficient delivery of public services to all of
the country’s inhabitants, taking account of the fact
that such public services are subject to a legal regime
established through legislation and that the State can
deliver them either directly or indirectly through
organized communities or through individuals. In all
cases, it falls to the State to regulate, control and
monitor these services.
Having said that, my delegation thanks the
delegation of Bolivia for its initiative to bring this item
to the General Assembly for discussion.
Mr. Gonnet (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that the Assembly was unable to adopt
resolution 64/292, on the basic right to water and
sanitation, by consensus. We welcome the progress
made through the adoption of this text, with its
recognition that the right to access to drinking water
and sanitation is a universal right. We hope that the
work under way in the Human Rights Council in

14

France calls upon the international community to
come together on this issue during the ongoing
consideration of the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals, in particular during the September
summit, and in the framework of the preparations for
the sixth World Water Forum, to be held at Marseilles
in March 2012.

But my delegation believes that such an
important issue should be resolved by consensus, not a
vote. It therefore deeply regrets that we did not have an
exhaustive discussion on this right in order to reach
consensus before action was taken. It is for that reason
that Japan abstained in the vote on resolution 64/292.
My delegation will continue to engage in this
discussion both in Geneva and in New York in order to
reach consensus, and will continue to support the work
of the Independent Expert on the issue of human rights
obligations related to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation. In this and other ways, my Government will
spare no effort to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals, including water and sanitation targets, in
countries in need.
Mr. Lukiyantsev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation
voted in favour of resolution 64/292, prepared by the
delegation of Bolivia and other delegations, on the
human right to water and sanitation. We believe that
this document raises important problems, in particular
in light of the summit on the Millennium Development
Goals to be held in September. We view it as a
complement to the discussions under way in Geneva.
At the same time, we draw attention to some
shortcomings in the conceptual drafting of this right,

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

and we call on other States, regardless of the positions
they took today, to continue discussions on this topic.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): With
respect to resolution 64/292 on the human right to
water and sanitation that we have just adopted, I should
like to make the following remarks on behalf of my
country. Peru voted in favour of the resolution in the
understanding that the guaranteed enjoyment of this
right is subject to existing domestic legislation, spatial
planning and the allocation of resources allowing for
the exercise of this right.
Ms. Kok (Singapore): I have the honour to make
this statement in explanation of vote after the voting.
Singapore is a small island State with no natural
resources, including water. Nonetheless, we cater to the
needs of our population through a combination of
means and mechanisms for the reliable delivery of this
crucial resource. We thus support efforts to provide
access to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation.
This is the basis of our vote in favour of resolution
64/292.
At the same time, we believe that several issues
need to be worked out with respect to this right — a
process that can also proceed through the ongoing
discussions in Geneva. For instance, clear definitions
and the scope of Member States’ obligations should be
clarified. My delegation stands ready to contribute
constructively in discussions.
Mr. De Bassompierre (Belgium) (spoke in
French): Belgium voted in favour of resolution 64/292
because we recognize the fundamental principle of the
right of access to water, which is enshrined in our
national and regional legislation.
Belgium appreciates the sincerity of Bolivia and
other sponsors in submitting this resolution. However,
we regret the process by which it was developed,
which did not favour the achievement of consensus on
this key issue.
We fully support the mandate of the independent
expert and the process under way in Geneva. Belgium
also regrets that some important suggestions made by
the European Union during the negotiations were not
taken into account in the final text of the resolution. In
particular, we express our reservations with respect to
paragraph 2. Without wishing to minimize the role of
the international cooperation in this area, which is an
explicit priority of Belgium’s cooperation and

10-46629

development policy, we underscore that
implementation of this right is above all
responsibility of individual States.

the
the

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I take the floor to give an
explanation of vote after the voting on resolution
64/292. Pakistan voted in favour of the resolution.
We wish to reaffirm that States have the
responsibility to ensure access to safe and clean
drinking water and sanitation for its nationals.
However, we should like to draw attention to practical
limitations in achieving the ideals aimed at in
resolution 64/292. These could only be progressively
achieved by taking into account the particular context
of developing countries like Pakistan vis-à-vis capacity
limitations, financial limitations and access to natural
resources.
Mr. De Klerk (Netherlands): The Netherlands
abstained in the voting on the Bolivian resolution on
the human right to water and sanitation, and I should
like to explain our position.
The Netherlands recognized access to clean,
affordable drinking water and adequate sanitation as a
human right in 2008. The Netherlands attaches great
importance to this human right. This is also reflected in
our overall development efforts and in our output target
for water and sanitation, which was formulated in
2005. The target is for Dutch assistance to help to
provide safe water and improved sanitation to 50
million people by 2015. We are also a major donor to
UNICEF’s programme for water, sanitation and
hygiene.
To ensure that priority is given to water and
sanitation in the international debate, the Netherlands
supports the Secretary-General’s Advisory Board on
Water and Sanitation. The Board has been instrumental
in, for instance, promoting the International Year of
Sanitation and in developing the Sanitation and Water
for All initiative, which is an alliance of national
Governments, donors, civil society organizations and
other development partners that tries to increase
political will and improve aid effectiveness by
mobilizing and better targeting resources for water
supply and sanitation.
Unfortunately, notwithstanding our support for
water issues, the Netherlands was not in a position to
vote in favour of resolution 64/292 for a number of
reasons. First of all, the resolution puts insufficient

15

A/64/PV.108

emphasis on the responsibility of Governments towards
their own citizens to move progressively and as
quickly as possible towards the full realization of the
right to water and sanitation for everyone, with special
attention to individuals and groups who have
traditionally faced difficulties. If Governments fail to
do so, citizens must be able to claim this right and hold
the duty-bearers accountable. Resolution 64/292
neither encourages States to take this responsibility nor
calls for redress mechanisms.
Secondly, the resolution refers to the work of the
independent expert mandated by the Human Rights
Council. The Netherlands considers it very important
that her report (A/HRC/12/24) be used as input for
further discussion during the Millennium Development
Goals summit. Requesting the independent expert to do
additional work at this stage, for which she is not
mandated by the Human Rights Council, will infringe
on her present mandate, which aims at inclusiveness
and consensus. A new request from the General
Assembly to the independent expert will not really
benefit consensus on or the realization of the relevant
human rights.
Thirdly, we firmly believe in the right to access to
clean, affordable drinking water and good sanitation,
and we underline that this right should be recognized
as such. However, we are not happy with the ad hoc
declaration of human rights by the General Assembly,
even though we noted and appreciated the oral revision
just introduced.
Finally, the resolution contains elements that
unnecessarily politicize this important theme.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate that the
Netherlands acknowledges the importance of access to
drinking water and good sanitation, and I should like to
underline our willingness to support Governments in
fulfilling their international obligations through
development assistance. National development policies
can be a starting point for turning human rights into
plans and action.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico voted in favour of resolution 64/292 as we
believe that access to safe drinking water and
sanitation is a matter of high priority and we share the
spirit of the text presented by Bolivia and the other
sponsors.

16

Mexico recognizes that access to safe drinking
water and sanitation are part and parcel of the human
right to an adequate standard of living and of the right
to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health, as established,
respectively, in article 25 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and articles 11 and 12 of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights. That is how we interpret the content of
paragraph 1 of the resolution just adopted by the
Assembly.
In Mexico, article 27 of our Constitution
establishes the modalities for ownership of the land
and water within the boundaries of our national
territory. Mexico will continue to make every effort
necessary to adopt progressive measures and, within
the limits of our resources, to provide water and
sanitation to that part of our population that does not
have such services, as established in our national
legislation in compliance with our applicable
international obligations and in line with the
Millennium Development Goals.
Mexico believes that it is up to national legal
systems to enhance equitable access to drinking water
and basic sanitation. The resolution must therefore be
implemented nationally and in accordance with the
applicable national legislation of every country.
Lastly, we believe that we must continue the indepth discussion on this matter in a constructive
manner and consistent with the processes under way in
the Human Rights Council, which is the appropriate
forum in which to move forward with this very
important issue.
Mr. Feleke (Ethiopia): My delegation abstained
in the voting on this resolution on the human right to
water and sanitation, but not because Ethiopia believes
that access to water for all human beings is neither a
noble idea nor their natural right.
However, although the delegation of Ethiopia
requested the inclusion of a paragraph taken from the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of
June 1992 —
“[Reaffirming that] States have, in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law,
the sovereign right to exploit their own resources
pursuant to their own environment and

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

development policies, and the responsibility to
ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or
control do not cause damage to the environment
of other States or of areas beyond the limits of
national jurisdiction,”
— this was not considered during the consultations,
and Ethiopia had to take this position today.
The Government of Ethiopia is of the view that
the aforementioned paragraph should have been
included in the resolution, as it reaffirms the sovereign
right of all States to their own resources, which is
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations and
the principles of international law. We strongly believe
that the right to water and sanitation cannot be seen in
isolation, particularly without taking into account, in
the first place, the rights of resource-poor countries,
which deserve new consideration when negotiating the
right or access to water or other related issues.

basis, scope or content of the right, or the concomitant
obligations of States with regard to this right.
The Government of Canada is of the view that a
general right to safe and clean drinking water and
sanitation is not explicitly codified under international
human rights law, and there is currently no
international consensus among States regarding the
basis, scope and content of a possible right to water. It
is premature to declare such a human right in the
absence of a clear international consensus, and the lack
of international consensus is exemplified by the fact
that a vote was called on this resolution.
Canada recognizes that there are important
human rights related to access to safe drinking water as
a component of existing rights, and Canada will
continue to meet its obligations in this regard. For all
these reasons, Canada abstained in the voting on this
resolution.

Mr. Normandin (Canada): By way of
introduction, let me first say that Canada fully
appreciates the vital importance of water for all, and
this is why Canada supports countless initiatives
around the world to ensure that people have access to
safe drinking water and sanitation. This being said,
with respect to the resolution we have just adopted, let
me offer the following explanation of vote.

Mr. Vigny (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland supports the process aimed at promoting
the right to water and access to sanitation for all, which
we believe arises from the international instruments
guaranteeing human rights. We would therefore like to
send a positive signal to that end, which justifies our
vote in favour although we were unhappy with the
negotiating process for the text.

Canada takes its human rights obligations
seriously, and before agreeing to be bound by new
international obligations, Canada must ensure that it
can meet those obligations domestically. During the
period when Canada was a member of the Human
Rights Council, we joined the consensus on resolution
7/22 of 2008, which established the mandate of the
independent expert on the issue of human rights
obligations related to access to safe drinking water and
sanitation to further study the issue. The work of the
independent expert was expected to serve as a basis for
Member States to consider, debate and delineate the
basis, scope and content of any right to water and
sanitation.

Indeed, we do not support a duplication of
resolutions concerning water between the General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council, as we
believe that it weakens the consensus work under way
in Geneva. Our hope is that, in the future, the countries
that initiate these different resolutions will work
together in a concerted fashion.

It is premature to recognize such a right without
allowing States the benefit of full deliberations based
on the independent expert’s findings, their own internal
processes and the agreement of States. The current
non-binding resolution would appear to declare that
there is a right to safe and clean drinking water and
sanitation as a human right, but does not set out the

10-46629

In addition, the negotiating process took place in a
way that was not very constructive or transparent, thus
preventing a consensus from being forged. Indeed, a
number of countries, including Switzerland, proposed —
unfortunately, to no avail — that paragraph 1 include a
reference to international instruments that underpin the
right to water and access to sanitation.
Switzerland also regrets that there is no reference
in the resolution to the obligation of States to ensure
enjoyment at the national level of the right to water and
to promote access to sanitation.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): My delegation
voted in favour of the resolution 64/292 because we
agree with the central and general statement that the

17

A/64/PV.108

right to water is a human right that is essential to the
full enjoyment of life and all human rights. We do,
however, regret that a vote had to be taken on this
resolution, and we share the concerns about the process
that others have expressed.
On substance, while we agree with the core
message, we regret that the issue has been dealt with in
a rather simplistic manner. To recognize the right to
water and sanitation as a human right is in our view, in
this context, nothing more and nothing less than an act
of interpretation of existing human rights law. There is
a limited number of human rights that are explicitly
recognized in international treaties and customary law,
and the right to water is not one of them. But these
explicit rights do, of course, imply many more specific
rights. This is also true for the right to water, even
though its exact scope and content remain unclear in
this resolution.
Most human rights are, furthermore, not absolute
in nature and must be seen in the context of the law.
This is particularly true for rights within the realm of
economic and social rights, whose realization is, to
some degree at least, subject to the availability of
resources. Most importantly, the obligation to
implement human rights falls first and foremost on
each individual State. It is therefore our understanding
that resolution 64/292 does not create any new right
and that it must be seen in the context of wider human
rights law.

a very important role at the national economic
conference. That is why we would like to thank Bolivia
and the sponsors of the resolution, and are pleased to
have voted in its favour.
Mr. Mutahar (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my heartfelt
condolences to the Government and people of Pakistan
following this morning’s airplane crash, which claimed
152 lives.
Yemen was a sponsor of resolution 64/292,
entitled “The human right to water and sanitation”.
Given our belief that water is of great importance to
human existence and life, since there can be no life at
all on Earth without it, it is natural that access to water
be considered a human right.
I will not parrot the representative of Bolivia’s
introduction of the resolution. Suffice it to note that
during the first decade of this millennium, many
reports have referred to the world water crisis. All of
those publications have stressed that the shortage of
water could be the greatest challenge of our time. I
would simply reiterate the statement made by Maude
Barlow — an expert in the field of water who received
the 2005 Right Livelihood Award, known as the
Alternative Nobel Prize, for her studies — to the effect
that water will be the oil of the twenty-first century.
This might even lead us to say that this is a time of
thirst.

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of Equatorial
Guinea congratulates Bolivia on its initiative. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 64/292 and the fact
that there was no vote against the resolution.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the General Assembly who voted in favour of the
resolution. We believe that this is a historic moment
that represents a major step forward towards the
September summit. We would have preferred, however,
that the resolution be adopted by consensus.

Let us picture a remote place where people have
nothing and live without resources. If we go there and
leave them without water, and then return after a while,
we will find them in the same situation. However, if we
leave them with water, the situation of the population
of that remote place will certainly have improved
greatly.

Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The adoption of resolution 64/292 marks a historic
moment. For the first time, the United Nations has
recognized the right to drinking water and sanitation as
an essential human right.

That is why I believe that the adoption of this
resolution is very significant, given the importance that
my country and Government attach to water. We
believe that it is a question of national sovereignty and
that countries are very aware of that. That is why our
Government is carrying out a vast national programme
to provide water to the population, an issue that played

18

The issue of water is at the very core of the
survival of humankind. While we deliver speeches in
this Hall, more than 884 million people on our planet
have no access to sources of improved drinking water
and 2.6 billion, including almost 1 billion children,
have no access to improved sanitation services. Worst
still, if we do not act quickly and effectively, in 2025

10-46629

A/64/PV.108

more than 3 billion people will suffer the consequences
of a lack of water.

positions of those countries that still find it difficult to
recognize the human right to water.

Cuba,
which
achieved
the
Millennium
Development Goal concerning the use of drinking
water in 1995, believes that access to water and
sanitation is a fundamental human right. In reaffirming
the sovereign right of every country to regulate water
and all its uses and services within its own territory, we
believe it important for States to strive at all levels to
implement this right for their inhabitants. Developing
countries need the support of the international
community in order to achieve these goals.

The adoption of this resolution is all the more
important in the light of the upcoming review of the status
of implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals.

The internationalization of the problem of water
makes it crucial for the United Nations to become the
main forum for discussing and reaching agreements on
water and sanitation. That is why Cuba welcomes
today’s adoption by the General Assembly, the
universal representative body, of this important
resolution by a wide a majority, following a lengthy
negotiating process marked by transparency and
inclusiveness. The text that we have adopted takes into
account proposals made by various delegations and
strikes a suitable balance. The resolution does not
contradict or prejudge in any way, but rather
complements and strengthens the discussion on the
issue of water and sanitation that is currently under
way in the Human Rights Council. The resolution
allows us to focus effectively on the consequences and
impact of the lack of drinking water and sanitation on
the attainment the Millennium Development Goals.
In conclusion, I should like to convey the
appreciation and gratitude of Cuba to the Plurinational
State of Bolivia for its leadership in this area. That
brotherly country took the initiative to promote a
debate on this important matter in the General
Assembly, and its tireless efforts were key to enabling
the adoption of this historic resolution, which Cuba
welcomes.
Mrs. Rubiales De Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua welcomes the adoption of
resolution 64/292 today, which recognizes the human
right to drinking water and sanitation as a human right
essential to the full enjoyment of life. We welcome the
adoption of this historic milestone, after more than
15 years of debate at the global level, thanks to the
initiative of the brotherly people and Government of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which also
endeavoured, with a conciliatory spirit, to reconcile the

10-46629

Some 884 million people lack safe drinking water
and more than 2.6 billion people do not have basic
sanitation. Every year, approximately 1.5 million
children under the age of five die, and 443 million
school days are lost as a result of diseases linked to
water and sanitation. We cannot continue to neglect
this issue.
Access to water and sanitation is essential to the
health and dignity of all people around in the world.
This resolution has been adopted at a crucial moment
as the world is also facing the impact of climate
change. The insufficient and inadequate provision of
safe drinking water represents an ongoing problem for
the health of the world population. Some 80 per cent of
all cases of disease in the developing world are caused
by the lack of clean water and adequate sanitation,
making it one of the leading causes of illness and
death, especially among children.
Nicaragua thanks those Member States that,
having grasped this reality, voted with us in favour of
this historic resolution.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we wish
to thank the Plurinational Republic of Bolivia for its
initiative and its leadership. We should also like to
thank all the States that have spoken in favour of
resolution 64/292.
Today we have seized the opportunity to provide
an adequate response to the 1.2 billion people who
currently do not have access to safe drinking water and
to the approximately 2.4 billion people who lack
adequate sanitation services. We have also taken an
important step to reduce the number of people,
currently more than 3 million, who die each year from
diseases kinked to the lack of safe drinking water.
In the process of negotiating the resolution, we
considered the importance of valuing water as a source
of life — and, indeed, as life itself. It is no coincidence
that water constitutes two-thirds of our planet and that
the same proportion can also be seen in the
composition of the human body. Without water, life on

19

A/64/PV.108

Earth would be impossible. That is why we reject all
attempts to turn water into commodity, as bargaining
with the life of humankind and of the planet could
result in water, instead of nourishing peace, becoming
an element of violence.
The international community must ensure the
right to water of the millions of persons, the majority
of whom are in developing countries, who lack safe
drinking water and thereby ensure their right to life and
to human dignity, based on the fact that access to water
services is fundamental to the enforcement of the right
to health and the prevention of countless diseases that
primarily affect the poor. All forms of discrimination
represent an attack on life, but discrimination based on
setting market prices for access to water is not only
economic discrimination, but a violation of the right to
exist.
The right to water is fundamental to peace,
democracy and a society free of disease and suffering.
Mr. Zeidan (Palestine): Palestine welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly today of the
important resolution 64/292 on the human right to
water and sanitation. We thank the sponsors and
express our appreciation of the efforts of Ms. Catarina
de Albuquerque, the United Nations independent expert
on the issue of human rights obligations related to
access to safe drinking water and sanitation, especially
with regard to the further elaboration of standards.
Palestine affirms that the right to safe and clean
drinking water and sanitation is a universal human
right that is essential to the full enjoyment of the right
to life and human dignity, and to which all peoples are
entitled, including people living under foreign occupation.
Palestine affirms its respect for the United Nations
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes and the relevant
provisions of international humanitarian law and human
rights law.
That water is a priority issue for Palestine is
reflected in the fact that it is actually one of the core

final status issues that must be justly and
comprehensively resolved for a lasting resolution of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For Palestine, the
scarcity of water has been compounded by the
exploitation and diversion of water resources by Israel,
the occupying Power, in addition to its contamination
and destruction of water and sanitation systems during
military assaults on the occupied Palestinian territory.
Israel’s illegal colonization by means of the wall and
settlements in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, has also entailed the seizure and obstruction
of access to aquifers, further reducing the water supply
available to the Palestinian civilian population.
Israel’s violation of the Palestinian people’s right
to water negatively impacts many other human rights,
including their rights to food, to health, to livelihood
and to development. A brief glimpse at the many
troubling statistics in this regard reveal that the
Palestinian people are allotted only 10 per cent of the
water extracted from their own land and that they must
actually purchase from Israel water that has been
exploited from the Palestinian territory. In the Gaza
Strip, only 5 to 10 per cent of water resources are of
drinkable quality, with the remaining 90 per cent unfit
for human consumption due to sewage and seawater
infiltration. Daily per-person water consumption falls
below World Health Organization minimum guidelines.
Israel continues to hamper Palestinian development of
essential water and sanitation infrastructure to this day.
Today, Palestine reiterates its call on Israel to comply
with its obligation to respect the right to water, in
addition to the need for its compliance with all of its
other obligations under international law.
Palestine looks forward to the implementation of
resolution 64/292, including the call for assistance to
help countries in need to gain the capacity and
technology to provide safe, clean, accessible and
affordable water and sanitation for all.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 48.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

20

10-46629
