Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Requests those States offering scholarships to inform the Secretary-General of the details of the offers
made and the scholarships granted under this programme and. whenever possible, rto provide travel funds
to prospective students;
5. Requests the administering Powers concerned to
intensify widespread and continuous dissemination in
the Territories under their administration of information
relating to offers of study and training facilities made
by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to
enable s,tudents to avail ,themselves of such offers;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Draws the attention of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
2198th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

3155 (XXVIII). Question of Niue

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Niue,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 48
Having heard the statement of the Leader of Government of Niue, 0
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resoJutions 2868 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and 2986 (XXVII) of 14 December
1972,
Recalling the report of the United Nations Visiting
Mission to Niue, 1972,50
Noting with satisfaction the outcome of the constitutional talks between the administering Power and a
Niuean Government delegation which was embodied in
a joint communique issued at Wellington on 2 March
1973, 51
Noting further that a time-table has been established
for the completion in 1974 of the final steps which will
enable Niue to achieve self-government,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Niue in their efforts
freely to decide their own future,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Niue to self-determination in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
• 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/9023/Rev.l ), chaps. III
and XVI.
4 9 lbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth Committee, 2067th
meeting.
IIO Ibid., Twenty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 23 (Al
8723/Rev.1), chap. XVI, annex J.
51 Jbid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9023/
Rev.1), chap. XVI, annex, para. 19.

105

2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Niue 52 and endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee on the question;
3. Notes with approval that, during the period since
the United Nations Mission visited Niue in June 1972,
the Government and people of Niue resolved to achieve
self-government in 1974 and that agreement has been
reached with the Government of New Zealand, as the
administering Power, on a specific time-table for the
free exercise by the people of Niue of their right to
self-determination;
4. Welcomes the invitation extended by the administering Power to the Secretary-General for the
United Nations to observe the act of self-determination
in Niue in 1974;
5. Requests ·the Special Committee, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Government of
Niue, to appoint a special mission to Niue in 1974
which will observe the proceedings relating to the act
of self-determination by the people of Niue and to report to the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
6. Requests the administering Power and the Government of Niue, as well as the Secretary-General, to
provide all the necessary assistance and facilities to
the special mission in the discharge of its task;
7. Requests the Special Committee to report on this
question to the General Assembly at its twenty~ninth
session.
2202nd plenary meetinf?
14 December 1973
3156 (XXVIII). Question of American Samoa,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, New
Hehrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles
and Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Gi_lbert and Ellice Islands, Guam, New Hebrides, Pitcairn, St. Helena, Seychelles and Solomon Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 53
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
!ndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970 containing the programme of action for the full impl~mentation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions relating to the
Territories listed above, in particular resolution 2984
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Noting with concern that many of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, as
weU as the related recommendations of the Special
Committee, remain largely unimplemented as regards
those Territories, in particular with respect to the
establishment of a specific time-table for the exercise
52 fbid., chap. XVI.
~;i !bid

char,. IH, V, X, XV. XVH :nd .XVI.H

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

106

by the peoples of the Territories of their right to selfdetermination and independence,
Deploring the continued refusal of the Governments
of France and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, in contravention of the provisions
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, to
co-operate with the Special Committee in its examination of the Territories under their administration,
Deeply deploring the policy of those administering
Powers which continue to maintain military bases in
some of the Territories under their administration, in
contravention of the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly,
Concerned that the economies of the Territories
listed above are based mainly on either single cash
products, such as copra or phosphates, or on military
activities,
Deeply deploring the attitude of the administering
Powers concerned, which continue to refuse to allow
United Nations missions to visit the Territories under
their administration,
Bearing in mind that recent visiting missions to small
Territories have demonstrated their usefulness, and
reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories is indispensable for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the political, economic and social
conditions in the Territories and to the views, wishes
and aspirations of the peoples therein,
Deeply concerned about the adverse effects of continued nuclear atmospheric testing in the South Pacific
on the lives, welfare and environment of the peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories situated therein,
and reaffirming that those peoples have a right to be
free of the hazards to their lives, welfare and environment caused by such tests,
Mindful that the Territories listed above require the
continued attention and assistance of the United Nations
in the achievement by their peoples of the objectives
embodied in the Charter of the United Nations and in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and the economic conditions of the Territories,
l. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Territories of American Samoa, Gilbert and Ellice
Islands, Guam, New Hebrides, Pi,tcairn, St. Helena,
Seychelles and Solomon Islands;54
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independ •1 :ce
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals
set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, a
specific time~table for the free exercise by the peoples
54 Ibid., chaps.

X, XV, XVII and XVIlI.

of the Territories of their right to self-determination
and independence;
4. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of
territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
5. Strongly deprecates any attempt aimed at the
partial or total disruption of the national unity and
territorial integrity of colonial Territories and the
establishment of military bases and installations in those
Territories as being incompatible with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
nd of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
6. Calls upon the Governments of France, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, as the administering Powers concerned, to reconsider their attitude
t?wards the receiving of United Nations visiting missions to the above-mentioned Territories and to permit
access by such missions to Territories under their
administration;
7. Calls upon the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom, as the administering Powers, to participate in the relevant proceedings of the Special Committee concerning the Territories under their acministration and, in particular, to report to the Special
Committee on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all possible steps to diversify the economies
of the Territories listed above;
9. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienable right of the peoples of those Territories to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the rights of the
peoples to own and dispose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
10. Calls upon the United Kingdom, as the administering Power concerned, formally to consult, in the
presence of a United Nations mission, the people of
Pitcairn about their views on present constitutional
arrangements and the future status of the Territory;
11. Calls upon the administering Power concerned,
in view of its responsibility towards the welfare of the
peoples of the Non-Self-Governing Territories in the
region, to discontinue any further nuclear atmospheric
testing in the South Pacific area, in order not to endanger the life and environment of the peoples of the
Territories concerned;
12. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national life of the Territories listed above;
13. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 3164 (XXVIII) of J4 December 1973, to
pay particular regard to the need to intensify widL:spread
dissemination of information on the process of decolonization in respect of the Territories listed above and,
in particular, to consider intensifying the activities of
the information centres concerned;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
give full consideration to this question, including m
particular the dispatch of visiting missions to those

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Territories, and to report to the Genera,} Assembly at
its twenty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present resolution.
2202nd plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3157 (XXVIII). Question of Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat,
Turks and Caicos Islands and United States
Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Bermuda, Briti-h
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and
Caicos Islands and United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 65
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, con•
taining the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling also its previous resolutions relating to the
Territories listed above, in particular resolution 2984
(XXVII) of 14 December 1972,
Noting with concern that many of the provisions of
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, as
well as the related recommendations of the Special
Committee, remain unimplemented as regards those
Territories, in particular with respect to the establishment of a specific time-table for the exercise by the
peoples of those Territories of their right to selfdetermination and independence,
Deploring the continued refusal of the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, in contravention of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly, to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its examination of the Territories under that Government's administration,
Deeply deploring the attitude of the administering
Powers concerned, which continue to refuse to allow
United Nations missions to visit the Territories under
their administration,
Concerned that the economies of those Territories
are based mainly on fluctuating activities such as
tourism, land sales and tax haven arrangements,
Bearing in mind that recent visiting missions to small
Territories have demonstrated their usefulness, and
reiterating its conviction that the dispatch of visiting
missions to the above-mentioned Territories is indispensable for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to the political, economic and social
conditions in the Territories and to the views, wishes
and aspirations of the people therein,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Decclaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
1111 Ibid., chaps. II and XXIII-XXV.

107

Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Bermuda, British Virgin Islands,
Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Turks and Caicos Islands
and United States Virgin Islands; 66
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all the necessary steps, without further delay,
to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals
set forth in the Declaration with respect to the Territories and, in that regard, to establish, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, a
specific time-table for the free exercise by the peoples
of the Territories of their right to self-determination
and independence;
4. Reaffirms its conviction that the questions of
territorial size, geographical isolation and limited resources should in no way delay the implementation of
the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
5. Calls upon the Governments of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America, as the administering Powers
concerned, to reconsider their attitude towards the
receiving of United Nations visiting missions to the
above-mentioned Territories and to permit access by
such missions to Territories under their administration;
6. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom. as an administering Power, to participate in the
relevant proceedings of the Special Committee concerning the Territories under its administration and, in
particular, to report to the Special Committee on the
implementation of the present resolution;
7. Calls upon the administering Powers concerned
to take all possible steps to diversify the economics of
the Territories listed above;

8. Urges the administering Powers to safeguard the
inalienabl.e right of the peoples of those Territories to
the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures which guarantee the rights of the
peoples to own and di~pose of those natural resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
9. Requests the organizations of the United Nations
system to assist in accelerating progress in all sectors
of the national life of those Territories;
10. Invites the Secretary-General, having regard to
the mandate entrusted to him in General Assembly
resolution 3164 (XXVIII) of 14 December '.~,7~, to
pay particular regard to the need to intensi· widespread dissemination of information on the pi, ~·~ss of
decolonization in respect of the Territories listed above
and. in particular, to consider intensifying the activities
of the information centres concerned;
11. Requests the Special Committee to c;>ntinue to
give full consideration to this question, including in
M Ibid., chaps. XXIIT-XXV.
