TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

MEETING: 26 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 504) . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . : . . . . . . , . , . . . , ,, . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9387) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1504

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

L

k

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND FOURTH MEETING

’

Held in New York on Tuesday, 26 August 1969, at 4 p.m.
Presiderzt: Mr. J. DE PINIES (Spain).

represents a consensus of opinion among the members of
the Council. The text of the draft resolution appears in
document S/9410, which has been circulated to the
members of the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

3. If I hear no objection, I shall declare that draft
resolution unanimously adopted.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 504)

The d@ft resolution was adopted unanimously. 1

1. Adoption of the agenda.

4. The PRESIDENT (translatedfiom SpanishJ: I shall now
call first on the members of the Council.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of
the Secudty Council (S/9385).

5. Lord CARADON (United‘Kingdom): This is no time to
repeat what has been said already, I wish, however, to
reaffirm that my Government has whole-heartedly supported the Secretary-General’s proposal that United
Nations observers should be stationed on both sides of the
Israel-Lebanon border. I do not need or wish to go over
what representatives of my delegation have said in this
debate or in earlier debates about breaches of the cease-fire
on one side and about reprisals on the other. We do not
forget, and we must certainly deeply regret, what they
mean in terms of loss of life and bereavement an,d suffering
on both sides.

3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9387).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East

6. I would only add that as I have read the records of the
earlier debate and remembered the previous similar debates
in the past I have wearily reflected that we are making no
progress. On the cbntrary, I fear that we are going
backwards; we are losing ground. Every month that passes
and every outbreak of violence on one side and every
reprisal on the other represents a setback-a most serious
setback to our hopes of peace.

Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires
a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9387)

7. There is a second frightening preoccupation, I am sure,
in all our minds at this time, Hopes of peace seem to
disappear over the horizon. Intense feeling mounts. It tends
to drive out rational judgement and constructive thinking.
Some fear that the time for making peace has run out, that
we have missed our chance, that we have delayed too long.
But there is another reaction to recent events-a reaction
which, I am glad to say, has been expressed in a number of
previous speeches. You yourself, Mr. President, emphasized
the same reaction when you spoke to us on behalf of your
country. All of us, I trust, join in believing that a just and
lasting peace can still become a reality.

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanishj: In accordance with the decision previously taken by the Co’uncil, I
shall now invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel
to take places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the Pvesident, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israelj took places at the Council
table.
,2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanishj: During the
past few days, the members of the Council have held
intensive consultations on this question. I am pleased to
announce that, as a result of those coqsultations, agreement
has been reached on the text of a draft resolution which

8. I ask how we can best stop the bloodshed and the
suffering. Not by superior exhortations or lofty condem1 See resolution
1

270 (1969).

nations, Not by threats or curses. All of us know that there
is only one way to stop the sickening slide to enveloping
conflict, It is by.iGrking confidently and urgently for a
peaceful and lasting settlement. If we abandon that effort,
then no verbal resolutions will save the peoples of the
Middle East from utter calamity-from a disaster which
may come slow or may come quick but will surely come, a
conflict on a terrible scale.

ened, rigid negotiating positions become even more rigid,
and margins for compromise and accommodation, on which
an agreed settlement depends, become even narrower. We
are particularly concerned that violence is extending t’o the
frontier between Israel and Lebanon, which has hitherto
been relatively free of it. It is because we wish strongly to
condemn the extension of fighting to that area that we have
joined in voting for this resolution.

9. As we disperse I trust that every one of us will resolve,
in spite of all discouragements, to turn without further
delay to the task of pursuing peace, to the only alternative
to violence and bloodshed.

16. In several respects, the resolution. that we have
adopted is not what we should have preferred. It does not
deal in as balanced a fashion as we should have wished with
the cycle of provocation and reprisal which are responsible
for extending the violence to that frontier. Nevertheless,
the resolution does make clear the Council’s strong dis.
approval of all violations of the cease-fire, from wherever
they may emanate. The resolution refers not only to acts of
military reprisal by one of the parties but also to violent
incursions launched across the frontier from the territory of
the other party. Thus the operative paragraphs of the
resolution reaffirm strict obligations on all concerned to
avoid violations of the cease-fire.

10. I believe that I can speak for all members of this
Council when I say that all our concern, all our endeavour,
should be directed to perseverance in that initiative. We
must every day be working, not waiting. I pray that we
shall not have to look back in future years and reproach
ourselves for having failed to pursue our joint and agreed
initiative when we still had time and when there were ‘still
favourable factors-chief among which is that we in this
Council have unanimously declared and reaffirmed the
principles and purposes of a just peace.

17. We would also have much preferred that there bl: no
reference in the resolution to the Israel-Lebanon Armistice
Agreement because its status and continued validity is
contested by the parties concerned. However, we do not
consider that its being recalled in this resolution prejudices
the position of either party in regard to it and we have
therefore agreed that it might be referred to along with the
cease-fire which both parties have accepted.

11. I believe I speak for all of us when I say that there is
no hope for the future, no hope of stopping bloodshed and
no hope of escape from the vicious circle of violence, unless
we renew and redouble our efforts to make the lasting
settlement proposed in the resolution of November 1967 a
reality-and unless we work for that purpose without
reservation, not only as something which is ultimately
desirable but as something which is desperately and
increasingly urgent now,

18. Of course what the Council is seeking here and
elsewhere in the Middle East, as clearly set forth in its
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, is a just and
lasting peace and not merely restoration of armistice
situations. We must continue to pursue that overriding /goal
and to move beyond armistice agreements and cease-fires ta
genuine peace.

12. Today we have acted unanimously. I warmly congratu.
late all those who made that possible. Especially, if I may, I
would pay tribute to your part, Mr. President in achieving
that result, and to the part played by the Ambassador of
Lebanon. I trust that our unanimity today can give us some
hope for the future-a hope that will be betrayed unless we
have faith that peace is possible and have courage in
working for it.

19. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia) (tra~&~tedfiwr?r
Spanish): The delegation of Colombia voted in favour of
the draft resolution submitted for the Council’s considera.
tion, precisely, because the terms of the resolution entirely
correspond to the views it has expressed on the matter.

13. The PRESIDENT (translated fkom Spanish): 1 thank
the representative of the United Kingdom for the kind
words he addressed to me,

20. My delegation expressed condemnation of any act’sef
reprisal and opposition to any unilateral and arbitrary
punitive operation.

14. Mr. YOST (United States of America): My delegation

has joined in supporting the resolution that the Council has
just adopted in the interest of ending the violence that is
seriously impeding the efforts towards establishment of
peace in the Middle East. As I indicated in my statement on
14 August [ISOOth meeting], the essential task of the
Security Council and of the parties at this time is to create
and maintain an atmosphere favourable to the success of
the diplomatic efforts now in *progress looking towards
agreement on a just and durable peace, to which the
representative of the United Kingdom has just so eloquently referred.

21. My delegation also stated that violations of the
cease-fire under any circumstances whatever, encouragedor
committed by either regular or irregular forces, are condems
nable, that they are contrary to the interests of peaceand
alien to a final and just solution of the problems in the
Middle East.
22. Mr. CAWEN (Finland): To the Finnish delegation the
unanimous decision just taken by the Security Couocii is
cause for satisfaction. We are well aware that long and
delicate negotiations were necessary to achieve this result.
We wish to express our appreciation to those who were
most immediately involved in those negotiations, Only by
acting unanimously, as it has done today, can the CoUrrcil

15. AS he has pointed out, violence along cease-fire lines in
the Middle East has unfortunately been increasing in recent
months. The inevitable result is that passions are height.
2

expect to make its influence fully and effectively felt, This
is particularly true in the context of the situation in the
Middle East.

condemned. That is why we believe that the word
“condemn” could well have been used in operative paragraph 2 of the resolution, especially in view of its relation
to the fifth preambular paragraph,

23. By this decision, the Council has made it clear that it
can neither ignore nor condone any violations of the
cease-fire regardless of whether they are committed by
regular Israeli forces or by irregular forces crossing the
cease-fire lines. The Council’s resolution should thus have
the effect of strengthening respect for the cease-fire on the
frontiers between Lebanon and Israel and of contributing
to the re-establishment of calm and quiet in the area. A
major step towards the prevention of any recurrence of the
violence of the kind we have recently witnessed would be
the acceptance by the parties of the Secretary-General’s
proposals to place United Nations observers in the area on
the basis on which the proposals were made and without
prejudice to the legal positions of the parties. The Finnish
Government strongly supports the Secretary-General’s proposal.

31. We interpret this resolution as follows: we believe it
covers all the violations of the cease-fire reported in this
debate, particularly by the provisions found in the second
operative paragraph and the relevant parts of the fourth.
32. MY last words must be to express appreciation to the
representatives who participated in the consultations which
enabled US to arrive at this unanimous decision in the
Security Council, and to the representative of Lebanon in
particular.
33’. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French): The
Algerian delegation, in its concern to strengthen the
authority of the Council, voted in favour of the draft
resolution contained in document S/9410.
34. Naturally, my delegation would have liked the Council
to go beyond the warning it addressed to Israel in
paragraph 3 of its resolution 262 (1968)-in other words,
that it should have taken concrete measures to put its
decisions into effect. The Security Council once again
unequivocally condemns the policy of reprisals systematically pursued by the Tel Aviv authorities. It may be
noted that this resolution is, from end to end, addressed
solely to Israel and that the interpretations which the States
allied with Israel have not failed to provide are and remain
outside the resolution. It is true that attempts have always
been made in this Council to put the Palestine national
liberation movement in the dock. Is it not enough to
prejudice the legitimate rights of a people but ‘lust you try
to thwart their rebirth as well? The Palestine people feel in
no way concerned, directly qy indirectly, by the resolutions
of an Organization which moreover-need I remind you? is responsible for this tragedy.

24. I should not conclude my statement without paying a
special tribute to the representative of Lebanon for the
restrained and constructive manner in which he dealt with a
question which understandably is a matter of the most
serious concern for his Government. The consideration of
this question has clearly shown the respect and sympathy
which the Council has for the efforts of the Government of
Lebanon to ensure security for its people, whose wish to
live in peace is well known to us all,
25. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): At the 1502nd meeting on Monday, 18 August, I
set forth the views of my delegation on the questions now
before the Security Council.
26. In the light of that statement, the reasons for the vote
my delegation has just cast in favour of the draft resolution
submitted to the Council might be considered to have been
explained.

35. It was on this understanding-minus the interpretation
of the text given by the representative of the United
States-that the Algerian delegation voted in favour of the
resolution.

27. Nevertheless, in accordance with specific instructions
given to me, it is my duty clearly to state the meaning my
delegation attaches to certain provisions of the resolution
adopted; these are provisions which might be opened to
different and perhaps even conflicting interpretations regarding their scope and significance. I refer particularly to
operative paragraph 2 and to the expression “other grave
violations of the cease-fire”, in operative paragraph 4.

36. Mr, SHAHI (Pakistan): I have asked for the floor in
order to explain the position of my delegation on the
resolution which has just been adopted unanimously by the
Security Council.

29. Pursuant to those decisions, any breach of the
cease-fire or any act violating it implies disobedience to the
high authority of the Council. Moreover, each of these acts
adds new grave elements to a situation which in itself is
grave enough already.

37. My delegation has consistently maintained that any
assertion by Israel of the so-called right of reprisal against
Arab States is contrary to the Charter of the United
Nations and to all rules of international law. While,
therefore, we have supported the resolution in document
S/9410, my delegation reserves its position on operative
paragraph 2, which “Deplores all violent incidents in
violation of the cease-fire”. Our reservation stems from the
same considerations that I set forth in my statement at the
1407th meeting in relation to operative paragraph 3 of
resolution 248 (1968), the first sentence of which is
identical with operative paragraph 2 of the present resolution. I stated then:

30. Therefore, all such acts violating the cease-fire, truce
or armistice, whatever their source, are equally to be

“In the view of my delegation, the inclusion of this
paragraph does not in any way imply that the sporadic

28. The Security Council, by earlier decisions which are
still as much in force and valid today as when they were
adopted, has unequivocally established the obligations of
the States which are parties to the conflict and defined
their responsibilities, especially with regard to the scrupulous observance of the cease-fire, truce or armistice.

3

: ’
I

acts of terrorism alleged by Israel are to be equated with
the large-scale military attack by Israel on 21 March.
Operative paragraph 3 does not in any way qualify the
condemnation in operative paragraph 2.” [1407th meeting, para. 61.1

44. This new condemnation by the Security Council of
Israel’s aggressive course is not an isolated one. It is another
in the long succession of condemnations of Israel, It is
added to the just reckoning which the Security Council and
the peoples of the world are presenting to the aggressor.

I further said:

45. The decision adopted by the Security Council toda:,
contains a number of minimum provisions: condemnation
of Israel for its aggressive actions against Lebanon and ,a
stern warning to the aggressor not to continue such actions.

“We cannot permit an interpretation of operative
paragraph 3”-that
is, of resolution 248 (1968)-“that
would, in the event of any future incident, enable Israel
to claim the freedom to launch any military attacks
against Jordan or any of its other neighbours,” (Ibid.,
para. 62.1

46. The Soviet delegation shares the view of those who
consider that it would have been in the interests of the
struggle against Israeli aggression and of the achievement of
a political settlement in the Middle East based on the
well-known Security Council resolution for the Security
Council to adopt a stronger decision. Nevertheless, the
Soviet delegation considers that the resolution adopted juslt
now is a necessarystep. It servesthe interests of the
struggle against Israeli aggressionand may promote a
political settlementin the Middle East.

38. Again on 28 March 1969, I stated:
“We fully realize that the dictates of realism, balance
and restraint cannot be disregarded. But it is not balance
to equate the grave violations of the cease-fire committed
by Israel with the actions of the Arab resistance organizations.” [1468th meeting, para. 53.J
That remains our position.

47. The PRESIDENT (transzatedfrom Spanish):No other
memberof the Councilis enteredon my list of speakers,

39. In conclusion, I should like to support the eloquent
plea of Lord Caradon, the representative of the United
Kingdom, for a renewed effort to promote a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

48. If no other memberof the Council wishesto speak,I
shallcall on the representativeof Lebanon.
49. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): By coming before the
Council Lebanon did not subscribeto Dante’sadmonition
when he said, “All hope abandon,ye who enter here,” We
manifestedour trust in and our relianceon the Councilin
the severalstatementswe madehere whenthe Councildealt
with the Israeli premeditated attack on the international
airport of Beirut in late December1968, and whenit dealt
with the presentcase.In both caseswe had hopedthat the
Council would, in the light of the heavy record of Israel’s
acts of aggression
againstits Arab neighbours,take effective
measuresto deter it from its recalcitrant acts, to curb its
unbridled designsand expansionistambitions.In both cases
the Csuncil stopped short of adopting thosemeasures.
Ia
their absenceIsrael can feel free, asthe representativeof
Pakistanjust said, to believe that it can continue, without
punishment,its aggressive
acts and its threats of the useof
force.

40. I have confined my remarks to the issue before the
Council, but I can hardly conclude without referring to the
grief and the anguish that all of us have suffered as a result
of the extensive damage caused by arson to the Al Aqsa
Mosque, one of the holiest shrines of Islam. To that issue of
transcendental importance I shall address myself at the
appropriate moment.
41. Mr. ZAKHAROV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council has
just adopted a resolution in which it condemned Israel’s
aggressive actions against Lebanon and issued another
warning to Israel. The consideration of this question in the
Security Council and the decision adopted by the Council
are yet another moral and political defeat for Israel,
demonstrating the bankruptcy and hopelessness of Tel
Aviv’s adventurist, militarist course,

50. The Council assumesa grave responsibility in that
respect.Our requestsand warningsshouldnot gounheeded
for the sake of achieving unanimity amongstmembersof
the Council and of preventing any division at a time when
quiet diplomacy is pursuedin an earnestsearchfor means
to achieve a final settlement of the Arab-Israeliconflict.
But quiet diplomacy, whether bilateral or quadrilateral,has
been slow and is in fact still slow in comingto gripswith
the explosivesituation of the Middle East.Whilediplomacy
was apparently on holiday, many gravedevelopments
took
place in the Middle East as a consequenceof repeated
Israeliaggressive
acts.

42. It is no accident that, during the discussion in the
Security Council, Israel’s actions against Lebanon were
unanimously condemned by all the members of the
Council. Even those who tried to shield the aggressor and
place his criminal acts on the same level as the legitimate
liberation struggle of the Arab people, even those delegates
could not bring themselves to deny Israel’s guilt and
expressed their censure of its action.
43. This is an extremely serious political event. It indicates
that the extremist policy of the present Israeli Government
is increasingly accentuating its international isolation. The
persistence of the Israeli ruling circles in their aggressive
policy, Israel’s sabotage of a political settlement in the
Middle East based on the well-known Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967-all this is fraught with
dangerous consequences for the cause of peace.

51. Israel persistsin levelling unfounded chargesagainst
Lebanon. Those chargeshave not been substantiated.We
reiterate what we have already stated on many occasions
here in the Council: that these allegedincidentscouldvery
easily have been verified had Israel acceptedthat United
4

Nations observers attached to the Mixed Armistice Commission should operate on its side of the border. In his
letter to me, our esteemed Secretary-General recently said:
“There is only token United Nations observer representation on the Lebanese side and none at all on the Israeli
side. It has not been possible, therefore, for me to provide
the Council with accounts of incidents in that sector,
including the most recent ones which have given rise to
the present meetings of the Council. This lack of verified
information cannot but affect adversely the consideration
of the question in that body.” (S/9393. J

reply confirmed the principles of international law and the
decisions of the Security Council regarding this matter. On
13 June 1967, the French newspaper Le Monde reported
that Mr. Eshkol, the then Prime Minister of Israel, had
declared in the Knesset that Israel no longer recognized the
Armistice Demarcation Lines except those with Lebanon, It
was then clear that Israel did not consider the Lebanese
reply as a denunciation of the Armistice Agreement. The
one who very clearly denounced it was Mr. Abba Eban, the
Israeli Foreign Minister, when he declared, on 14 August
1967-and I shall quote him in French-that:
[The speaker continued in French.]

52. We take it that the Secretary-General had in mind the
incidents alleged by Israel to have taken place on its side of
the armistice line. As for the massive and premeditated air
attack against several villages in southern Lebanon, .there
was an open opportunity for everyone to verify it. Such a
verification was not even necessary. The Israeli representative admitted that attack in writing, and here in the
Council. Furthermore, in our reply td the Secretary
General’s letter of 16 August 1969 we stated emphatically
that we still adhere to the Armistice Agreement and honour
our obligations under it. The observers of the Mixed
Armistice Commission continue to be stationed on our
territory. We stated that should the need arise Lebanon
would agree to the strengthening of the Commission
machinery. In his evasive reply of 25 August 1969 the
representative of Israel claimed that the armistice period “is
now behind us”. (S/9393/Add.2.]
53. The Council has in its wisdom adopted the resolution
contained in document S/9410. If by its unanimous
adoption all our hopes were not realized, at least some of
them were. Our delegation is gratified that the resolution
has been adopted unanimously. Another reason for our
satisfaction is that the Council has in the second paragraph
of the preambular part taken into consideration Lebanon’s
complaint contained in document S/9383 dated 11 August
1969 and rejected the counter-complaint of the representative of Israel contained in document S/9387 of 12 August
1969. As some representatives of the Council have already
stated in one form or another, the resolution must be read
in the light of that paragraph, It constitutes the factual and
juridical basis for the main paragraph. We are also gratified
that the resolution recalIs Security Council resolution
262 (1968), which was also unanimously adopted by the
Council following the premeditated and massive air attack
against the airport of Beirut by Israeli aircraft,
54. We are also pleased with the Council’s recalling the
Armistice Agreement of 23 March 1949 between Israel and
Lebanon. That Agreement, in our view and in the view of
an abundant body of opinion here in the United Nations, is
still alive and valid. Israel has made many attempts to free
itself of its obligations under that Armistice Agreement. On
7 June 1967, an Israeli plane was shot down over the Syrian
territory adjacent to Lebanon, and its pilot, bailing out,
landed safely on Lebanese territory. Israel requested his
release, through the Chairman of the Mixed Armistice
Commission. On that occasion, that is 9 June, Israel
inquired df the Government of Lebanon, through the same
channels, whether or not it considered the Armistice
Agreement to be still valid. The Lebanese Government in its

“There was an Armistice Agreement with Lebanon. On
5 June, Lebanon declared war on Israel by the old,
classical method of a declaration of war. Under international law, the declaration of war conclusively terminates
armistice agreements; for this reason, there is no longer
any legal framework for our relations with Lebanon and
we should like to have a peace arrangement with it.”
[The speaker continued in English.]
Israel cannot resort to this fallacious argument that
Lebanon has declared war on Israel according to the
classical way of decIaring war. That allegation has no
substance in fact; it exists only in the minds of the Israeli
authorities; it is motivated only by their bad faith. The
Armistice Agreement remains valid.
55. I would like here to put on record what our esteemed
Secretary-General mentioned in the Introduction to his
annual report (A/67OIfAdd.I,
para. 43],2 covering the
period 16 June 1966 to 15 June 1967, part V, paragraph 43: “On the other hand there has been no indication
either in the General Assembly or in the Security Council
that the validity and applicability of the Armistice Agreements have been changed as a result of the recent hostilities
or of the war of 1956; each agreement, in fact, contains a
provision that it will remain in force ‘until a peaceful
settlement between the parties is achieved’. Nor has the
Security Council or the General Assembly taken any steps
to change the pertinent resolutions of either organ relating
to the Armistice Agreements or to the earlier cease-fire
demands, The Agreements provide that by mutual consent
the signatories can revise or suspend them. There is no
provision in them for unilateral termination of their
application, This has been the United Nations position all
along and will continue to be the position until a
competent organ decides otherwise.”
56. The obligation of Israel to respect its adherence to the
Armistice Agreement is supported also by Article 103 of
the Charter. That Article stipulates, as we all know, that
“In the event of a conflict between the obligations of
the Members of the United Natidns under the present
Charter and their obligations under any other international agreement, their obligations under the present
Charter shall prevail.”
2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. IA.

We maintain that there is no actuaI conflict between the
obligations deriving from an Armistice Agreement and
those of its signatories under the Charter. On the contrary,
the obligations under that Agreement are consonant and in
full accord with their obligations under the Charter. The
Armistice Agreement is the more binding on Israel because
it has been entered into under the aegis of the United
Nations and its stipulations support the principles and
objectives of the Charter. Israel cannot release itself from
its obligations under both and put itself outside the law of
nations.

peace on our southern border. It is determined to ~10so
despite the threats that we continually receive from Israel,
In the last two days alone, Israel has been repeating its
charges and threats against Lebanon. We should lik:e to
bring this to the attention of the Council at this stage.
Should Israel repeat its attacks against Lebanon-the kind
of attacks it has undertaken on the last two occasions-Lebanon will have no recourse but to come before the
Council and face the Council squarely with its full
responsibilities,

57. I am sorry, Mr. President and members of the Council,
to have to detain you a little further, but there are certain
points which my delegation and Government felt we should
put on the record of the Security Council,

63. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to thank you and
those members of the Council who have helped in bringing
about the adoption of this resolution, which, althou& it
does not fully satisfy us, at least meets some of the points
we have made here in the Council,

58. In the discussion today we have heard some mention
of cease-fire lines. My delegation does not subscribe to that
expression. I think that there has already been a debate in
the Security Council about that matter, and Lord Caradon,
the representative of the United Kingdom, will recall that
the opinion of the Security Council is that there is no such
thing as a cease-fire line; there is a cease-fire, The cease-fire
is a call from the Security Council to the parties concerned
to desist from firing; it is a prohibition upon them, that
they not resort to warring. The cease-fire is not, in our
opinion, a substitution of the Armistice Agreement, It does
not supersede it. The contrary is true. The jurisprudence of
the United Nations confirms this point of view. In 1949,
when the Security Council adopted its resolution
(72 (1949)/ of 11 August of that year, the principle was
established, and it has subsequently been upheld. Our
esteemed Under-Secretary-General, Dr. Ralph Bunche, who
was then the Acting Mediator, can testify for this point of
view.
59. The resolution just adopted by the Council stipulates,
in operative paragraph 1, a condemnation of “the premeditated air attack by Israel on villages in Southern
Lebanon, in violation of its obligations under the Charter
and Security Council resolutions”. Our delegation is satisfied with that language, although we had hoped it would
reflect the languageused in resolution 262 (1968).
60. Nevertheless, we have our reservations about operative
paragraph 2, which “deplores all violent incidents in violation of the cease-fire”. The cease-fire, which was accepted
by Lebanon, was a call by the Council to the warring
parties of that time to cease firing. Lebanon has respected
its obligations un,der the Armistice Agreement and the
cease-fire; it has not taken any action to breach the
cease-fire. On two occasions Israel has undertaken massive
military acts to breach the cease-fire: by attacking the
International Airport of Beirut and, recently, by attacking
seven villages in Southern Lebanon.
61. In operative paragraph 3, the Council “deplores the
extension of the area fighting”. We agree with the Council
in its deploring of the extension of the area of fighting
because, by its attack against Lebanon, Israel is extending
the area of fighting.
62. The Lebanese Government, as we have said before, has
done and is doing all in its power to maintain conditions of

64. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Ilext
speaker on my list is the representative of Israel, on wham I
now call.
65. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I am obliged,at this concluding
meeting of the Security Council’s debate, to draw the
Security Council’s attention to the sombrerealitiesof tlte
situation. Even asthe’council pursuedits deliberations
and
memberStatesconsulted on an appropriateform of words
for a draft resolution, armed attacks againstIsraelwere
continuing from Lebanon, in flagrant violation of the
cease-fire.Israeli towns and villageswerebeingsheIled,and
the lives of innocent civiliansput in jeopardy.
66. In the last three days alone, three seriousactsof
aggression
have taken place.
67. On 23 August at approximately 10 p-m, two Israeli
villages-Dafna and Shear Yashuv in Upper Galilee-were
attacked from Lebanese territory by 130millin~e~tre
Katyusha rocket fire.
68. Yesterday, at approximately 2.30 a.m., the villageof
Kefar Yuval north of Qiryat Shemonawas attackedwith
bazookasand smallarmsfrom Lebaneseterritory.
69. Again, at approximately 3.1f; a.m., bazookaandsmall
arms fire was directed from Lebaneseterritory ou the
villageof Metula.
70. It is regrettablethat the resolutionnow adoptedjoins
a long list of similartexts which have reflected,againand
again, the chronic disability of the Security Councilto
addressitself to the Israel-Arab conflict with thenecessary
equity and effectiveness.The facts of the situationdiscussedby the Council are unmistakably clear. In recent
months Lebaneseterritory has becomea basefor terror
operationsagainstIsrael.The last few weekshavewitnessed
a grave intensification of these attacks, directedprimarily
againstthe civilian population of Israel.Terror warfareelf
this kind is an old method employedby the Arab States,hl
violation of international law and the United Nations
Charter, throughout the twenty-year Arab war on Israel.
71. Faced with the duty to protect its citizensfrom armed
attack, the Governmentof Israelresorted,on 11August,to
its inherent and inalienableright of self-defenceandtook

action to disable encampments of the irregular forces in
Southern Lebanon, from which the acts of aggression
against Israel were being carried out.

understand that resolutions on the Middle East adopted by
the Council in these circumstances must be regarded as
being primarily a reflection of the arithmetical vagaries of
the vote, always dominated by the fact that of fifteen
members of the Council no less than six have no diplomatic
relations with Israel or deny Israel’s right to independence
and sovereignty.

72. These facts have been fully confirmed by published
statements made on behalf of the joint command of the
terror organizations; they have been freely announced by
Lebanese personalities and the Lebanese press, widely
reported by international media of information, and are
fully established by many eyewitnesses of unimpeachable
integrity. The Lebanese representative has made only
perfunctory attempts to question these facts, and when he
does question them, as he did today, he finds himself at
odds with reality.

78. The difficulties which the Security Council faces in
producing balanced, equitable, realistic resolutions on the
Israel-Arab conflict are becoming a matter of increasingly
grave concern to the Council itself and to all to whom the
ideals of the United Nations Charter are dear. These
internal difficulties, however, do not affect basic tenets of
law and justice, and their unhappy results cannot be
interpreted as prejudicing the legitimate rights of a State
which has been continuously resisting implacable aggression
for more than two decades, Surely it cannot be expected
that any sector of the cease-fire line would remain
undefended, any village or town left open to attack, and
the security of a single Israeli civilian or soldier sacrificed or
the aggressor allowed to go unpunished, because of a text
resulting from such failings. There is no place for any
illusions concerning Israel’s determination to resist all
aggression and to agree to supplant the cease-fire with
nothing less than true, lasting peace. The persistent refusal
by the Arab States to recognize Israel’s rights and terminate
their lengthy war on Israel may well have been nurtured by
some such illusions and by the tendency to accept
propaganda slogans as a substitute for real understanding.
For example, Arab aggression against Israel since 1948 has
been fed on the slogan that the Jewish people returning to
their homeland are strangers. In fact no people in the world
has proven its attachment to its land throughout the ages
with greater strength, dedication and sacrifice than the
people of Israel. Arab aggression has sought desperately to
vindicate itself by the slogan of the alleged injustice to the
Palestinian Arab refugees. In reality the only difference
between the Arab refugees and an almost equal number of
Jewish refugees from the Arab States is that the latter,
being an integral part of the Jewish people, have been
accepted and fully integrated in the Jewish State while the
Arab refugees, for political reasons, have been abandoned
by their brethren, and many still live on international
charity.

73. For instance, according to the Beirut daily Al Nahar of
18 August, 42.4 per cent of the Lebanese citizens questioned in a special Gallup polI consider the presence of
saboteur groups on Lebanese soil and their operations
against Israel as the cause for Israel’s action on 11 August.
74. The resolution of the Security Council inexplicably
ignores these facts. A number of members of the Council
have condemned unequivocally the armed attacks carried
out from Lebanon against Israel, and rejected the Lebanese
Government’s denial of responsibility for violations of the
cease-fire. However, the resolution, although it proscribes
all violent incidents in violation of the cease-fire-and,
therefore, obviously the armed attacks by irregular forces
from Lebanon-fails to single out those attacks for strong
and specific censure, On the other hand, it does censure the
Israel defence action against those attacks.
75. Now, such a double standard may encourage the
aggressor. It will strengthen the defender in the opinion
that the Security Council is, unfortunately, unable to
recognize the defender’s legitimate rights, whatever the
understanding, and indeed knowledge, of some of its
members may be.
76. Matters have reached such a point that even a formal
reference in the preamble of the resolution to the Lebanese
letter to the Council cannot be balanced by a similar
reference to the Israeli letter; and at the same time room is
found in the preamble to recall the ghost of the armistice
regime, nullified by the Arab refusal to respect it and
finally voided by Arab aggression. The defects of the
resolution are further expressed in the fact that, while
terror organizations and the Lebanese press and Lebanese
leaders have openly admitted that Israel’s action was
directed against saboteur encampments, the resolution
speaks of reprisal on Lebanese villages; and the exclusion at
Arab insistence of a direct and explicit call by the Security
Council to the parties to observe the cease-fire is a striking
example of the resolution’s inadequacy.

79. The spurious claim that Arab terror warfare is a
consequence of the refugee problem would be no different
from a suggestion that the Israel Government should have
organized and waged warfare against the Arab States
because of the destitute Jewish refugees from Arab lands
who had fled to Israel. Today Arab warfare looks for
additional succour in the slogan of strife against Israeli
occupation and of an alleged movement of national
resistance, ignoring that there have never been agreed
boundaries between Israel and its neighbours, that the
present cease-fire lines result from Israel’s repulse of an
all-Arab attempt in 1967 to destroy it, and that the terror
warfare carried on from the Arab States at present is a
continuation of a method of harassment resorted to by the
Arab States for no lessthan two decades.It is a method of
aggressionopenly decided upon, organized and conducted
by the Arab Governments by means of irregular forces
specially trained in the contemptible pursuit of indis-

77. Here I would observe that my Government’s reluctance to invite the Security Council to consider Israeli
grievances flows from considerations such as these and not
from those repeatedly alleged by Arab spokesmen, including the representative of Lebanon, and their supporters.
Members of the United Nations and the representatives in
the Council who know of the high esteem and personal
friendship in which we hold them will undoubtedly
7

criminate murder of men, women and children. It has never
been, nor is it today, anything that even remotely resembles
or deserves the title of a national movement of resistance.

84. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):I calI on
the representativeof Lebanon,
85. Mr. CHAMMAS (Lebanon): It is not the intentionof
my delegationto detain the membersof the Councilfer
any length of time. The membersof the Councilareby non
accustomedto hearing the type of statementjust delivered
by the representativeof Israeleachtime the Councilsdopn
a resolution condemningIsraelfor its continuedprernedita~
ted attacks. However, there are certain points in the
statementjust madeby the representativeof Israelthat my
delegationcannot passover without exercisingits right of
reply in order to put the record straight.

80. The new fashionable Arab slogan, that Israel can be
forced to retreat from its legitimate objectives of peace and
,iecurity by a war of attrition, belongs to the same trash-can
as similar flourishes of bellicosity in the past. A people that
has resisted attrition by history’s overpowering storms for
3,000 years will not be weakened by another hour of trial.
On the contrary, in the dangers and difficulties of the
present they are already finding additional strength, resilience and inspiration-even as Arab aggression continues,
and the people of Israel pursue their work of construction
and creation. It is time, for their own good and for that of
their people, that the Arab Governments realized that
violence against Israel is today as futile asit has been in the
past and that only real peace can bring happiness to both
Arab and Israeli. Indeed, escapist subservience to the
slogans of propaganda and the refusal of the leaders to face
the truth have only brought disaster to the Arab States and
catastrophe to -their peoples.

86. The Council has no doubt heard that the representa.
tive of Israel was clearly making allegationsabout new
incidents, which he claims,have taken placeasa resultof
people, as he again claims, crossingfrom the Lebanese
border. The representative of Israel said this af’ter the
Chairman of the delegation of Lebanon had informed
members of the Council of formal threats th,at the
Governmentof Israel haslevelled againstLebanono~ver
the
last forty-eight hours. What the representativeof Israel
seemsto be proposingto the Council is this: he will/ level
accusationsagainst Lebanon in order to preparein the
shortest time possible another wanton attack against
Lebanon. It is my delegation’sduty to draw the atknlion
of the Council to that fact.

81. It is regrettable that Lebanon as well should have
entered on this path and brought about an extension of the
area of fighting. It is regrettable, yet perhaps not entirely
surprising, for as far back as May 1967 Lebanon made it
clear that it identified itself entirely with the campaign of
aggression that was being launched at the time against Israel
under the aegis of Egypt. On 30 May the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lebanon declared in the Security
Council:

87. Even as he was about to end his statement,the
representativeof Israel said that the reaction of Isratelwill
depend on the measuresthat Lebanonwill adopt. That is,
no decisionadopted by the Security Council, no warning,
“Lebanon supportsthis exercise by the United Arab
no directive will be heededby Israel.He wasjust informing
Republic of its sovereignrights over the entranceto the
the membersof the Council that he would reservefor
Gulf of Aqaba. We still stand by the United Arab
Republic.. . . In a total war the Arabs will useall means himself and his Government the right to react andthleright
to make the adoption of reprisalsa norm of international
to defeat their enemy” /13#4th meeting, paras.18
law.
and 211.

82. The debatehere and the Security Councilresolution
are diplomatic events which, like similar onespreceding
them, regrettably areof little effect in efforts to resolvethe
Middle East conflict. This episodeis now over. Lebanon
and Israel are left, however, to live with each other as
neighbours.They will continue to have to grapplewith the
realities of the security situation and the duty of every
governmentto protect the livesand property of its citizens.
83. Israel’spolicy will continue to be scrupulousobservanceof the cease-fire,Lebanonwill continueto face the
questionwhetherit will abideby its obligationsunder the
cease-fire.It cannot evadea decisionwhetherto allow its
territory to remaina baseof aggression
from which armed
attacks are beinglaunchedagainstIsraelor to take effective
measuresto put an end to theseattacks. On this decision
and on the measures
the Lebanese
authoritieswill adopt to
terminate violationsof the cease-firefrom its territory will
dependwhether tranquillity will prevail on the border or
whether the armedattackswill continue, leavingIsraelwith
no alternative but to defend itself againstthem. Indeed,
only faithful observance
of the cease-firecanbring uscloser
to the objective which should be commonto us all: true,
just and lastingpeace.

88. Weagainexpressregret that the Councildid not seefir
to take more effective measuresat this stagelef its
considerationof Lebanon’scomplaint againstIsrael.More
effective measureswould put an end to the type Of
statement that the representative of Israel so likesto
make-although such statementswould not harm anyone
if
it were not for the certainty that the Governmentof ISraeI
is preparingfor another attack on Lebanon.That is ayeI)’
seriousmatter that the membersof the Councilshouldbear
in mind.
89. Again, the representative of Israel referred to the
Armistice Agreements by calling them “the gllO!;tef
Armistice Agreements”. My delegationhason manyeeca.
sions put its views on record as far as the Armistice
Agreementsare concerned, I do not think that thereiss
need to emphasizefurther our positionin that regard,but
we would have this to say: Weconsiderthat the SeeluntY
Council, in adopting its resolutiontoday andin recalling
in
that resolutionthe Armistice AgreementbetweenLebarron
and Israel, pronounceditself to the effect that it considers
the Lebanon-IsraeliArmistice Agreementto be still ‘valid
and applicable,and no other interpretation will be accepted
by my delegation.

8

90. In recalling its resolutions on the cease-fire, the
Security Council has consolidated the validity and applicability of the Armistice Agreement by emphasizing an
underlying pbligation, an underlying undertaking on the
parties and by the parties, namely, to observe the cease-fire.
In this spirit we interpret the insertion in the same
preambular paragraph of the reference to the cease-fire
resolutions and to the Armistice Agreement.

jeopardizing a successful human experiment and condemning it to all kinds of upheavals and disruptions.
96. For almost three months, as everybody knows, Lebanon has been going through the most acute and serious
political and governmental crisis in its history, precisely
because of the Palestinian tragedy. It is in nobody’s interest
to aggravate our difficulties. In saying this, we appeal to the
sense of responsibility of every member of the Security
Council and to your conscience as men. The harmonious
human synthesis achieved by Lebanon has a significance
which transcends its borders. In short, it represents the
supreme longing of all human beings for an era of brotherly
understanding and co-operation. When we really think
about it, surely one of the goals to which the United
Nations aspires is precisely to make such progress feasible
on an international scale? Possibly, this plea does not seem
remarkable to some. From the historical viewpoint, however, the case of Lebanon undoubtedly represents a stage
and criteria which can lead either to progress or to
regression.

91. Above and beyond all these considerations and above
and beyond the terror of this debate and in another
demonstration of our good faith to the members of the
Council, my delegation wishes, as the Council is about to
conclude its consideration of our complaint against Israel,
to submit-for
a better understanding and a full appreciation of our position-the following statement, which I shall
make in French.
[The speaker continued in French.]
92. Above and beyond all the considerations and all the
arguments which have been advanced in the course of these
discussions, I should like respectfully to ask the distinguished members of the Security Council to ponder on the
quite exceptional case of Lebanon.

97. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call on
the representative of Israel.
98. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have no intention at all to
engage in a debate with the representative of Lebanon. He
painted here a touching picture of a little country. I should
like to assure him that we ask of his little country pnly one
little thing: abide by your international obligations, stop
armed attacks against us, and there will be tranquillity on
the border.

93. Lebanon is a small country which, at home, has
fraternal and peaceful co-operation among the different
communities composing it and, abroad, is one of the
countries most open to the world, to all that is human and
universal. This small country is on the edge of the
Palestinian tragedy, whose dire repercussions it suffers at
the political, military, economic and social levels. There are
300,000 Palestinian refugees living on our territory, whom
we cannot repatriate and whom, for humanitarian, political,
moral and fraternal reasons, we cannot drive out of our
territory. If some of these refugees or their brothers see
that, after all the trials they have endured, nobody has yet
been able to ensure their exercise of the rights which the
international community has so often recognized, including
the right to return to their homes, and if they try to
exercise that right directly, to take the law into their own
hands and, in short, to apply the resolutions repeatedly
adopted by the highest international bodies, Lebanon
cannot prevent them from doing so.

99. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call on
the representative of Lebanon.
100. Mr. CHAMMAS (Lebanon): The 300,000 refugees
are in Lebanon because of- Israel. That is the only reply I
wish to make.
101, The PRESIDENT (transzated from Spanish): I should
be grateful if representatives would help us, if possible, to
hasten-the conclusion of the debate.
102. I call on the representative of Israel.
103. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have only one observation
on the last remark of the representative of Lebanon. We are
fully aware of the presence of a number of refugees from
Palestine on Lebanese soil, The Lebanese Government is
undoubtedly aware of the fact that in Israel there are about
600,000 refugees-Jewish refugees from Arab States.
’
104. The’PRE%IDENT
(translated from Spanish): The
Council has concluded its consideration of the item
submitted for its consideration in the past few days.
Therefore, I shall now adjourn the meeting.

94. Nor can Lebanon always prevent all their activities. If,
because of this situation, the Lebanese population has to be
exposed to bombing, and particularly with napalm, the
result will be that this country, which is in no way
responsible for the unleashing of the tragedy or for the turn
it has taken, may find not qnly its internal and external
security but also its national unity in jeopardy.
95, I hope these considerations will be constantly borne in
mind by each member of the Security Coyncil. TO be sure,
it is easy to adopt a resolution, as the Security C~uncti has
just done, whose wording seems satisfactory from the
technical standpoint; but we must get to the bottom of the
situation, foresee all its possible consequences and avoid
._

The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUELlCATlONS

United
Nations
publicationr,may
be obtained
the world.
Consult
yaw bookstore
or write
or Geneva.

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sates Section,

COMMENT

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
der Notions
Unier
sent en vente
dans
les librairies
et ler ogencer
dCpositairer
du monde entier.
Informer-vour
auprbs
de votre librairie
ou adresrez-vous
b:
Nations
Unies, Section
der ventes, New York ou Genive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocioner
de las Nocionar
Unidar
sstdn
en todor
porter
del mundo. Conrulte
a w librera
Vantar,
Nueva
York D Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

UNIDAS

en venta en librerior
Y caras distribuidorar
o dirijare
a: Nacioner
Unidos,
Scccidn

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent
.

in other

currencies)

de

82205-December

1972-2850
