S/PRST/2001/26

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2001
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4383rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 September 2001, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Burundi”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its strong support for the Facilitation of
Former President Nelson Mandela, and urges all Burundians of goodwill to
join in the cause of peace, democracy and national reconciliation in their
country. It also calls upon all parties to cooperate fully with the
Implementation Monitoring Committee.
“The Security Council looks forward to and strongly supports the 1
November 2001 installation of the transitional government in Burundi. The
Security Council believes that this event, the creation of a broad-based and
inclusive government, will mark a critical turning point in the Burundi peace
process. It will also encourage the donors to provide additional assistance,
including by honouring fully the pledges they made during the Paris Donors’
Conference in December 2000.
“The Security Council calls on the Burundian parties to reach agreement
swiftly on the establishment of a special protection unit entrusted solely with
the police function of providing personal security for politicians returning
from exile. It welcomes the convening by the Facilitation of a preimplementation stakeholders meeting in Arusha and urges the international
community to provide, on an urgent basis, support for the training and
deployment of this special protection unit.
“Deeply concerned by the increase of violence recently, the Security
Council recalls the urgent need to bring about a negotiated settlement of the
conflict and calls upon the Facilitation, the Regional Peace Initiative for
Burundi, the Government of Burundi, the signatory parties and the armed
groups to devote their full attention to the achievement of a definitive
ceasefire. The Security Council once again calls on the Forces pour la Défense
de la Démocratie and Forces Nationales de Libération to suspend hostilities, to
continue negotiations and to join the peace process. The Council believes that
the installation of a broad-based government on the basis of an internationally
sanctioned peace process makes armed rebellion an unacceptable means of
political expression. It calls on the FNL and FDD, together with the Burundi

01-55213 (E) 260901

*0155213*

S/PRST/2001/26

Government, to observe strictly the rights of the civilian population and other
provisions of international humanitarian law.
“The Security Council calls on all States, in particular those in the
region, to cease all forms of support to the FNL and FDD, and urges all
Member States to encourage the armed groups to join the peace process.
“The Security Council calls on the States of the Regional Initiative to
mark the installation of the transitional government by further enhancing their
bilateral and regional cooperation with the new government. The Council
believes that this cooperation is particularly important in the area of regional
security and calls on the Governments of Burundi and its neighbouring States
to increase their cooperation in this regard.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and calls on all parties to create the conditions for the
voluntary return of refugees, and for the safe and unhindered activities of the
humanitarian relief community. It also calls upon the donor community to
increase their humanitarian assistance to Burundi and to accelerate its
delivery.”

2
