United Natio~

1006th

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING
(CLOSING MEETING)

ASSEMBLY

Friday, 25 August 1961,
at 8 p.m.

Official Records
THIRD SPECIAL SESSION
CONTENTS

New York

held its first meeting to discuss this question. The events
at Bizerta, the victims of the attack and, above all, the
fact that the Security Council was not able to achieve
any positive settlement, tended to increase the gravity
of this incident, which has tal\:en on such dramatic
proportions on the international stage.
5. Yet, when this special session of the General Assembly was requested, even the interim resolution
approved by the Security Council 1 had not been fully
carried out. It must be made clear that this was not the
only occasion on which the Security Council had
considered the same question, since it had done so on
another occasion and from other points of view. In 1958
the Council received complaints which may shed some
light on the path this affair was to take until it arrived
at this session of the General Assembly, in which my
Government trusts that it will be of assistance in helping
the parties to arrive at a settlement and thus finally
dispose of this dispute.
6. It is a historical fact that, under the Protocol of
Agreement of 20 March 1956 between France and
Tunisia, the independence of Tunisia was finally
recognized and Tunisia ei1tered the community of
sovereign nations. Bizerta, however, continued to be a
subject of c;Iebate. The agreement which was to have
been reached-and here I quote from the original
documents-" until circumstances allow of the conclusion
of a final agreement", was never achieved; but, as we
have heard several times from this rostrum, the very
nature of these agreements-either of the provisional
agreement or of the agreement which was to have been
final-show what was the essential attitude of France,
which did not consider that its troops should he
stationed permanently at Bizerta.
7. All this suggests that direct negotiation, understanding between the parties and a dialogue between the
two main actors in this drama are more than possible ;
my Government hopes that these talks will be resumed,
and it will make every effort to bring this about. The
resumption of these talks is necessary in the eyes of the
world, and the solution of this dispute is still more
necessary. It is essential to reach an agreement that
will complete in this part of Africa the admirable system
of independent and sovereign States now existing on the
African continent. The resurrection of the peoples and
nations of the colonial world ensures the presence in
Africa of the universal values of ·our age.
8. I may say that I have recently seen, with my own
humble eyes, many things to confirm the ideas and
profound hopes of which I speak. These new nationalities, rising from the colonial world, seem once more
to be uniting their destinies, at a time when the links
created by the colonial system have been broken, to be

Page

Agenda item 7 :
Consideration of the grave situation in Tunisia obtain. ing sihce 19 July 1961 (concluded) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Agenda item 2 :
Minute of silent prayer or meditation .... ,. . . . . . . . . . 140
Closing of the session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140

President: Mr. Frederick H. BOLAND (Ireland).

AGENDA ITEM 7

Consideration of the grave situation in Tunisia
obtaining since 19 July 1961 (concluded)

Mr. RODRIGUEZ FABREGAT. (Uruguay)
(translated from Spanish) : May I say that it is an
honour for me to occupy this rostrum in a debate
presided over by Mr. Boland of Ireland. Many words
have been spoken here in his praise. We, for our part,
know and esteem him, and when we voted for him as
President of this special session, the third in the history
of the General Assembly, we offered our tribute both
to the man who presides over us and to the country he
represents.
2. When my Government supported the request to call
together this special session of the Assembly, it was by
no means with the intention of increasing the gravity
of the present serious and regrettable situation but in
the hope of facilitating a settlement at which the Security Council was unable to arrive in its debates.
3. In this debate and on this occasion, we have not
been allowed to hear the voice of the French delegation,
whose influence is always so great. The facts, however,
were laid before us in the statetnent of the representative
of Tunisia, Mr. Slim [996th meeting]. The austerity
of his statement, the circumstances in which he made it
and its general tone have been praised many times from
this rostrum, and I can only say that when I hear
Mr. Slim, I always have the impression that I am
listening to one of the en1inent workers for human
progress. I have had occasion to work with him in a
Committee of the General Assembly, and I have seen
him fight- relentlessly for those fundamental rights
which, according to the Charter, constitute all the dignity
of the human person. Several of our colleagues have
expressed their satisfaction and agreement with the way
in which the representative of Tunisia has described the
situation from this rostrum, and I also have the honour
to convey to him, in a few words-and I shall be really
brief-my Government's views on the situation at this
special session of the United Nations General Assembly.
4. It is obvious that world opinion was deeply concerned when, on 21 July 1961, the Security Council
1.

1 0 fficial Records of the S ewrity Council, Sixteenth Year,
Supplement for July, August and September 1960, document.
S/4882.

129

AfPV.lOQ6

130

General Assembly-Third Speeial Session-Plenary Meetings

replaced by new links between the peoples of Africa
and the. values of their own destiny and· culture.
9. I may say that, as in Latin America in the nineteenth
century, there has been a revival of peoples. The contribution of the new nationalities to human progress is
becoming as obvious as their contribution to the United
Nations.
10. This is why, when I myself take these considerations into account, and when I note that there has
been a reference to the general lines which must be laid
down before a final agreement can be reached, I must
-say more firmly than ever that, from the moment the
·possibility of this special session of the Assembly was
considered, my Government has been ready to support,·
encourage or initiate any action provided that it would
not increase present difficulties or give rise to any new
judgements, that might be irrevocable, while the dialogue
.between the two factors is interrupted. Since our task
is not to put new obstacles in the way of a solution, I
~must make it clear, on the instructions of my Govern·ment, that we are ready and anxious to co-operate in
pr.eparing general conditions which may lead to an
understanding between the two parties to this incident.
·My Government's view on this debate and on the draft
resolution to be voted· upon in a moment [A/L.351],
is · that we must try to bring about a reconciliation
between the parties, without taking premature decisions
on questions of substance. To do so might create new
obstacles to this reconciliation between the two nations,
both of which we all respect and esteem equally. This
is our view and this is how we shall vote.
11. We are not here to prejudge the matter but,
fundamentally, to bring about a resumption of talks
between these two nations, which have been suddenly
divided by the events we are considering irt this debate,
and to enable them to co-operate for peace artd for the
right of peoples to decide their own destiny. I repeat
that this is our view and this is how we shall vote.
12. There . is no reason-quite on the contrary-why
we should not vote in favour of that part of the draft
resolution which reaffirms the Security Council's interim
.resolution and urges the Government of France to
implement fully the provisions of operative paragraph 1
thereof.
13. We also intend to vote in favour of operative
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, which calls upon
both Governments to enter into immediate negotiations
for which. my Government, as I have often said, has
striven so much. It is also the desire of my Government
that these neg()tiations should be completed in full
accordance with the principles of the Charter. The
purpose of these negotiations should be to devise the
agreed measures mentioned. in that resolution and to
·- ,create suitable circumstances for the ending of this
.state of affairs, and for the restoration of peace and of
the guarantees and rights involved in this conflict.
14. Naturally our vote on the whole sitlll.tion will be
qualified by the explanation I have . just given, in
accordance with my Government's desire to bring about
.an understanding between the parties. Anything which
departs :from this purpose must necessarily create new
.difficulties -in a situation which is already dangerous
and which we all deplore.
15. .In putting these views-and it i~ my honour to
do so on behalf of my Government-! fervently hope
that these negotiations, held in accordance with the
principles of international law and the purposes of the

Charter, will lead to better relations between France
and Tunisia, the two distinguished parties.
16. The PRESIDENT: A number cif representatives
have expressed a desire to explain· their votes before
the voting. I shall now call upon these in the order
in which they are inscribed.
17. I should like to recall that their purpose in coming
to the rostrum will be to explain the votes they propose
to cast and the reasons for them. In view of the late
hour, and what I believe is the general desire of the
Assembly to reach a· conclusion on this matter this
evening, I would earnestly request the representatives
concerned, who have expressed a desire to explain their
votes, to confine their observations to that purpose.
18. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (translated from Fr~nch):
Mr. President, I would like first to take the opportunity
of associating myself whole-heartedly with the delegations who have already expressed their esteem and
respect on the occasion of your election to the presidency of this extraordinary session of the General
Assembly.
19. Before we pass to a vote, I want to state my delegation's position very briefly with regard to the draft
resolution [AfL.351] submitted to this Assembly by
thirty-two of its Members.
20. The dispute which today divides two countries
that have hitherto been friends and certain tragic
aspects which it has taken on have aroused profound
dismay in my country, the more so as Greece maintains
cordial relations with them. We are bound to France
by memories of our common struggle for the liberty of
all peoples, as well a:s our determination to defend this
supreme possession again if need be. As for Tunisia,
in addition to the age-old bonds which unite the Hellenic
people and the family of Arab nations, there is the
fact that since Tunisia has been amongst us in this
Organization our two delegations have on numerous
occasions found themselves side by side on the same
arduous road in defence of the principles of independence and dignity of peoples.
·
21. In this situation of shared friendship, it is not an
easy task to define my delegation's position in the
Franco-Tunisian dispute, the more so as the absence
of the French delegation, which we deplore, has deprived us of the opportunity of hearing it defend its
position in the debate.
22. If we look closely at the question before us we
cannot but note-several speakers have already done
so-that the key to the solution rests in the incontestable principle of Tunisia's sovereignty over Bizerta.
This principle is essentially the one which, in the final
analysis, constitutes the most solid basis for the negotiations which must ensue without further delay, and
the best guarantee of their success. The solution to
which Tunisia aspires must inevitably derive from that
principle.
23. Secondly, we think that during these negotiations
the parties concerned should define, in . the light of
the principle to which I have just referred and strictly
within its limits, the practical measures whic;h would
lead to a definitive solution of the dispute. This is the
sense in which my delegation interprets operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution.
·
24. It goes without saying that the only way to end
this crisis is by ·carrying out the decision made by the
Security Council2 on 22 July promptly and fully. lVIy
2 Ibid.

1006th meeting-25 August 1961

delegation will therefore vote in favour of the relevant
paragraphs in the text before us if they are put to the
vote separately.
25. Nevertheless, my delegation has reservations about
the wording of the fourth preambular paragraph. It feels
that, in view of the divergent interpretations given in
the official texts, the circumstances in which the conflict
broke out are not so clearly established that the Assembly can solemnly announce that such and such a
party has committed such and such a violation. Besides,
such an announcement would only serve to stir up feelings which have already weighed heavily enough on
the unhappy events in Tunisia, and by so doing, block
the rapid progress for which we all hope.
26. These considerations, which will determine our
vote on the draft as a whole, were dictated by a solicitude
for the true facts and by the desire to reach an exact
diagnosis of what can be done.
27. Mr. AMADEO (Argentina) (translated jr01n
Spanish): The Argentine delegation has already put
its views on the substance of the question .. before us
in detail and, we trust, objectively [.998th meeting 1.
May we now say a very few words in explanation of
our vote on the draft resolution [ AjL.351] which has
been submitted to the judgement of the Assembly.
28. My delegation fervently hoped to be able to vote
in favour of a draft resolution affirming Tunisia's right
to demand the effective exercise of its sovereignty over
Bizerta, urging France to carry out the interim resolution of the Security CounciJ3 strictly and immediately
in accordance with their explicit right_ to do so.
29. It seemed to us that the logical coroUary of this
debate must be the approval of a text recognizing the
justice of the Tunisian demand, in terms which would
make the resolution a truly effective instrument for the
peaceful settlement of this conflict. As the representatives of Tunisia and other countries know well, we had
no lack of positive suggestions to offer to that end,
which it has unfortunately been impossible to achieve.
30. Although we agree with a large part of the draft
resolution of the African and Asian countries, we think
that some· of its paragraphs might have been drafted
in a way more likely to lead to a peaceful settlement
of the dispute. In particular we find ·the tone of the
fourth preambular paragraph unnecessarily harsh, and
the drafting of operative paragraph 3 is objectionable.
With regard to the latter, although we are convinced
that the natural conclusion of this conflict can only be
the final evacuation of the base of Bizerta, we have
serious doubts about the competence of the General
Assembly to take the place of the parties by defining
a priori the settlement which they must reach.
31. I think the General Assembly has rarely been
more anxious to approve a draft resolution unanimously,
and I also think it has rarely come closer to achieving
this aim. vVe deeply regret that this has not been
possible, because we are convinced that, if the General
Assembly had decided on a just and unanimous text,
this would have been inore beneficial to all, especially
to the country directly affected, than a text which is
not completely free of polemical references; and we
are not completely certain that thi'S text will help
towards a conciliation.
32. Lastly, although we regret that the document
which will presumably be the result of this debate is
not exactly what we should have preferred, my dele3 Ibid.

131

gation does not repent of supporting the request for
the convening of this special session of the General
Assembly, because the dispassionate voices inspired by
a desire for concord and a love of truth which we have
·heard here, have risen far above the words inciting to
rancour and hatred; and this in itself justifies our
meetings.
33. Mr. ZOTTI (Italy): I would like to say just a
few words to explain my delegation's vote on tl1e draft
resolution [AjL.351].
34. Italy appreciates the spirit which originated the
draft resolution. We understand that the Security
Cour;cil having failed to reach a decision during its last
meetmg [966th meeting], there would be a number of
countries which felt it appropriate to ask for the conv~ning of a special session of the Assembly. We certamly do not minimize the gravity of the situation
which has arisen between France and Tunisia concerning the Bizerta crisis. Furthermore, Italy firmly believes
in the principle of sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Member States, a principle which, of course, implies
the acceptance of whatever steps a Member State deems
necessary to undertake within the sphere of its sovereign rights, in accordance with the principles set forth
in. the Charter of the United Nations. ·
35. In this sphere it is therefore obvious that no Goverl?-mer~t cottl~ be asked to keep foreign troops on its
sml wrthout rts consent, embodied in an agreement.
It is also an undeniable fact that there is a Security
Council interim resolution 4 which is still awaiting full
cmppliance.
·
36. The Italian people feel very dose to the two
.nations involved in the dispute-:-our ally and friend,
France, and Tunis,ia, a nation to which we feel bound
by so many links. vVe deeply regret the serious sufferings that nationals of both countries have endured.
In particular, Italy is fully aware of the hardship that
this crisis has imposed on the Tunisian people, so justly
proud of their recently attained independence. We hope
that negotiations between the two parties can soon be
resumed and. brought to a happy conclusion.
1
37.. Does thrs draft resolution make these negotiations
easrer? H~re, we must confess, we have mixed feelings.
I am afrard that the present draft, as it stands is more
likely to widen than help 1n bridge the gap ' between
the two sides.
.
38. As a matter of fact, overtures were made by
France. We also heard from Tunisia that it is willino
to enter into negotiations. My Government has done it~
utmost, and will spare no effort, to bring the parties
together so that negotiations can take place.
39. Bearing this in mind, it is our belief that the draft
resolution before us, with all its good intentions, would
not serve the purpose of favouring, at least in the short
rnn! the opening of negotiations, which we deem highly
desrrable. vV e feel that both sides should negotiate as
speedily as possible.
40. The principle which this draft resolution seeks
to uphold seems to us to be correct. However, the way
in which it is expressed makes it difficult for us to
accept it.
41. Efforts were made to seek a wording which would
have been, in our view, more appropriate to the task.
We sincerely regret that there was no success in this
respect, for it would have prompted us to support the
draft resolution.
4 Ibid.

132

General Assembly-Third Special Session-.,.-Plenary Meetings

42. Mr. DADET (Congo, Brazzaville) (tmnslated
from French): I shall be extremely brief. The delegation of the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville), which
has not yet .fanned the singular habit of insulting from
this rostrum the flags and the national anthems of
States M~mbers of our Organization, will. vote without
the slightest regret for the draft resolution [A/ L.351]
before the General Assembly. In doing. so, the delegation of the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville)
wishes to reaffirm and endorse the statements by the
representatives of Senegal, Cameroun, Madagascar and
the Niger, who spoke from this same rostrum on behalf
of the States belonging to the Brazzaville group with
wisdom, level-headedness and effectiveness, in words
free from hatred, demagogy and blustering competitiveness.
43. The delegation of the Republic of the Congo (Braz,..
zaville), which feels repugnance for all Utopian dialectics, has no intention of following the contradictory
example of those who, less than a year ago, were applauding a certain speech here in which the dismissal
.of the Secretary-General of the United Nations was
requested and even demanded. It is a curious paradox
that these same men are today heaping flowers at the
Secretary-General's feet.
44. The delegation of the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville), in voting unreservedly for this draft resolution,
bows before the dead who fell at Bizerta and expresses
its earnest wish that there shall be no renewal of this
unhappy spectacle which has saddened the friends of
the Tunisian and French peoples, among whom are
to be included the peoples of the countries in the Brazzaville group. The delegation of the Congo (Brazzaville), as I have just announced, will therefore add
its vote to that of those delegations which sincerely
desire, in Africa and in the world, that human blood
·should cease to be shed unnecessarily, as is now the case
in Algeria and above all in Angola where Mr. Salazar's
Portugal is stopping at nothing to exterminate thousands of Africans. The delegation of the Congo (Brazzaville) will therefore vote for the whole of the draft
resolution submitted.
45. Mr. THORS (Iceland) : At this late hour, at the
moment when the President's term of office is coming
to a close, may I be allowed to congratulate him on
the excellent service he has rendered the United Nations
during tge entire tenure of his presidency. He has
presided over an extraordinary General Assembly, extraordinary both on account of the large attendance at
the fifteenth session and by reason of the many unusual,
grave, and difficult problems with which it was seized,
which prolonged its duration beyond that of any previous session of the General Assembly. All these difficulties he has met with tact, clarity and determination. Therefore, I hope he will accept my sincere ·
congratulations.
46. I have come to this rostrum to say a few words
in explanation of the vote of the Icelandic delegation
on the draft resolution [A/L.351] which will soon be
put to the Assembly.
47. Let me first state that we were somewhat doubtful
about the urgency of convening a special session of the
Assembly' to consider the situation in Tunisia, because
of the fact that the sixteenth regular session of the
· Assembly is to be convened in less than a month. We
also had doubts whether the Assembly, at a special
session, could arrive at a positive and constructive
conclusion that would be helpful in this regrettable

and grave situation, and that would lead to realistic
negotiations between France and Tunisia, it being evident that negotiations between the parties. themselves
constitute the only road that can lead to a peaceful and
enduring settlement of the dispute.
48. We are now faced with the hard fact of having
to register our vote on a single draft resolution, to
which no amendments have been offered. We should
have preferred to see some of the paragraphs of the
draft resolution amended-and I refer specifically to the
second and fourth paragraphs of the preamble. We are,
however, happy to note that the draft resolution as a
whole has been drafted with prudence and moderation,
avoiding ill-construed or malicious accusations.
49. It was no surprise to us that Tunisia's case was
presented to the Assembly in a moderate and dignified
manner by Tunisia's distinguished representative, 1\Ir.
Slim.
SO. A small nation like mine is bonnd by virtue of its
very existence to honour, emphasize and support in all
instances the principle of self-rletermination and the
sovereignty of every nation over its own territory. This
vitally important principle of territorial integrity is
clearly pronounced in paragraph 2 of the .operative part
of the draft resolution, which states that the General
Assembly:
"Recognizes the sovereign right of Tunisia to call
for the withdrawal of all French am1ed forces present
on its territory without its consent".
51. It is the sad truth that French armed forces are
present in Tunisia against the will and wishes of the
Tunisian Government and the Tunisian people, and not
by reason or right based on any international or bilateral
treaty or agreement. The Tunisian Government, in the
exerdse of i1Js full sovereignty, therefore has the complete right to demand the withdrawal of these armed
forces from Tunisian soil, since they are stationed there
in violation of Tunisian sovereignty. We favour the statement contained in paragraph 2 of the operative part of
the draft resolution.
52. In paragraph 3 the General Assembly :
"Calls upon the Governments of France and Tun~sia to enter into immediate negotiations to devise
peaceful and agreed measures in accordance with the
principles of the Charter for the withdrawal · of all
French armed forces from Tunisian territory".
It is for the parties to negotiate about the modalities and
time-table as well as the necessary technical and precautionary measures in connexion with the withdrawal.
But withdrawal seems to be the only solution, since this
is claimed by Tunisia on the strength of its inherent territorial integrity. We adhere to this principle and must
vote for it on the basis of our own conscience and in all
fairness. If we did not jealously honour and guard the
principle of self-determination and sovereignty based on
law and justice, we should not be worthy of the name of
a sovereign and independent nation.
53. We shall therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution as a whole, well remembering that what we want
others to do unto us, we should likewise do unto them.
54. Today it is Tunisia that .calls for understanding and
support. Tomorrow it may be any other small nation.
We have enough confidence in the wisdom and fairness
of France and Tunisia to be convinced that their dispute
of today is but the prologue to their friendly relations of
tomorrow and of all the years to come. Both nations have
proven their greatness in the dim days of struggle and

1006th meeting-25 Angnst 1961

sacrifice. They are both our friends and we wish them
well.
55. What is of crucial importance to the Icelandic delegation in this case is the fear that if we do not strongly
and universally protect and practise the principle of the
territorial integrity of all nations everywhere, we shall
invite the big and strong to thrust their powerful armies
into the territories of the small and weak That would
be inviting disaster. Let us therefore be determined in
pronouncing what ·is right, legal and just.
56. Mr. GALLIN-DOUATHE (Central African Republic) (translated from French) : As part of the
Brazzaville group, the representatives of Senegal and
Cameroun have addressed to you, Mr.. President, their
respectful congratulations on your election to· the presidency of this special session of the General Assembly. I
should like to repeat those congratulations on behalf of
my delegation, for in our view your election, or rather
your re-election, i,s a unanimous tribute to your greaf
qualities as an impartial and courteous diplomat.
57. The representatives of Senegal and Cameroun have
set forth in clear and precise terms the position of the
Brazzaville group with respect to the question of Bizerta,
the cause of the Tunisian drama. My delegation will limit
itself to a few general remarks, before participating in the
vote which is to be taken in a few moments.
58. Firstly, my country, a free, independent and save-·
reign State, does not intend to receive a lesson from any
country as regards our national or international policy.
My country is a State whose national unity and poilitical stability have earned the admiration even of its
adversaries.
59. Secondly, the Central African Republic, a Member
State of the United Nations, once again proclaims its
complete faith in this institution, whose Charter it has
freely accepted both in the letter and in the spirit. That
is why my country means to use this important international rostrum to make its modest contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security; that
is to say, to wider fraternization in the world family. In
short, the Central African Republic feels that this
rostrum is a place where a Member State should seek to
raise itself rather than to lower itself by insulting and
slandering other Member;s, for the Central African Republic has as ins motto: Unity, dignity, work. Furthermore, my country does not care for those who indulge
in long palavers; it does not hate them, but it does not
admire them.
60. These elementary principles having been stated, it :ls
clear that my country's position regarding the Tunisian
problem has been a position of conciliation. So soon as
the painful news of the Franco-Tunisian conflict was received in my country, Mr. David Dacko, President of
the Central African Republic and President of the Government, sent two messages, one to Tunis and the other
to Pads. What did the message addressed to Tunis say?
I shall read it to you very quickly:
"President Dacko to President Bourguiba of
Tunisia:
"It is with infinite sadness that my Government
and I have heard of the tragic events at the military
base of Bizerta which have plunged Tunisia into
mourning. We keenly deplore the loss of so many
hmnan lives suffered by your country, a friend of the
Central African Republic, and we fully share your
sorrow. We heartily wish for the immediate cessation
of military operations and a return to peace with a view

133

to the peaceful negotiations which alone will lead to a
solution of the Bizerta problem. With highest consideration. Dacko."
61. At the same time the President of the Centrai
African Republic addressed a message to President de
·
Gaulle, which was worded as follows: ·
"President Dacko to President de Gaulle :
"My Government and I have heard" with amazement
the announcement of the tragic events in :runisia at the
military base of Bizerta, . that have already cost the
lives of many hundreds of victims. We sincerely deplore
this umiecessary loss of human life. We express the
hope that France, always imbued with the ideal of
peace and liberty, will do everything in its power to
put a stop to the military operations in Tunisia without
delay. We consider that a solution of the question
of Bizerta can only be found through negotiation. To,
give up the idea of negotiation would be to com~
promise once again peace in Africa and particularly iJ:l,
the Franco-African community. With highest consideration. David Dacko."
62. This position taken by my Government . was of:ficially confirmed. in a communique published after a
meeting of the Council of Ministers, which stated among
other things :
"The Government of the Central African Republic
cannot but regret keenly the tragic· events in Bizerta
which set · France and Tunisia-countries that are
friends-against each other, and it deplores the unnecessary loss of human life which has resulted.
"Furthermore, recognizing that Tunisia, .an independent country, has the right to exercise its sove-reignty over the whole of its national territory, it approves the principle of the evacuation of .the military
base of Bizerta by French troops, as requested by the
Tunisian Government.
"The Government of the Central African Republic
hopes that an amicable settlement of the Bizerta affair
will· be reached as quickly as possible and recommends
that the two parties concerned, rather than seek international 'settlement of the dispute or resort to the
further use of force, should open direct negotiations
without delay with a view to finding a reasonable settlement acceptable to both countries."
63. Later on, within the scope of the concerted inter-.
national policy of the Brazzaville group of States, my
country and my Government united their. ei;Iorts to those
of the other participants at the Conference of Abidjan,
on 25 October 1960, to seek a conciliatory. solution for
the Tuni,sian problem. Let us recall the result of this
meeting of the heads of State of the Brazzaville grO\lp :
first, reaffirmation of the principle of absolute respect
for the territorial integrity of every independent State;
second, censure of recourse to violence in any form for
the settlement of territorial claims; third, affirmation that
a debate in the United Nations would only jeopardize
the possible rapid solution of the Bizerta problem; and
fourth, expression of the hope of the twelve States that
direct negotiations would open immediately between
France and Tunisia with a view to normalizing relations
between the two countries and establishing fl. prec;ise timetable for the evacuation of Bizerta by French troops.
·
64. It will also be remembered that a collectiye approach to-the French Government wa:s made by the head~
of the twelve States of the Brazzaville group-:-- to which
my country belongs. In the meantime, the will of the
majority of the States Members of the United Nations

134

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

led to the convening of a special session of the General
Assembly [A/4831]. Thus we have come to consider
this evening a draft resolution [A/L.351] submitted by
a number of African~Asian States.
65. My delegation and the delegations of the Brazzaville
group are happy to note that this draft resoluti?n, ab~ve
all in its operative part, reflects the w~ole. solutiOn. w~Ich
the Brazzaville group had advocated m Its negotiations
with Tunis ·and Paris. The main points are : full complimice with the interim reso!ution of the. ~e?urity Co';lncil of 22 ·July ;_5 rea~firmatwn . of Tum~Ia s. so':ereign
rights over all Its natwnal terntory, which I~phes the
establishment of a time-table for the evaluatiOn of the
Bizerta ·base;· preliminary direct negotiations between
France and Tunisia. That is the essence of the draft
resolution before us, and it is precisely the solution
which my country, within the Brazzaville group, recommended. · Therefore, my country finds it difficult to
understand how the representative of another State can
come to this rostrum and try to give us a lesson in
African solidarity~ In fact ...
66. The PRESIDENT : I am afraid I must remind the
speaker of the purpose for which he has co~e. to the
rostrum. We are now in the stage of explaimng our
votes and the reasons for them. Instead of doing that,
the speaker is reopening a controve~sy wh~ch has nothing
to do with the issue before the special sesswn or the draft
resolution· on which we should shortly be voting.
67. Mr. GALUN-DOUATHE (Central African Republic) (translated from French) : I ~o apologize: Mr.
President. I am glad to have had tht-s opportumty to
realize that there are representatives who applaud when
the representative of another country has said something
that departs from the general rule of the Assembly.
68. For the Central African Republic, it was a question
of direct negotiations. As far as we were concerned,
these negotiations are indispensable, because Fr~nce and
Tunisia-which my country looks upon as Its godpai:en!Js--a.re friends and we must ~t all costs _encoura~e
these two nations to renew their fnendly relatiOns. Thxs
is the ardent hope of my country. _Therefore, my dele~a­
tion, within the scope of the pohcy of the ~razzavxlle
group, will give its support to the draft resolutiOn before
us [AjL.351].
69. Mr. OKAZAKI (Japan): May I join with the
other delegations and offer the President my sincere congratulations on his election to his high office?
70. I wish to explain briefly the position of my delegation on the draft resolution [A/ L.351] before us. After
listening carefully to the stateme?ts ma~e by various
delegations in the S~curity Connell and 111 _the General
Assembly, I should hke to make th~ _followmg obs~rva­
tions There is no doubt that Tumsxa has sovereignty
over .its entire territory, including Bizerta. However, in
view of its complicated legal and h_istorical bac~groun?,
the recognition of Tunisian sovereignty over Bizerta IS
not enough to expedite an amicable solution of the problem. The solution of this question is to be sought through
peaceful negotiati.on~ between the t:vo parties in accordance with the prmciples set forth m the Charter of the
United Nations.
71. In this connexion it is gratifying to note that ~oth
parties have professed . th~r willingnes? to enter mto
negotiations. The question I:s how to bnng together the
two parties quickly around a conference table. Every
effort should be made to create an atmosphere which will
. "Ibid.

be conducive to such negotiations.. Any attempt which

is likely to make more difficult or to delay such negotiations should be avoided.
72. I am glad to note that the draft resolution before
us embodies the factors I have mentioned. However, in
the view of my delegation the draft resolution contains.
some provisions which do not seem to contribute to the
creation of a climate which will enable both parties
to arrive freely at an amicable solution of the problem.
For the above reasons, my delegation finds it difficult to
subscribe to the draft resolution.
73. However, I wish to make it quite clear that my
Government is very eager to see that there is a fair and
equitable solution of the dispute. My country being one
of the African-Asian countries, and enjoying the most
friendly relations with Tunisia, has full sympathy with
Tunisia's legitimate aspirations and we wish to continue to do whatever we can to restore peace and promote prosperity in Tunisia.
74. Mr. RITCHIE (Canada) : I should like to join
with others who have spoken here before me in paying
tribute to the wisdom and the tact with which the
President has presided over our deliberations and which
have made his presidency a memorable one in the
history of the United Nations.
75. I wish very briefly to explain the position of the
Canadian delegation on the draft resolution [AfL.351]
before us. In our view the purpose of this special
session should. be the creation of an atmosphere which
will be conducive to effective negotiations between the
two parties. We should, we feel, urge direct negotiations
between France and Tunisia, employing for this purpose
language which is clear, persuasive and most likely to
have practi'cal effects. We should, we think, avoid
wording which might lead to a hardening of attitudes.
76. The Canadian delegation is in sympathy with much
of this draft resolution before us. We are concerned that
France has not seen .fit to comply fully with the provisions of the interim resolution6 adopted by the Security
Council. In particular, we agree with the urgent need
for negotiations between the two parties. We do not
think, however, that the language used in the fourth
paragraph of the preamble is calculated to advance such
negotiations. Further, we question whether the last
operative paragraph does not go to? far in prej~d~ing
the conclusions to be reached by bilateral negotiatiOns
between the two parties.
77. These considerations will determine the vote cast
by my delegation.
78. Mr. CHERMONT (Brazil): The Brazilian delegation is going to vote in favour of the draft resolution
[ AfL.351] which is sponsored by thirty-two delegations.
I stated the position of the Brazilian Government _on
the matter during the general debate. I should now hke
to emphasize just one point before the vote is taken.
The Brazilian Government considers that we are faced
with two problems as regards the presence of French
troops in Tunisia. On the on~ hand, there a~e the
troops which were deployed outside th~ base of ~1zerta.
The interim resolution 7 of the Secunty Councxl dealt
with these troops, and I am confident that the Assembly
will reaffirm that resolution. On the other hand, there
are troops stationed within the base itself that were
the subject of the exchange of notes of 17 June 1958,
and whose continued presence on Tunisian soil is
6 Ibid.

7 Ibid .

I

I

i

--- .

~trary

1006oh _

. .,.._,..A..... 1961

to the wishes of the Government and
people of that country, and therefore tends to constitute
a constant source of trouble and even a threat to
intemational peace and security.
79. Thus, in the view of the Brazilian delegation,
France should comply with the Security Council resolution in order- to settle the first problem, and the two
countries should start negotiations on the second question, in accordance with the exchange of notes I cited
and with a view to the eventual evacuation of all French
troops from Tunisian territory.
80. Mrs. ROSSEL (Sweden): In considering its
attitude toward the draft resolution [A/L.351] which
is now before the Assembly, the Swedish delegation
has been guided by a desire to see the United Nations
mal<:e a constructive contribution toward the twofold
goal of forestalling further bloodshed and of bringing
the parties together. We feel that this goal can be
furthered by a reaffirmation of the Security Council's
interim resolution8 of 22 July 1961. This point is
covered in the draft resolution before us.
81. As for the problem of Franco-Tunisian negotiations, which has been dealt with by all delegations
which have spoken in the Assembly debate, my delegation has noted that the two parties are agreed on the
desirability of negotiations and that they are also agreed
on at least one of the principles that should underlie
such negotiations. I am referring to the recognition
of Tunisian sovereignty over Bizerta. There seems to be,
therefore, some basis for the hope that negotiations can
be brought about ·and lead to fruitful results. These
points are also taken into account in the draft resolution.
82. Although my delegation thinks that the language
of the· draft .resolution is not altogether fortunate, we
consider that a vote in favour of it would, on balance,
best serve the cause of the United Nations and of peace
in the area.
83. Mr. MATSCH (Austria): I should like briefly
to set forth the position of my delegation. The Austrian
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution
[ AjL.351]. We would be unable, however, to support
the fourth preambular paragraph if a separate vote were
taken on this paragraph. The Austrian delegation
sincerely hopes that negotiations will take place as
soon as possible and lead to a positive result.
84. Mr. SCHMIDT (Denmark) : May I add the
congratulations of my delegation to those which have
already been extended to the President on the occasion
of his election to his high office?
85. Before: a vote is taken on the draft resolution
[A/L.351] the Danish delegation wants to state its
position. Denmark will vote in favour of the draft
resolution. In doing so, the Danish Government does
not, however, endorse all parts of the draft resolution.
It is my Government's opinion that the draft resolution
in its present form does not render full justice to one
of the parties in the current dispute. The draft resolution would have been better suited, in our view, to a
favourable and speedy solution of the problem if the
wording of some parts of the te:xt had been different.
I am referring in particular to the second and fourth
paragraphs of the preamble and to operative paragraph 2.
The Danish delegation has nevertheless decided to vote
for the draft resolution, because up to now negotiations
between the parties have not produced results and the
present situation therefore implies grave risks. Under
s Ibid.

135

these circumstances, the Danish Government deems it
of great importance that it be established that the United
Nations has a special responsibility and that the
Organization receive the widest possible support in its
endeavours to bring about a peaceful and lasting
solution.
86. Mr. MENEMENCIOGLU (Turkey) : In explaining the vote of my delegation I do not have to
dwell on .the details of our position in the present
disagreement, since we have already spoken at some
length on this question both in the Security Council
meetings and in the special session of the Assembly.
I wish to speak directly and briefly on the draft resolution [A/L.351]. As is known, there is only one draft
resolution before us, which means that either this text
must be adopted or there will be no decision at all.
87. My delegation is in agreement with the essential
provisions of that text, although we do not approve
of the wording in certain parts, and consider that
the factual presentation in other parts is also somewhat
faulty. We would have preferred· to vote separately on
certain paragraphs. If that had been possible, my delegation would still have voted in favour of the operative
paragraphs of the text, while we would not have given
our support to the fourth preambular paragraph, with
whose formulation my delegation does not agree.
However, it appears that this will not be the case and
that the Assembly will have to express itself in a single
vote.
88. We shall vote in favour of this text, because we
agree with its general conception, but we wish to state
for the record that our vote does not imply agreement
with the contents of the fourth paragraph of the preamble or with the wording of certain other parts. We
shall vote in favour of this text in spite of our partial
disagreement, because we wish to register our desire
to see a prompt implementation of the Security Council
resolution9 and a speedy, just and peaceful solution
of this regrettable question, with full recognition of
Tunisian sovereignty over its entire territory through
negotiations in the spirit and the letter of the Charter
of the United Nations.
89. In conclusion, I wish to congratulate the delegation
of Tunisia, and especially its Chairman, Mr. Mongi
Slim, for the moderation and dignity with which they
have presented Tunisia's case.
90. Mr. ZEA (Colombia) (translated from Spanish):
The draft resolution to ·be voted upon· [A/ L.351] contains certain statements which exactly reflect the views
of my Government, and which probably reflect the
unanimous feeling of this Assembly about the immediate
and extremely urgent need for the countries in conflict
to open negotiations in order to reach an agreement in
accordance with the principles of the Charter, and the
need for France to carry out the Security Council's
decision of 22 July,l0 completely and without delay,
pending a satisfactory settlement by negotiation for
the preservation of peace.
91. But there are other parts of the draft resolution
with which my delegation does not completely agree.
One is the fourth preambular paragraph which, we
think, would imply that the Assembly has taken a
decision on. the substance of the question under discussian without having all the necessary evidence. Nor do
we find operative paragraph 2 acceptable, not because
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid.

136

General Assemhly~l'hird .Special Session-Plenary Meetings

of its substance, but because its form and its wording
the dele?"ation of Dahomey ;vill not vote for one country
mi~ht i? fut~re be adduced by any State as a precedent
nor agamst .the other. It ":Ill.vote for a principle,-since
to Justify disregard for the validity of freely accepted
the affirmation of that pnnc1ple here might be useful
not only to the two parties concerned but also to the
~ublic treaties. We also find the last sentence of operacause of international peace and security.
·
tive paragraph 3 unnecessary. and unwise, since the
Assembly ca~no:t lay do'Yn in advance the specific objects
98. My delegation, therefore, will vote in favour cif
of any negotr.atwns which may be held; it is obvious
the draft resolution, in the hope· that France and
~hat these obJects must be agreed upon by the parties
Tunisia will enter into negotiations with a view to
m complete freedom and without outside interference.
reaching a solution in conformity with the United
We do not think that the Charter authorizes the General
Nations Charter.
Assembly to make this kind of decision.
Mr. R-itchie (Canada), Vice-President took the
92. However, my delegation has decided ·to vote in
Chair.
.
'
'
favour of the. draft resolution as a whole, not only as
99. Mr. PLIMSOLL (Australia): The Australian
a demonstratiOn of sympathy and admiration for the
delegation is unable to vote for the draft resolution
forti~~de .and resolution shown by the heroic peoples of
[AjL.351] as it appears before us now. I think it would
Tumsra m the defence of its sovereignty, but also in
have been possible to devise a draft resolution that would
order to emphasize my country's firm conviction that
have achieved the virtually unanimous support of this
peace can only be achieved by mutual respect between
Assembly but the various discussions that have taken
S.tates. Colombia also hopes fervently that the passing
place here have not brought forth such a draft resolution.
differences between two distinguished countries of the
100. The Australian Government does not believe that
free world, with deep roots in democracy will soon
the
draft resolution, in its present form, can be adopted
disappear.
'
to
the
best advantage, if our objective is to bring the two
93. Mr. ZOLLNER (Dahomey) (translated from
parties together quickly and effectively. Nevertheless, I
French) : Before undertaking to explain its vote, the
have been impressed in this debate by the wide area of
delegatiOn of Dahomey would like to associate itself
agreement among countries from all groups, from all
with the congratulations and the unanimous tribute
c~:mtinents. I have been impressed. also by the moderaaddressed to the President on his re-election.
t~on that has been shown by most of the speakers .on all
94. Like many other delegations, the delegation of . s1des and I hope that the debates and the spirit shown
Dah~mey has been deeply affected by this sanguinary
here will have their effect upon the parties when they
conflict between two of its best friends France and
come together.
Tunisia.
'
101. It is, in fact, urgently necessary that the parties
95. The. vote of my delegation is the logical result
!Should come together and that, in their negotiations,
o~ the attitude adopted by my country since the beginthey pay regard to their obligations under the Charter
mug of this painful crisis ; but a speaker from this
of the United Nations. It is the duty of all of us here
rostr.um this very n:orning thought· he might arrogate
to do what we can as individual nations, as friends of
to himself the credit for having determined the vote
both of the countries-, to try to bring them together and
of Dahomey and of mahy countries that are friends of
to .attempt to help towards a solution. In fact, .that is our
Dahomey. On the contrary, the sense of measure which
pnmary obligatio?- at this time, to try to bring them
~y country has always tried to display will be needed
together; we beheve that, as far as Australia is conm full ~o prevent an attitude from being influenced
cerned, we are s~rving this purpose by abstaining on
at the tlme of the vote by these statements, in which
the draft res?l~twn and in expressing this hope for
~ack of finesse was exceeded only by arrogance. There
prompt negotlatwns by both parties, with a view not'
IS, hovvever, no point in lingering any further over the
!llerely .to solving the immediate cause of the dispute but
slande~ous assertions directed against us yesterday and
m the mterests of the longer-term relations between the
today m these speeches, the self-complacency of which
two parties in the area, in which France and Tunisia can
would be extraordinary if it were not merely puerile.
as partners, work together for the security and economi~
96. The principles now expressed in a draft resolutio~
advm:cement of the whole of North Africa and the
[A(L.351] were .a~rmed unequivocally by my deleMed1terranean.
.
gabon at the begmnmg of this unfortunate crisis in a
10~. Mr. ENCKELL (Finland): I should like to exletter addressed by it and other nations of Africa and
plam t~e · vote of the delegation of Finland. The draft
Asia to the President of the Security Council. The Govresolution [A/L.351] before us does not, much to our
ernment of Dahomey which has not ceased since then in
regret, ;:vholly me~t our expectations. We would like
i~s ~fforts to bring about a resumption of sincere negoto
help m an effic1ent way towards the solution of this
tiations between the opposing parties in concert with
grave .situation th;ough bilateral negotiations. We could
the allied .Governments of the Brazzaville group, could
not fa1l to re~o.gmze th~ sovereign right of the Governnot but view the convening of this special session of
ment of Tumsm to dec1de, according to its laws as to
the General Assembly with some reserve. Our short
!he u~e of its national territory. This was th; spirit
experience with the United Nations has shown us that
m which we told the Secretary-General that we sup~!though the United Nations may well be the best
ported
the request [A/4831] for holding this special
mstrument for the solution of conflicts, a General
session.
Assembly was often only a pretext for unseemly propa103. The Organization, if it wishes to fulfil its mission
ganda, which harmed the very cause the Assembly
must undoubtedly deal with situations such as this and
was ~upposed to serve. One ~tate gave us added proof
must do so without undue delay. It is also undoubtedly
of this fact, yesterday and th1s morning.
our d~ty ~o up~old the authority of the Security Council
97. Despite these apprehensions which were unforany s1tu.at1on 'Y~th the purpose of facilitating its solution
tunately largely justified, my Government was gratified
and of 1ts dec1smns.
·
that the principles it had always proclaimed should be
expressed in the draft resolution. In this sad conflict,
104. But it is as unquestionably our duty to deal with

1006th meeting-25 August 1961

and avoiding anything which might, rightly or wrongly,
contribute to existing difficulties. _We would. have p;eferred not to find in this text certam formulatwns which
we .feel could have been and ought to have been avoided.
It is, therefore, with certain reservations, and especially
so with regard to the fourth preambular paragraph, that
we are going to cast our vote in favour of the text
before us.
Mr. Boland (Ireland) reSWmed the Chair.
105. Mr. GAMBOA (Philippines): Not having participated in the substantive debate on this. question, r:-'Y
delegation desires to take advantage of this opportumty
to congratulate Mr. Boland on his election as President
of the General Assembly at this special session.
106. On instructions from my Government, I would
like to explain our vote on the draft resolution
[AjL.351]. My Government is one of the many _repr~­
sented in this world Organization which has the fnendhest feelings for the peoples of Tunisia and France, the
two countries directly involved in the dispute now before
us. As a friend of both, we would not wish the present
situation to deteriorate any further. In our view, it remains the task of friends of Tunisia and France alike,
no less than of the United Nations, to create a favourable
atmosphere for a mutually satisfactory settlement of the
dispute, in accordance with the Charter.
107. It is our convi~tion that direct bilateral negotiations between the parties concerned hold the promise
of bringing about that happy _result. This the draft res?~u­
tion seeks to accomplish. This was also what the Philippine delegation had in mind when we signed the request
[A/ 4831] to convene the present special session.
108. We realize that this draft resolution is far from
perfect. It would be difficult indeed to say that either
party in the present dispute is absolutely right and blameless. What the General Assembly seeks to accomplish
through the adoption of this draft resolution is to !nake
possible a reconciliation of views, leading to an amicable
settlement of their differences. It would be a disservice
to the cause of world peace and security to allow the
Bizerta dispute to worsen into a crisis. The Philippine
delegation has welcomed this opportunity to help foster
a climate conducive to the reconciliation between France
and Tunisia at this critical hour in world history.
109. For these reasons, my delegation is happy to give
its support to the draft resolution in question.
110. Mr. CABALLERO (Bolivia) {translated from
Spanish) : I wish fir.st to cong~a!ulate t~e Preside?t, on
behalf of the delegatiOn of Bohvta, on his re-election at
the present special sessio? of t~e General -~ssembly and
on the magnificent way m which he has discharged so
high and important a task.
111. My Government has paid the greatest attention to
the grave issue of Bizerta since it arose. We have been
particularly anxious in the present case, because of the
concern and interest with which Bolivia has followed the
achievement of independence by the new African countries, and because of the historical and almost secu~ar
friendship which binds Bolivia to France.
112. At the end of the debate at this special session,
in which we have heard dear and profound legal analyses
of the problem, as well as the usual skirmi?hes o.f the cold
war, we have come to the moment of votmg with a feeling of despair, which we canriot hide. We fear tha~ all
these deliberations and efforts. will not lead to solutions
as satisfactory as those for · which we had hoped, and

137

that once more this Chamber, in which all peoples of the
world, especially small nations such as m~ own, place
their hopes for peace, work and progress, will ha:ve been
used as a theatre for impassioned demonstratiOns by
those who wish to impose a totalitarian hegemony on
the world.
·
113. Until the last moment we tried to .keep alive the
hope that the two nations, France and Tunisia, both of
which are so close to the feelings of my people, would
be able to find a way to negotiate directly and to settle
the differences which gave rise to the situation. This- has
not happened, and before the evidence of France's disregard for the recommendations of the Security Council, 11
which were designed to defend the principle of sovereignty, the very essence of nationality, my. delegation
will vote in favour of the one draft resolution proposed
by the African-Asian nations and Yugoslavia [A/ L.351],
although we are forced to state that the Bolivian dele&"ation holds certain reservations with respect to operative
paragraph 3 and the fourth preambular paragraph of the
draft.
114. Mr. RAKOTOMALALA (Madagascar) (translated from French) : The Malagasy Republic, together
with its brother States of the Brazzaville group, will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before the General
Assembly [A/ L.351]. It will do so, for it views this
resolution as merely an appeal to negotiations between
France and Tunisia.
115. True, my delegation would have preferred a different wording of some of the preambular passages, particularly the second and fourth paragraphs, because, being
first and foremost practical, it feared that these passages
might render less easy the conversations which the two
parties, in its view, should undertake immediately with a
view to establishing the time-table for withdrawal.
116. To France, which has such a glorious and proud
history and which from 1959 to 1960, under the leadership of General de Gaulle, has shown the world the extent
of itJs devotion to freedom by granting independence to
fifteen territories and 29 million human beings, that it still
assists so generously and so disinterestedly, my delegation
would say: The greatness of France will be increased even
more if you comply with_the obligations of the Charter of
the United Nations which you helped to establish fifteen
years ago and of which you have until now been one of
the firmest supporters.
117. My delegation would remind Tunisia and President Bourguiba of the conciliatory efforts within the
United Nations and of the great work of national reconstruotion which have made the Tunisian State, until now,
a model and a symbol for its African brothers.
118. We would say to both parties: Let us have no more
vain pride, for the peace of the world may be disturbed
by this absurd conflict, which is not in keeping with your
greatness nor with your obligations ,to the free world.
119. It is :ln .th~s spirit that the Malagasy delegation,
like the whole Brazzaville group, will vote in favour of
the draft resolution before the Assembly.
120. Mr. MOROZOV (Union of Soviet •Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : At ·this moment,
when the General Assembly is about to vote on the draft
resolution ·submitted by thirty-two African and Asian
countries, the delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics considers it necessary to state briefly the position it will adopt. in the vote on this draft.
11 Ibi<t:

138

General Assembly-Third Special Session-Plenary Meetings

In doing so, we first of all take into ~ccou?t the
fact that the discussion which has been held m th1s hall
over the past week has shown that the majority of the
African and Asian countries and a considerable number
of Latin American countries, as well as all the socialist
countries belonging to the United Nations, have unanimously condemned France's actions. These States have
resolutely called for the immediate cessation of French
aggression, for the withdrawal of French armed forces
from Tunisia, and for unconditional respect and strict observance of Tunisia's sovereignty.
122. Many representatives of African, Asian, Latin
American and socialist countries have supplied convincing
proofs of the incontestable fact that foreign military bases
constitute a bulwark of colonialism, a constant danger to
peace, a threat to the national ,independence of small
countries, and a permanent source of international
tension.
123. The very discussion in this Assembly, the whole
course o.f the debate on .the French aggression in Tunisia,
must be regarded a serious waming to the French colonizers. In this we see an important result, already achieved,.
at 0is paint, in the General Assembly's third special
sess10n.
124. The logical conclusion of the efforts made, at this
session, to curb French aggression is of course the adoption of an appropriate decision by the General Assembly.
125. If we approacl1 the text of the draft resolution
-submitted by the Af.rican and Asian countries from this
point of view, we must recognize and stress that it contains a series of important statements reflecting the general
thesis which has predominated in the discussions of these
last days and which has been expres-sed in resolute condemnation of Frencl1 aggression ·in Ttmisia.
126. The draft resolution proposes-rightly, in our
view-recognition of the fact that the presence of French
armed forces on Tunisian territory constitutes a violation
of Tunisia's sovereignty and that this is a permanent
source of international friction, endangering peace and
security.
127. The operative part of the resolution rightly urges
France to implement the Security Council resolution
calling for a cease.,fire and the withdrawal of the armed
forces to the positions which they occupied before 19 July
121.

-

1961.
128. The draft resolution further contains an important

provision-and this requires special emphasis-stating the
main task: the withdrawal of French troops from Tunisian
territory.
129. At the san1e time we cannot refrain from observing,
like many other delegates who have spoken here, that in
several respects the wording of the draft could be considerably strengthened and that the demands to be made by the
Assembly could be e ..'Cpressed more vigorously.
130. However, we fully understand the position of the
African and Asian countries which have stated here that
the As.sembly's adoption of their draft resolution without
any changes-! emphasize, without any changes-should
vindicate loyalty to the principles of-the United Nations
Charter not only in words but also in deeds.
131. We therefore associate ourselves with those African, Asian and Latin American countries which, from
this rostrum, have called upon the Assembly to support
the thirty-two-Power draft.
132. The Soviet delegation will vote in favour of this
draft resolution. We consider, for our part, that the

adoption of this draft will show that the majority of States
Members of the United Nations are firmly convinced of
the nee<i to end French aggression in the North African
and Mediterranean area, so that peace and calm may be
resto-red in this part of the world as speedily as possible.
133. The adoption of this draft resolution should serve
as a pledge that all peace-loving countries and peoples
will continue to g·ive resolute support to the Tunisian
people in its noble struggle for national independence and
for sovereignty.
134. Mr. Mongi SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from
French) : I apologize for trying the patience of the President and the Assembly again, but I believe it is time for
the Tunisian delegation to express its position cin the
draft resolution submitted by thirty-two African and
Asian delegations [A/ L.351], since, after all, this question essentially concerns my country, its sovereignty
and its territorial integrity. I should like, therefore, to
state very briefly my delegation's feeling regarding this
draft resolution.
135. The extent of the aggression suffered by Tunisia,
the effects of which are still apparent, in view of the
occupation of our territory and .the usurpation of authority
that normally belongs solely to the sovereignty of our
country/ 2 all the more since France on 20 March 1956
solemnly proclaimed the independence of Tunisia, give
sufficient ground to my delegation to adopt a forceful position in this debate, that is justified by many precedents
on the subject in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council.
136. The 1950 precedent is clear and precise. ·since
provisi9nal measures decided on by the Security Council
have not been applied, the Security Council recorded the
failure clearly and distinctly and called upon all Member
States to repel what it characterized without· any ambiguity as an act of aggression.
137. The Suez precedent in 1956 also supports my delegation's position. After the Security Council had been
unable to take a decision, the General Assembly adopted
hvo clear and precise resolutions urging the withdrawal of
forces [resolutions 997 (ES-I) and 998 (ES-I)]. These
resolutions mav not have characterized the act as
aggressive, but "they strongly urged the withdrawal of
troops and sent an emergency force to see ,that the decision was carried out.
·
138. May I remind you also of a precedent of the past
year, that of the Congo (Leopoldville). There again, the
Security Council adopted various resolutions calling upon
a Member State, Belgium, to withdraw its troops immed1ately; some were approved unanimously and all were supported by the two great world Powers that were permanent members of the Security Council.
139. In accordance with these precedents, and because
of the circumstances in which we find ourselves despite
the endeavours and everything done by friends from
Africa and elsewhere to lead France to a better understanding of justice and right and of the obligations
it itself undertook, particularly by its letter of 17 June
1958, 13 we were justified in adopting an energetic
attitude, having on our side our rights, the principles
laid down in the United Nations Charter, and also
many precedents on the subject.
12 Protocol of agreement between France and Tunisia signed
at Paris on 20 March 1956.
13 Sewrif3< Council Official Records, Si:rteen.th Year, Su-ppleinmt for .Tuly, August and September 1961, document S/4869.

r

~-

1

1006th meeting-25 August 1961

140. But taking into account the difficulties that are
-inherent in the diversity of opinion in this essentially
democratic Assembly, we determined to · keep to
·essentials. In other words, we restricted ourselves to
.calling very forcefully for the rapid and immediate
·execution of the interim resolution of the Security
CounciP 4 -and asking for what we had always requested,
namely, that· honest and sincere negotiations should
begin very rapidly between France and Tunisia with
_a view: to deciding the sole point which appears to us
to be in controversy: the .terms and time-table for the
withdrawal of French troops from Tunisia and for the
transfer of all the installations, occupied up to this dq.y
by _these troops, to the Government and authorities of
Tunisia. And thus we have come to feel that this draft
resolution [A/ L.351] is an honest draft, although
certainly moderate in tone as well as in its operative
pr~>Visions, i.e., in the recommendations which we feel
the special session of the General Assembly is entitled
to make, in view of the present situation.
141. My delegation knows very well that this draft
. resolution will not satisfy some delegations which will
find it lukewarm and moderate, and I know too that
it will not completely satisfy other delegations which
will find its wording, if not its spirit, perhaps a little
too strong. But we must take the middle road, which
satisfies nobody, but at least meets the requirements
-of the United Nations itself, the United Nations Charter
and the principles of law and justice it embodies.
142. For these reasons, my delegation supports this
'
draft resolution.
143. May I say that despite our grief, our suffering,
qur losses, the harm we have suffered and the insults
to our national dignity, we shall be satisfied if the
case of Tunisia and Bizerta, and of the south of Tunisia,
has succeeded in establishing some unity in the African
continent, which has suffered so much in the past from
foreign domination and which has need of unity and of
the co-ordination of its energies in a renewed fraternity,
in the face of the afflictions of one of its own, to build
itself the road to progress.
144. _May I also express my satisfaction and that of
my people if, despite our sufferings, the case of Bizerta
and Tunisia has served to strengthen this Organization
in which we all place our most fervent hopes not only
for the settlement of cases like the Bizerta affair
but particularly for better w;orld co-operation, for
better understanding between the different trends
existing in the world, and for a better solution of all
the dangerous conflicts which are now likely to confront
this Organization.
145. If an almost unanimous vote on this draft
resolution strengthens the United- Nations, that will
satisfy my Government and my people, and their
sacrifice will not have been in vain. More particularly,
if this resolution, once adopted, is as loyally executed
by the two parties to which it is addressed, it will also
help to re-establish Franco-Tunisian friendship ; such
friendship is still possible despite the sufferings of the
Tunisian people, but only after the interim measures
demanded hy the Security Council have been completely
and loyally executed, and after sincere negotiations
have begun between France and Tunisia to determine
all the terms and time-limits for the final withdrawal
of all French troops from Tunisian national soil.
14 Ibid.,

document S/4882.

139

146. You will forgive me if I briefly review the events
that led to this affair ; such a review may not be very
encouraging, but it may make clear to you how we
felt when we were the victim of that aggression.
147. It happened in June 1940. Habib Bourguiba
and some of his companions were in- one of the underground chambers of an army prison at Marseille. By
methods which only political prisoners can guess,
Bourguiba secretly possessed a small radio receiving
set. On 18 June a voice had been heard over the. radio.
It came from London. It was glorious, magnificent; it
opposed the domination of French . soil by foreign
troops, which also at that time were attempting to
;Dccupy the French Atlantic coasts in order to ensure the
safety of .the Third Reich. The voice we heard then,
in Fort Saint-Nicolas, called on the. French people to
resist such an occupation by all possible means.
148. Afterwards, the United Nations was established
by France and .other countries to provide ways of
safeguarding any State, small or large, against aggression from any direction whatever.
149. Was it not sad for this man, who had been at
Fort Saint-Nicolas on 18 June 1940, to find that the
person whose voice he had heard at that time and who
is now at the head of the Government of France, has
permitted such an aggression to take place against a
small country like Tunisia, which is essentially peaceloving and ready to use all means to establish peace,
understanding, co-operation and harmony in the world,
and above all the prinCiples of the United Nations
and its Charter. As one of our colleagues has just said,
by obedience to the Charter, the application of the
principles it proclaims and the loyal execution of General
Assembly resolutions we cannot but become greater.
150. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly will now
proceed to take a decision on the question before it.
In this connexion, the Assembly has before it a single
proposal, the draft resolution . submitted jointly by
thirty-two Members [A/L.351]. I now propose to put
this draft resolution to the vote of the Assembly.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Urugiay, having been drawn by lot by the President,
·
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Albania, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cambodia,
Cameroun, Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad,
Colombia,· Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Leopoldville),
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Dahomey, Denmark,
Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya, Finland, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Treland, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Sweden,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Arab Republic, Upper Volta.
Against: None.
Abstaining: Uruguay, Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti;
Honduras, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay,
Pe,ru, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America.

140

General Assembly-Thil·d ·Special Session-Plenal"y Meetings

The draft resolution was adopted by 66 votes to
none, with 30 abstentions.*
151. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of the United States, who has expressed a
wish to explain his vote after the voting.
152. Mr. STEVENSON (United States of America):
I had nof thought to speak again, but as so many
delegations have seen fit to explain their vote, I hope
the Assembly will forgive me if I do so likewise,
even at this late hour.
153. I have explained previously that the United
States has been engaged almost incessantly for several
weeks in an effort to bring these parties together.
There are several aspects of this resolution, I have also
explained, with which we agree, including our profound
regret that the resolution15 of the Security Council
has not been fully implemented and that the parties
have not met to discuss and to agree upon the final
disposition of the facilities now under the control of
France at Bizerta.
154. We have felt obliged to abstain because we are
fearful that this resolution will not accelerate, but will
retard, these talks and the peaceful results which have
been the almost unanimous hope of the many speakers
we have heard during the past week. .
155. With the conclusion of this special session, a
new stage of this unhappy affair must now begin. The
resolution itself is at best a prelude to negotiations
between the parties-early negotiations, we hopewhich are necessary before there can be a definitive
solution in Bizerta which takes full account of Tunisian
sovereignty and the right of Tunisia to be master in
its own house.
156. As in the past weeks, the United States pledges
to the Assembly its unrelenting efforts to do everything it can within :its power to bring about the result
which is not only desirable, but also indispensable, to
any effective and final solution of this situation. Our
earnest hope is that this resolution, which so many
Members approved, will not retard these talks, and as

I say, we pledge our continued and tireless effort to
avoid this consequence and to bring France and Tunisia together to settle this unfortunate conflict between
old friends. Our role has not been an easy one, nor
has it escaped criticism here during the past week.
But I would remind Members that, as we say in our
language, discretion is sometimes the better part of
va.Iour.
157. Finally, may I congratulate the representative
of Tunisia on his speech here this evening, as always,
moving in its moderation.
158. The PRESIDENT: That brings to an end the
work of this third special session of the General
Assembly.
159. If I may, I should like at this stage in a few
words to express my profound and sincere personal
thanks for the congratulations which so many delegations have extended to me in their statements and
for the more than kind personal references which have
been made to me. I value more than I can say the
friendly feelings and the goodwill on the part of my
colleagues of which I take these references to be the
expression. It has been a great honour for me to serve
the General Assembly of the United Nations in this
Chair. No one could wish for a more exalted privilege.
I am profoundly grateful· to all delegations, without
exception, for the co-operation and understanding that
they have extended to me and which has done so
much to lighten my task during my term of office.

*The delegation of Niger subsequently indicated that it
wished to be put on record as having abstained in the vote on
the draft resolution.

161. The PRESIDENT: I now declare closed the
third special session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 10.55 p.m.

15 Ibid.

Printed in U.S.A.

AGENDA ITEii'I 2

Minute of silent prayer or meditation

160. The PRESIDENT: Before adjourning this
third special session I would now invite Members
to stand to observe one minute of silent prayer or
meditation.
The representatives stood in silence.

Closing of the session

S-25119-February 1962-2,175
