A/RES/63/14

United Nations

Distr.: General
16 December 2008

General Assembly
Sixty-third session
Agenda item 114 (g)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 November 2008
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/63/L.12 and Add.1)]

63/14. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Agreement between the Council of Europe and the Secretariat of
the United Nations signed on 15 December 1951 and the Arrangement on
Cooperation and Liaison between the Secretariats of the United Nations and the
Council of Europe of 19 November 1971,
Recalling also its previous resolutions on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe,
Recalling further the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 in 2008, and noting the sixtieth anniversary of the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 2 in
2010,
0F

1F

Acknowledging the contribution of the Council of Europe, at the European
level, to the protection and strengthening of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law through its standards, principles and
monitoring mechanisms, as well as to the effective implementation of all relevant
international legal instruments of the United Nations,
Taking note of the contribution of the Council of Europe to the universal
periodic review by the Human Rights Council of the situation of human rights in
States members of the Council of Europe,
Welcoming the declaration of the Council of Europe to improve the protection
of human rights defenders and promote their activities within the European sphere,
Acknowledging the contribution of the Council of Europe to the development
of international law, and noting that a number of legal instruments of the Council
are open to the participation of States of other regions,

_______________
1
2

08-47163

Resolution 217 A (III).
Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 5.

A/RES/63/14

Acknowledging also the continued interest of the Parliamentary Assembly of
the Council of Europe in the ongoing reform process of the United Nations,
Welcoming the increasingly close relations between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Secretary-General, 3
2F

1.
Calls for the reinforcement of cooperation and synergies with the
Council of Europe regarding the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, inter alia, the promotion of democracy and the rule of law, the prevention
of torture, the fight against trafficking in human beings, the fight against racism,
discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance, the promotion of gender equality and
the protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
Recognizes the important role of the European Court of Human Rights in
2.
protecting human rights as the guardian of the implementation of the European
Convention on Human Rights,2 which applies to the eight hundred million
individuals in the forty-seven States members of the Council of Europe, and invites
the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to strengthen their cooperation with the Council of Europe,
including its Commissioner for Human Rights, in promoting respect for human
rights, while encouraging close cooperation with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on human rights defenders;
Encourages further cooperation, where appropriate, between the United
3.
Nations and the Council of Europe through their mechanisms regarding the
prevention of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
Supports the development of cooperation, where appropriate, between
4.
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and the Council of Europe, with a
view to promoting post-conflict reconstruction and development and the
consolidation of peace, with full respect for human rights and the rule of law;
Takes note with appreciation of the entry into force on 1 February 2008
5.
of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human
Beings, 4 to which any non-member State of the Council of Europe may accede after
having obtained unanimous consent of the parties to the Convention, commends the
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe in this
regard, and expresses its appreciation for the preparation of a joint study on
trafficking in organs and tissues, including trafficking in persons for the purpose of
the removal of organs;
3F

Encourages further cooperation between the Office of the United Nations
6.
High Commissioner for Refugees and the Council of Europe in the field of
nationality, in particular in the prevention and reduction of statelessness, and in the
protection and promotion of the rights of refugees, asylum-seekers and internally
displaced persons;
Also encourages further cooperation between the United Nations and the
7.
Council of Europe in the area of democracy and good governance, and in particular
with regard to the International Day of Democracy, inter alia, through the Venice
Commission and the Forum for the Future of Democracy, and through the
_______________
3
4

2

A/63/228-S/2008/531 and Corr.1, sect. II.G.
Council of Europe Treaty Series, No. 197.

A/RES/63/14

strengthening of links between the United Nations Decade of Education for
Sustainable Development and the Council of Europe Project on Education for
Democratic Citizenship and Human Rights;
Welcomes the signing of a joint declaration between the United Nations
8.
Children’s Fund and the Council of Europe to further cooperation on the protection
and promotion of the rights of the child;
Notes with appreciation the Council of Europe Campaign to Combat
9.
Violence against Women, including Domestic Violence, and calls for increased
cooperation regarding all forms of violence against women, in the framework of the
Secretary-General’s campaign to end violence against women;
10. Recognizes the fruitful cooperation between the United Nations missions
and the field offices of the Council of Europe;
11. Takes note of the contribution of the Council of Europe to the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001
and 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005, and welcomes the entry into force on 1 June
2007 of the Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism 5 and on
1 May 2008 of the Council of Europe Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure
and Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the Financing of Terrorism, 6
and encourages the Council of Europe to promote the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy 7 while protecting human rights;
4F

5F

6F

12. Encourages further cooperation between the two organizations regarding
the fight against transnational organized crime, cybercrime, corruption and moneylaundering, as well as regarding the protection of the rights of victims of crime and
the promotion of human rights and the rule of law in the information society, and
takes note of the contribution of the Council of Europe to the Internet Governance
Forum and the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime 8 and the Additional
Protocol thereto; 9
7F

8F

13. Notes the interaction between the Council of Europe and the Sixth
Committee of the General Assembly and with the International Law Commission,
and encourages cooperation between the Council of Europe and the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group with the purpose of strengthening the rule of law;
14. Encourages further cooperation between the United Nations and its
specialized agencies, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the World Health Organization and the Council of Europe;
15. Reiterates its support for cooperation between the two organizations in
the social field, in particular concerning the protection and promotion of the rights
of persons with disabilities, combating poverty and social exclusion and ensuring
equal access to economic, social and cultural rights for all;
16. Encourages joint action between the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Council of Europe in the context of the
follow-up to the Faro Platform, takes note of the intention of the Council of Europe
_______________
5

Ibid., No. 196.
Ibid., No. 198.
7
Resolution 60/288.
8
Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 185.
9
Ibid., No. 189.
6

3

A/RES/63/14

to work in close cooperation with the Alliance of Civilizations, a forum for
intercultural dialogue created under the auspices of the United Nations, on the basis
of a memorandum of understanding, and welcomes the role of the North-South
Centre;
17. Requests the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the Council
of Europe to combine their efforts in seeking answers to global challenges, within
their respective mandates, and calls upon all relevant United Nations bodies to
support the enhancement of cooperation with the Council of Europe in the areas
mentioned above;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fifth session the
sub-item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of
Europe”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its sixty-fifth session a report on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe in implementation of the present resolution.
37th plenary meeting
3 November 2008

4
