Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

---------to the effect that they should refrain from action running

counter to the main purposes of that Convention;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, in
the light of the comments and observations submitted
by Governments, the study of the question of the
punishment of war crimes and crimes against humanity
and the criteria for determining compensation to the
victims of such crimes, in order to submit a report on
this question to the General Assembly at its twentysixth session.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2713 (XXV). Measures to be taken against nazism
and racial intolerance
The General Assembly,

Reaffirming its faith in the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and abiding by
them,
Recalling its resolutions 2331 (XXII) of 18 December 1967, 2438 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and
2545 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
Noting that nazism, racism, apartheid and other
similar ideologies and practices have in the past repeatedly led to barbarous acts that trouble the (conscience of mankind, and ultimately to war, and still
have the power to threaten universal peace and the
security of nations,
Deeply concerned by the fact that, twenty-five years
after the foundation of the United Nations, the activities
of groups and organizations which are proponents of
the ideologies and practices of nazism, racism and
apartheid are still continuing,
Expressing its deep concern at the fact that not all
the States concerned have taken the measures specified
in the aforementioned resolutions for the complete
prohibition of Nazi and racist organizations and groups
and for their prosecution in the courts,
Welcoming the contribution which the relevant specialized agencies can make to the fight against naZism
and racial intolerance and the measures already taken
by many of them in this respect,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
4 (XXVI) of 4 March 1970,86 in which the Commission noted the tentative nature of the findings on this
subject in the study on racial discrimination prepared
by the Special Rapporteur3 7 and requested the SubCommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to continue its study, placing
special emphasis on measures to be taken to detect and
effectively to prevent contemporary activities that might
be inspired by nazism or any other totalitarian ideology
based on incitement to hatred and racial intolerance,
1. Again resolutely condemns nazism, racism,
apartheid and other totalitarian and colonial ideologies
and practices which are based on terror and racial intolerance;
2. Urges the States concerned to implement without
delay the resolutions of the General Assembly and,
in particular, to take legislative and other effective
me¥ures with a view to the speedy and final eradication of nazism, including its contemporary forms, of
86 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 5 (E/4816), chapter

xxm.

BT E/CN.4/Sub.2/301.

79

racism and of other similar ideologies and practices
based on terror and racial intolerance;
3. Calls upon States during 1971, the International
Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, to take all effective measures to combat
s:ontemporary manifestations of nazism and other forms
of racial intolerance;
4. Decides to retain on its agenda the item concerning measures to be taken against nazism and other
totalitarian ideologies and practices based on incitement to hatred and racial intolerance.
1930th plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
2714 (XXV). Question of the violation of human
rights and fundamental freedom.8, including
policies of racial discrimination and eegre.
gation and of apartheid, in all countries, with
particular reference to colonial and other
dependent countries and Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2440 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 in which, inter alia, it condemned any and
every practice of torture, inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees and prisoners in South African
prisons and in South African police custody duimg
mterrogation and detention,
Recalling its resolution 2505 (XXIV) of 20 November 1969 in which it expressed the firm intention of
the United Nations, acting in co-operation with the
Organization of African Unity, to intensify its efforts
to find a solution to the present grave situation in
southern Africa,
Also recalling Security Council resolutions 264
( 1969) of 20 March 1969 and 269 (1969) of n
August 1969 on Namibia,
Further recalling General Assembly resolution 2547
A (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 relating, inter alia,
to the inhuman and degrading treatment and torture of
political prisoners, detainees and captured freedom
fighters in the Territories ruled by Governments and
rlgimes wedded to the policies of apartheid, radal discrimination and colonialism in southern Africa,
Determined to promote immediate and urgent actiou
with a view to restoring the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the oppressed peoples of southern
Africa,
1. Commends the Ad Hoe Working Group of Experts on the treatment of political prisoners in South
Africii 88 for its valuable report; 39
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggles of the
peoples of southern Africa to oppose the policies of
apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism and to
assert their right to self-determination;
3. Condemns any and every practice of torture and
ill-treatment of prisoners, detainees and captured freedom fighters in Namibia, Southern Rhodesia and the
African Territories under Portuguese domination, as
well as of persons in police custody in these Territories;
88 Established under Commission on Hrlman Rights resolution 2 (XXIII) of 6 March 1967.
89 E/CN.4/984 and Add.1, Add.2/Rev.1, Add.3/Rev.1,
Add.4 and S, Add.6/Rev.1, Add.7/Rev.1, Add.8 and 9, Add.10/
Rev.I, Add.11/Rev.1, Add.12-14, Add.lS/Rev.1, Add.16/Rev.1
and Add. 17-19.
