UNITED NATIONS

CIAL RECORDS
THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

1
I
II,,/ ,,

th

MEETING:

13 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2212) , . , , , , , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , , . . , , . . . . , . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , , , . , , , , , , , , , , . . , , , , . , , . . . , . , . . , , . . . . . , . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (S/13888) . . . . . , . . . . , , , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SjPV.2212

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Sllpp/cment.s of the Ojjkiul Rcc~)~vl.~o$ thy Srcwrity Corrt?c*il, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears 5x in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rl~wlutiotw cozd
Dwisions
(6’ tlw Secrrrity COLIIK*~/. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

----------

2212th MEETING
Held in New Yark on Sunday, 13 April 1980, at 1.15 p.m.
Prcsidrnt:

Mr. Porfirio

MUROZ

LED0

(Mexico).

2,

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Bangladesh, China, France, G&man Democratic Republic, .lamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway,
Philippines,
Portugal,
Tunisia,
Union
of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland,
United States of America,
Zambia.
Provisional

1. Adoption

(irlrerpretatim

j+()m Spa/&h):

3. 1 now Call upon the Secretary-General,
wishes to make a statement,

agenda (S/Agenda/2212)

who

4.

The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The situation in
which has been extremely tense for the
past week, yesterday deteriorated in such a way
that I felt it my duty to inform the Council and to
ask its assistance in bringing to an end the intolerable
aggravation
and harassment which the Force is
experiencing.

of the agenda

UNIFIL,

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-Genera1 on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13888)

Adoption

The PRESIDENT

The Council is meeting today in response to B request
from the rePresentah% of Lebanon, which is contained in a letter dated 10 April addressed to the
President of the Coimcil [S/13885]. The members of
the Council also have before them the special report
of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) [,y1.38&?],

5. My special report to the Council, dated 11 April,
gives the developments in the area up to Friday
11 April.
6. On Saturday 12 April the situation developed as
follows. At 1350 GMT all outgoing telephone lines
from UNIFIL
headquarters were reported to have
been cut. At 1400 GMT small-arms fire started to
impact on the operations building of UNIFIL
headquarters. Shortly thereafter, the firing spread to the
following areas: the main compound, the guard contingent, the French Engineer platoon, Italian helicopter
wing and Norwegian medical company. Between
1623 and 1838 GMT, a total of 85 rounds of artillery,
mortar and tank fire impacted within the UNIFIL
headquarters area, including the medical company
compound. All artillery and mortar fire came from
de .fclcto forces’ positions on the coast north of
Naqoura. Firing stopped at 1840 GMT after UNlFIL
informed the Israel Defence Force Liaison Officer that,
unless the firing ceased, UNIFIL would fire on known
&J filcro forces’ gun positions in the area. The cessatioh of fire coincided with the .arrival of the Israeli
Major-General
Ben Gal at Rosh Hanikra. During the
firing one UNIFIL
soldier suffered injuries.

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 10 April 1980 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13885);
Special report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13888)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative
of Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invitt that representative to participate in the debate without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

7. Following is a summary of damage caused to
UNIFIL
headquarters and property in Naqoura. All
four helicopters were seriously damaged and rendered
unusable by mortar and small-arms fire. The maintenance hangar was partially damaged and about
80 per cent of the helicopter spare Parts Were de1

forces left At-Tiri,
it would withdraw the Force
Reserve from the village. The participants agreed that
all concerned would meet again on the afternoon of
13 April. A further report is expected after that
meeting.

equipstrayed, Ten vehicles, including fire-fighting
ment, were partially damaged by mortar shrapnel.
Two long-range radio sets and some other communication equipment were damaged by artillery and mortar
shrapnel. Serious damage was caused to the camp
plumbing and electrical system, with the auxiliary
power severely damaged.
Fifteen
prefabricated
buildings
were completely
destroyed,
and three
concrete buildings were partially damaged, by mortar
and artillery fire. Serious damage was caused to
some contingent-owned
equipment of headquarters
units and Force reserve supply stores, such as refrigerators, clothing, bedding and personal equipment.
I should add that this material damage is very high
and that the most serious consequence is the loss of
medical evacuation capability by helicopter, because
in fact helicopters provide our only possible means of
evacuating wounded people.

12. On 11 and 12 April UNIFIL
observed the Israel
Defence Force leaving positions near the village of
Kunin, in the Irish battalion area, and west of Markabe
in the enclave. However, UNIFIL is unable to confirm
the extent of the withdrawal, as its freedom of
movement in the enclave is severely restricted.
13. I am extremely conscious of my responsibilities
as regards the United Nations peace-keeping force in
southern Lebanon. I need hardly recall to members of
the Council that it was the Council which in March
1978 made the decision to station that force in the
area [resolutia/z 42.5 (1978)]. Nor do I need to recall
to members of the Council the extreme difficulties and
dangers to which UNIFIL
has been subjected right
from the beginning.

8. At 1255 GMT the Irish battalion-was informed by
the de &to
forces that the latter were holding five
Irish personnel as hostages and, if any UNIFIL
action
in the At-Tiri area led to & facto forces or civilian
casualties, they would take action against the Irish
personnel.

14. My recent report [S/l3691 of 14 December 19791
gives details of the kind of harassment and abuse
to which the Force is exposed daily. I wish to emphasize that throughout
its existence UNIFIL
has
exercised the maximum restraint, even in its right
to use force in self-defence, However, soldiers cannot
be expected indefinitely
to put up with harassment,
abuse and violence in carrying out the duties entrusted
to them by the Council.

9. Between 1255 and 1455 GMT, the Irish battalion
reported a fire-fight between UNIFIL
troops and the
de&-to
forces in the At-Tiri area, which was initiated
by the latter, As a result, one Fijian soldier was
seriously injured and later died. One member of the
de facto forces was observed being taken away,
presumably dead; three wounded and four & fucto
forces personnel were captured; and the village was
taken over by UNIFIL
troops. At 1505 GMT, Major
Haddad sent a message to the Force Commander,
General Erskine, stating that because of the firing
by UNIFIL
troops at At-Tiri, he would not be responsible for the safety of UNIFIL
soldiers or the acts
of reprisal that would be carried out against the Force.

IS. I am also very conscious of the position of the
Government of Lebanon in regard to recent developments, a position that has been clearly stated by the
representative of Lebanon, Ambassador Tukni, in his
letter to the President of the Council of 10 April
[S/13885] <
16. I wish to state here my warm appreciation to
the Governments which have provided the troops for
the Force and for their support in these very difficult
times. I also wish to state my admiration and gratitude
to the Commander,
the officers and the men of the
Force for their steadfast conduct in the face of very
great difficulties. I am also appreciative of the efforts
made by a number of Governments in recent days to
bring their influence to bear on the situation in such a
way as to de-escalate the recent very dangerous
developments.

10. At 2103 GMT the Irish battalion reported that
they had lost radio contact with one of their positions
in the enclave. A United Nations observation post in
the enclave later reported that the four Irish soldiers
of that position had been taken away by the de,frrcto
forces. At 2116 GMT Major Haddad met with the
Force Commander in Naqoura and since that time
the Irish battalion area has been quiet but very tense.
11, A meeting between UNIFIL,
Israeli and dc fucto
forces personnel was held at UNIFIL
headquarters
at Naqoura at 2216 local time on 12 April. The Force
Commander,
Israeli General Ben Gal and Major
Haddad were present. General Ben &il proposed that
prisoners be exchanged, that UNIFIL
remove the
Force Reserve from At-Tiri and that it permit Major
Haddad to recover his damaged half-track from AtTiri. UNIFIL
agreed that as soon as all de j’ucto

Litlio

in United

Nations.

New

York

17. In conclusion, I hope that the members of the
Council will consider what can be done to bring this
situation under control and to make it possible to
proceed with the full implementation
of resolution 425
(1978) and other relevant resolutions.

00300

83-hl462-August

I’)%-2.425
