UNmEti

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-F0

RECORDS
URTH

YEAR

2149’”

MEETING:

NEW

COUNCIL

14 JUNE 1979

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2149)
. . . . . . . . . ..*...............
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the MiddIe East:
Letter &ted 30 May 1979 from the Permanent Representative of.Lebanon to the
Uhited Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13356);
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(S/13384) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i........

1
1

wPv.2149

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with fgures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. ..) are normally published in
cparterly Suppkments of the Of&l
Rem& of the Seam@ Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is
given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resohdions and Decisions of the
Security COW&! The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

..,.
I

>

s

I..
-.

.,.
c

,

.

.

.

.

,

.,,.

2149tb MEETING
Held hi New York on Thursday, 14 June 1979, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Mr. ScheItema (NetherIan&) and Mr. EI-Choufi (Syrian Arab
RqubIic) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
CounciI chamber, and Mr. AbaW Rahman (Pa&wine Liberation Orgrmizaion) took theplace reservedforhim at the& of
the counciI chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

2 The PRESIDENT (rWrpretationjiom
Russian): Mem:
hers have before them a draft resolution contained 3 document S/13392, which was prepared during consultations
with Council members.

Provkional agenda (S/Agendd2149)

3. Mr. KAISER (Bangladesh): Mr. President, please accept our warmest congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency. We are confident that under your experienced and able leadership we will be able to fulfil our
responsibilities promptly and effectively. I take this opportunity also to reaffirm the close ties of friendship and cooperation that have always existed between our two
countries. It is our oorjviction that our relations will continue to be strengthened to our mutual benefit and
satisfaction.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter &ted 30 May 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13356);
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/13384)

4. I also wish to expressour gratitude to your predecessor,
Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal, for the dedicated manner in which he conducted our affairs during the
month of May, with infinite patience, skill and impartiality.
He has won the sincere admiration of us all.

The meeting ivas called to order at 4.30 pm.

Adoptionof the agenda
Tie agenda was adopted.

5. Southern Lebanon continues to remain a scene of violence. The mandate entrusted to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) under resolution 425 (1978) to
augment its military crepibility and control of the zone, to
promote a return to normalcy and to restore the effective
authority of Lebanon in the arca is yet to be fulfilled at the
end of the Force’s third term. The situation obtaining today
constitutes a serious challenge to the continuance of the
peace-keeping operation, to the capacity of the Security
Council to respond to Charter provisions regarding peacekeeping and to the moral and political conscience of the
Governments and peoples of the world.

ThesituationintheMiddleEask
Letter dated 30 May 1979 ti-om tlk Permrurent Reps
sent&e of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13356),
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force ln Lebanon (S/13384)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interp&ation from Russian): In
accordance with decisions taken at our previous meetings
[2146&2248th meetings], I invite the representative of
Lebanon to take a place at the Council table, I invite the
representatives of Egypt, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Jordan,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Netherlands and Syrian Arab
Republic to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber, and I invite the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organisation to take the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.

6. No one can doubt that the hard core of the problem
remains Israel’s intransigence about co-operating with the
United Nations. Successive reports of the Secretary-General have made that fact clear. In his latest report, the
Secretary-General reiterates that:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tu&i(Z&arwn) took
aploce at the Council table, Mr. Elaraby&yppt), Mr. Shemfrani (Iran), MI: Kea&g (Irekzru& Mr. Bhun (lsraeo, Mr.
Shamma (Jor&n), Mr. Kikhia (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),

“Continued representations to the Israeli authorities
have as yet failed to achieve the change of position
required for a significant improvement in the deployment
of UNIFIL.” [S/13384, para. 35.1

I

1
.,^

7. So much, then, for Israel’s commitment to cooperating
with UNIFIL. Not only has such co-operation been lacking,
despite painstaking efforts by all concerned, including successivePresidents of the Council, but opposition, resistance
and persistent harassment of UNIFIL has been deliberately
incited and escalated in a consistent patternof behaviour.
This makes one feel that the real intent of Israel’s professed
willingness to co-operate is to erode and truncate the
UNIFIL mandate while supporting its continued presence.
8. The objective of restoring the legitimate authority of
Lebanon up to its internationally recognii
border with
Israel also remains impeded and unreal&d. We can only
note with gratification the efforts pursued by the Govemment of Lebanon in operation
with UNIFIL to restore
its military and legal presence in the south in accordance
with the phased programme of activities initiated under
resolution 444 (1979). That, too, has seen but limited progress as a result of Israel% determined opposition.
9. The Secretary-General’s report has also highlighted
the reaffirmation by the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization of their commitment not to initiate
action from inside the UNIFIL area of operation or to
shell targets of the Israeli Defence Forces or illegal Haddad forces from Lebanese territory unless attacked first.
Moreover, the PLO has also reconfirmed its decision to
evacuate all armed forces from villages and towns in
Southern Lebanon and to remove its o&es from Tyre.
Those are welcome developments in an otherwise
depressing situation.
10. We listened with attention to the response of the
Israeli representative on Tuesday last [2Ii7rh meerixg]
deriding this welcome announcement by the PLO and
perhaps by this-although
we hope not-preparing
the
case for further bombing by air and sea of innocent
civilians-men,
women and children.

11. Lebanon remains seemingly a pawn whose sovereignty and territorial integrity-can de respected or violated at Israel’s whim. ,Over the past months, Israel has
launched a series of predatory attacks across the face of
Lebanon by land, sea and air, shelling its ports, raiding its
northern areas, launching an armed invasion across its
southern frontier and aiding and abetting its own henchmen in Southern Lebanon in an indiscriminate spate of
blood-letting and violence. It seems to us a supreme irony
that, in spite of such repeated acts of aggression, Israel
insists on reiterating its commitment to respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and
charges Beirut with not responding to Israel’s offer of
peaceful negotiations. It is even more ironical that Israel
should take refuge in international law to rationalize its
actions and should with verbal sophistry subvert and
interpret international law to suit its own purpose.
12. It is true that the situation in Lebanonis the inevitable fall-out of the Middle East problem. It is also true that
the heart of the problem is the restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian pe.ople and the vacating of
territories illegally occupied by Israel in 1967. Israel’s
continued occupation of lands acquired by force is unjust
and illegal. Israel’s belated claim to permanent occupa-

tion on the basis of andent legitimacy is a travesty of
international law. Israel has dispossessed the true inhabitants of the land; it has curtailed and deprived the
rights, possessions and resources of those who remain. It
has with intensity sought to root out and to exterminate
those driven into exile in neighbouring lands, particularly
in Lebanon, violating, inter da, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that country. The world community must judge who .are the terrorists and who are the
terrorized. It is in this context that the Council cannot but
take note of the moving statement of the PLO representative on Tuesday in this Council when’ he said:
. . .neace’is our goal, our objective; we struggle for it,
we want it-for we i&e not a bunch of masochi%. We do
not enjoy suffering and we do not enjoy dispersion; we do
not enjoy exile either. . . tWe want to live together as
Palestinii people; we want to be allowed the opportunity to build a nation, to reconstruct our national identity,
to create a culture, put it together and establish normal
relations with everyone in the world.” [lb& bara. 163.1
‘4

Significantly, the PLO ‘representative went on to spell out
what he considered the essentials for peace. He stated:
. . .those conditions are: total Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied territories; recognition of the national
rights of the Palestinian people, which include the,right to
selfdetermination and national independence; and a just
solution of the Palestinii
refugee problem, in accordance with the resolutions of the United Nations pertinent to the refugee-problem. When those conditions are
met, peace can be established very soon thereafter.”
[Ibid. para. 164.1
_’
6‘

13. It is in the context of those remarks that we now-turn
to the directions in which the Security Council should pre
teed. We fully concur with the Secretary-General that, despite obstacles strewn in its path, UNIFIL has performed an
indispensable function and has contributed decisively
towards restoring calm and maintaining peace and stability
in Southern Lebanon and, indeed, in the region as a whole.
We believe that it is necessary to retain the UNIFIL presence, not least because its withdrawal would have ,serious
repercussions for the people of the area. It would also
.challenge the credibility of the United Nations concerning
its ability effectively to deal with issues relating to intemational peace and security.
14. Nevertheless the decision to retain UNIFIL is not a
very happy one. Virtually all Member States and the
Secretary-General have cautioned against the assumption
of an automatic renewal, particularly in view of imperfections and of advantages that accrue to Israel. UNIFIL
cannot be taken for granted by any party. Its role must not
.be reduced to a limited preventive one, or to one of preserving in perpetuity a state of nebulous’suspended peace, The
Council has a clear responsibility to promote UNIFIL’s
competence and its capacity to fulfil its defined tasks. In this
connexion, Bangladesh fully endorses the recommendation
of the Secretary-General for a six-month extension of the
mandate of UNIFIL, as also the views expressed in paragraph 42 of his report regarding the essential conditions for
its fulfilment.

15. No one can usefully deny that the UNIFIL mandate
has been obstructed or be ignorant as to who is primarily
responsible. In the absence of the combined will and
support of all members for stronger remedial action,
despite the deteriorating situation, the Council must
pursue the only remaining remedy, that of effectively
applying pressure on Israel to make it fulfil its obligations
and comply with its commitment to co-operate with
UNIFIL. We are aware of the past efforts pursued in this
direction by those who have influence on Israel, and also
of those of the troop-contributing
countries acting individually and collectively. We welcome these bilateral
efforts, though they have not borne much fruit.

ist PLO injected itself in large numbers into Lebanon and
set up a State within a State there, particularly in the area
of the south of that country, which was dubbed Fatahland. Then, during the civil war that began in 1974, Syria
exploited the opportunity to invade Lebanon on the pretext of aiding the Government of Lebanon against the
PLO and of restoring peace. Having ruthlessly massacred
Palestinians in Tel al-Zaatar and elsewhere, it then turned
upon the Christians and in the process not only laid the
country bare by also tore it apart.
22. The members of the Council are more than familiar
with these facts, and there is no need to elaborate upon
them here. What should be stressed, however, is that the
situation now prevailing in the south of Lebanon is a
direct outcome of the situation in other parts of that
deeply troubled country; and in particular at Beirut and
its environs.

16. In the final analysis, however, the Council itself
cannot be bypassed, and it must exercise its combined
weight and jurisdiction in consonance with its responsibilities under the Charter. Bangladesh is committed to
supporting all measures that will lead to an effective
progression and the realization of the aims spelled out in
the resolutions of the Council. To that end we are willing
to co-operate in any move that can successfully contribute to this objective, including the adoption of measures
laid down in the Charter.

23. When the Council met in March 1978 to deal with
the question of Southern Lebanon, it was well aware of
those facts. Thus the Council took cognizance of the
problem of Lebanon as a whole, fully understanding that
the presence of thousands of armed PLO terrorists and
the presence of up to one third of the Syrian army on
Lebanese soil constituted major barriers to the establishment of international peace and security and to the reassertion thereafter of Lebanon’s authority over its
territory. With those considerations in mind, in its resolution 425 (1978), the Council called for

17. In conclusion, I wish to express our deep gratitude
to the Secretary-General and his representatives for their
consistent and devoted efforts and to General Erskine,
the Commander of UNIFIL, and the troops in the field
under his command, who have performed with exemplary heroism under difficult and humiliating circumstances, not hesitating to make the supreme sacrifice. In
that regard, we have already taken specific cognizance of
the efforts undertaken by the Lebanese Government to
reassert its presence and authority in the area under the
most adverse circumstances. But we believe that it is our
duty to continue to assist and support Lebanon during
this time of crisis until the final restoration of its full
authority in the area.

“strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence”-and
I stress political
independence-“ of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries”.
24. UNIFIL was established not only for the purpose of
confirming the withdrawal of the Israeli Defence Forces,
but also for the purpose of “restoring international peace
and security and assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area”.
In order to achieve that purpose, UNIFIL was ordered to
prevent the infiltration of armed personnel into the areas
under its control, an instruction aimed at preventing the
PLO from returning to the region-that
being a necessary condition for the establishment of international
peace and security.

18. The PRESIDENT
(interprerution from Russian): I
thank the representative of Bangladesh for the kind
words he addressed to me. I thank him also for his remarks
concerning the friendly relations existing between his
country and mine.
19. The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
a statement.

25. In recent months we have witnessed a distinct
tendency to ignore essential elements of resolution 425
(1978). Indeed, the truncation of the UNIFIL mandate
may even be inferred from the subsection entitled
“Guidelines and terms of reference” which has appeared
in the last three reports prepared by the SecretaryGeneral in anticipation of the periodic renewals of the
UNIFIL
mandate. On that interpretation,
UNIFIL’s
function would be confined (a) to confirming Israel’s
withdrawal-which
was done on 13 June 1978; I refer
members to the Secretary-General’s report of the same
date [S/Z2620/,4d0j-and
(b) to the establishment and
maintenance of an area of operation.

20. Mr. BLUM (Israel): This is the eighth time in the
course of the last 15 months that the Security Council has
discussed the situation in Southern Lebanon. However,
thus far we have been treated to a very selective reading of
the situation. As on previous occasions, an undisguised
attempt has been made by some participants to gloss over
the real issues relating to Lebanon and instead to focus
their comments on Israel almost exclusively, in a highly
mischievous and diversionary manner.
21. All of us here are painfully aware that Lebanon’s
problems did not begin with the events that led to the
establishment of UNIFIL and are by no means confined
to the area of its operation. In their present form, Lebanon’s problems began in the early 1970s,-when the terror-

26. Somehow, attention seems to have been diverted
from the centrality of the other inseparable components
3

of the UNIFIL mandate, which are, tirst,.the restoration
of international peace and security-and, I should point
out, “international
peace and security”. is a two-way
street-and, secondly, assistance to the Government of
Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority
in the area-that is, only after restoring international
peace and security.

during the period under review. The majority of those
incidents involved attempts at infiltration of armed personnel into the IJNIFIL area of operation pthich were
successfully prevented by UNIFIL.. . . The most serious
of those incidents occurred on 3 February in the Fijian
battalion headquarters area at Qana, which resulted in
the death of two Fijian soldiers and the wounding of four
others. On that occasion, four Norwegian medical personnel aboard a IJNIFIL helicopter that had been dispatched to evacuate one of the wounded Fijian soldiers
were also killed as the craft accidentally hit an overhead
electric cable and crashed.”

27. Israel’s concern in these matters derives from a
direct and vital security interest. What happens in Southem Lebanon directly affects the daily lives and safety of
our people who live in the towns and villages throughout
Israel, and in particular in the north of our country. The
speedy return of PLO terrorists to Southern Lebanon as a
base for operations against civilian targets in Israel, as it
had been for several years in the past, is therefore a matter
of deep concern.

The list given by the Secretary-General is, as he himself
indicated, by no means complete.
33. In the light of such provocations by the PLO, the
IJNIFIL spokesman issued the following statement on 23
May:

28. As I pointed out in my letter of 9 May 1979
[S/1331& the PLO made no attempt to hide its intentions. Shortly after UNIFIL was established, Abu Iyyad,
one of Yasser Arafat’s leading henchmen, indicated in an
interview with the Swiss newspaper Tages Anzeiger in
April 1978 that the PLO would return to its bases in
Southern Lebanon.

“‘A significant increase iii the number of attempts by
various groups of armed elements, in particular those in
the Tyre pocket, to harass UNIFIL personnel and to
infiltrate into the IJNIFIL area of aperation has become
a source of growing concern to the Force’s command.
This disturbing trend has manifested itself recently in
frequent ambushes laid to UNIFIL vehicles on the road
linking Naqoura, the Force’s headquarters, to Tyre. Such
totally unwarranted and irresponsible acts, in addition to
material losses, have led to increased tension in the area
which may result in unnecessary fatalities.

29. The PLO moved quickly to carry out its threat, and
within months of the establishment of UNIFIL, about
2,000 of its armed terrorists found their way south of the
River Litani. Some 1,500 of them are located in and
around the area of Tyre, which reaches within eight miles
of Israel-an area which was originally conceived as part
of the IJNIFIL area of operation and which UNIFIL was
prevented from entering by PLO terrorists who did
not hesitate to use armed force and to kill and wound
UNIFIL soldiers. To make matters worse, there are also
today several hundred other armed terrorists inside the
UNIFIL area of operation, whom the Force allows to
receive supplies on a regular basis.

“The UNIFIL command is well aware of the fact that
these armed elements are encouraged by their conviction
that disciplined UNIFIL troops will not use arms except
in the strictest sense of self-defence.”
34. In parallel, there has been a distinct and serious escalation of the exchanges of fire within the area under UNIFIL
control. The .gravest of those incidents involved heavy
exchanges of fire over a period extending from 26 to 30 May
between the PLO and the local Lebanese forces in the south.
As the Secretary-General pointed out, both in his statement
before the Council on 3 1 May [21462/r meeting] and again in
paragraph 30 of his latest report, most of the firing was
initiated by the PLO.

30. Moreover, as indicated in paragraph 21 of the
Secretary-General’s latest report, in recent months there
have been increased efforts by PLO terrorists to infiltrate
the area under IJNIFIL’s control. The Secretary-General
speaks of “40 major infiltration attempts involving 140
armed elements*‘--“ armed elements*’ being the euphemistic term adopted here for PLO terrorists. Those involved
“were escorted out of the area’*-presumably still in possession of their weapons and no doubt to try their luck on
another occasion.

35. In tbis connexion, a joint communiqu& was issued a
few days ago by the PLO and its Lebanese allies regarding
their alleged redeployment in Southern Lebanon. As I
observed in my statement before the Council two days ago
[21471h meering], the practical implications of that communiquC are virtually meaningless and there can be little
doubt that its sole purpose is to serve as a smoke-screen for
continued PLO violence both within the UNIFIL area of
operation and across the border with Israel.

31. This is by no means the end of the story, for there are
another 10,000 to 12,000 armed terrorists in areas of
Lebanon north of the Litani.
32. In the first few months of UNIFIL’s existence, the
PLO maintained a relatively low profile, especially with
regard to the Force. However, as the Secretary-General
indicated in paragraph 19 of his report of 19 April 1979
[S/232.54 and then stated emphatically in paragraph 24 of
his latest report:

36. Let me remind members of the Council that in the’past
six months, and in particular since the signing of the IsraelEgypt peace treaty on 26 March 1979, the PLO has once
again activated Southern Lebanon as a base for indiscriminate attackson civilian centres in northern Israel. In my
letter of 9 May, I gave an extensive list of terrorist attacks
launched by the PLO by land and sea from Lebanese territory against civilian centres in the north of Israel.

“The number of incidents involving Palestinian and
Lebanese armed elements and UNIFIL has increased
4
\

---_

.

37. ‘..I shah not go into’the gory and brutal details. These
have been described in the letters submitted by me, as the
worst -of the atrocities that have occurred. I shall only
remind members that in the past six months some 20 major
outrages have been’perpetrated or attempted against Israel
by PLO criminals setting out from Lebanon.
,
38. Moreover, as pointed out by the Secretary-General at
the beginning of the present debate and in his latest report,
those attacks by land and sea from Lebanese territory are
not isolated acts. They are part of a much wider pattern and
must be seen as such. Hence, during the same period, that is
in the past six months, there have been over 30 other major
acts of PLO terror in Israel.

‘blatantly used-& a cover behind which PLO terrorists can
shelter whii planning and launching their attacks and then
hide .their tracks after carrying out their criminal acts. It is
” equally ‘difkult
to grasp how in the light of this wholly
represensible record of direct ,challenges to and abuse of
UNIFIL, the PLO can be portrayed here in a favourable
light and requested merely to continue its over-all cooperation as an essential condition for the effective discharge by UNIFIL of its duties. What is really called for is a
forthright condemnation of the PLO’s flagrant violation of
the UNIFIL mandate.
45. As I said in my statement in the Council on 19 January
1979 [21132/r meeting], a new element in the PLO’s tactics
has emerged in recent months. Previously, they hid behind a
shield of refugees and villagers. Now they are trying to hide
also behind a shield of United Nations peace-keeping forces. That surely is wholly inadmissible and can only be
regarded as what it is-the total abuse of international
peace-keeping.

39. In sum, the criminal activities of the PLO over the past
six months have resulted in 19 fatalities and the injury of 232
people in Israel. All the casualities have been civilians, and
many of them children.
40. The PLO, as is its wont, has openly boasted of its
responsibility for all those acts. Moreover, in almost every
case it was through its news agency at Beirut and on its radio
station broadcasting from Lebanon that the PLO bragged
of this responsibility. Members of the Council will find
ample evidence of this phenomenon with regard to the
outrages in my letters of the past six months circulated as
ofEcial documents.

46. In the attempt on the guest house at Ma’alot on 13
January 1979, reported in my letter of 14 January [S/I3028J,
it was clear that the three PLO terrorists involved crossed
through UNIFIL lines on the way to carrying out their
criminal act. The same holds true for a group of six PLO
terrorists encountered and eliminated on 16 April by the
Israeli Defence Forces near the village of Zar’it near the
northern border of Israel, as reported in my letter of 19
April [S/13261]. The background to the PLO terrorist
attack on kibbutz Manara on the border with Lebanon on
9 May, reported in my letter of the same date [S/13312] is
equally disquieting. In that incident a patrol of the Israeli
Defence Forces wounded and captured one terrorist. He
disclosed that the group had set out from Tyre. They
entered the UNIFIL area of operation from the north and
proceeded through the UNIFIL
lines to the village of
Shaqra which is well within the UNIFIL area of operation.
At the village they received weapons and instructions about
their operation before crossing the border into Israel. Their
orders were to carry out the mass murder of Israeli civilians.
After an exchange of fire with the patrol of the Israeli
Defence Forces, the terrorists who were not wounded fled
to Lebanon in the direction of Mis alJebe1 and from there
they backtracked to Shaqra.

41. All the recent incidents have one thing in common.
They aim at the mass murder of civilians. That has been the
consistent pattern of the PLO’s cowardly activities throughout its existence. This is not the work ofa national liberation
organization, as the PLO incongruously purports to be. It is
the work of international criminals of the worst kind bent
on the indiscriminate mass murder of civilians. That is the
true character and the true face of the terrorist PLO.
42. Moreover, the PLO has also stressed its intention of
continuing its criminal activities, particularly in connexion
with the signing of the Israel-Egypt peace treaty on 26
March 1979. Thus, on 12 March, Yasser Arafat was quoted
by the Associated Press at Beirut as saying:
“Carter, Begin and Sadat should understand that we
will bum everything.. . . Our people will continue to fuel
the torch of the revolution with rivers of blood.”

47. Peace-keeping operations can be a double-edged
sword. They can contribute towards creating the political
climate for the making of peace and for the advancement of
international security. But there is also a danger that they
can be used, or rather abused, by those bent on subverting
peace, while behind the cover of the peace-keeping Forces
the ground is being prepared for resumed hostilities and
further threats to international peace and security. That
danger must be recognized and all effective steps must be
taken to avert it.

On 2 April, Farouk Khaddoumi, another of Arafat’s henchmen, openly said in an interview with the Kuwaiti newspaper ai-Ra’i al-‘Amm that the PLO would’ escalate its
activities against Israel.
43. That then is a true reflection of the PLO’s intentionsdespite its so-called “renewed commitment” not to shell
Israeli Defence Forces or the local Lebanese force targets
“unless attacked first” and not to launch attacks across the
Lebanese border. As I said in my statement on Tuesday, the
PLO was in fact in the process of violating that “commitment” in Southern Lebanon at precisely the same time as it
was supposedly “rea!Eling”
it through United Nations
channels at Beirut.

48. In striking at the terrorist bases from which the PLO
murder gangs launched their criminal missions against the
civilian population in Israel, my Government is exercising
its inherent right of self-defence, a right enjoyed by every
sovereign State, a right which has found expression in Article 51 of the Charter.

44. It is diflicult to grasp how some members of the
Council can ignore the fact that UNIFIL is now being

5

49. I must reiterate that, statements to the contrary notwithstanding, a State’s right to take the measures’necessary
to halt and to foil terroristic activities emanating from
across its boundaries is a principle well rccognized by iriternational law and international practice alike. What is more,
the very toleration by a State on its territory of armed bands
engaged in hostile activities against another State is considered a breach of international law on the part of the State
tolerating the presence of such bands on its territory, irrespective of whether it is unwilling or unable to curb such
activities. In Oppenheim’s authoritative treatise on intemational law, it is explicitly stated that:

considered the Armistice Agreement in force by concluding
a series .of agreements with the terrorist PLO that were
totally incompatible with its basic obligations under the
Armistice Agreement.
51.’ We have heard much about the local-Lebanese forces in the south. While Israel is not responsible for their
attitudes and actions, it cannot be indifferent to the fate
of the villagers in the south. The PLO terror is aimed
equally at them, and they act accordingly in what they
judge to be a matter of their own survival. What seems to
be forgotten is that the local forces in the south are
Lebanese, and that their perceptions and responses are
conditioned in the context of Lebanon as a whole. They
are in continual contact with the north. Day by day, they
receive detailed reports about what is happening there.
That is what influences and determines their actions. This
is acknowledged in paragraph 39 of the SecretaryGeneral’s latest report, and even more explicitly in his
report of 12 January 1979 which states that:

“. . .States are under a duty to prevent and suppress
such subversive activity against foreign Governments as
assumes the form of armed hostile expeditions, or
attempts to commit common crimes against life or
propcrty.“1
Another foremost authority on international
Kelsen, stated in very similar terms:

law, Hans

“. . .States are obliged by general international law to
prevent certain acts injurious to other States from being
committed on their territories, and if prevention is not
possible, to punish the delinquents and force them to
repair the damage caused by the delict. Such injurious
acts are, for example, . . . hostile expeditions organized in
the territory of a State and directed against the territorial
integrity of a foreign State.“2

. . . the situation in Southern Lebanon cannot be
divorced from the situation in the rest of the country
and to a lesser extent in the region as a whole. This
factor unquestionably plays an important role in determining the attitude of various parties to UNIFIL, an
attitude which is strongly influenced by their perception and interpretation of developments in Lebanon
and in the region as a whole. It is important to
remember that UNIFIL is not acting in isolation in
.Southern Lebanon.” [S/Z3026, para. 37.1

50. In the course of the present debate, the representative
of Lebanon has repeatedly relied on the Israeli-Lebanese
General Armistice Agreement of 23 March 1949.3 However, as I have already pointed out, that Agreement was
brought to an end by Lebanon in June 1967. That conclusion is warranted by the fact that the Lebanese attack on
Israel during the Six Day War of 1967 wasin the nature of a
“material breach” of the Agreement, article I, paragraph 2,
of which had provided that:

52. To detach the question of Southern Lebanon from
the situation in Lebanon as a whole will not enhance the
cause of peace. It is Israel’s view that peace cannot be
restored in Lebanon while a Syrian occupation army
trains its gun-sights on the civilian population of Beirut
and while armed PLO terrorists are allowed free rein on
Lebanese soil.

“

53. As we heard from the representative of Syria this
morning [2148th meeting], the Syrian army of occupation
continues to masquerade in Lebanon as an “Arab deterrent force”. But, as is well known, all the other national
contingents of that force, whose task it was to cover up
the true character of the Syrian occupation, have since
been withdrawn. The Syrian representative can thus no
longer hide behind such a transparent fig leaf.

“No aggressive action by the armed forces-land,
sea, or air-of
either Party shall be undertaken,
planned, or threatened against the people or the armed
forces of the other.”
And it is an accepted principle of international law, which
has now also found expression in the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, that:

54. Israel appeals to the Security Council to face the
fundamental problems of Lebanon with realism. Until
the nettle of restoring international peace and security is
grasped, there can be no real prospect of restoring Lebanese sovereignty in its international boundaries.

“A material breach of a bilateral treaty by one of the
parties entitles the other to invoke the breach as a ground
for terminating the treaty or suspending its operation in
whole or in part.“’
I might add that subsequent to June 1967 the Government
of Lebanon also repeatedly demonstrated that it no longer
’ L. Oppenheim,
pacht. cd. (London,

55. Israel would like to pay a tribute to the Commander
of UNIFIL, Major-General Emmanuel A. Erskine, and
his staff, as well as to the soldiers of all ranks serving with
UNIFIL
in the most arduous of circumstances. Israel
opposes without qualification any firing on or shelling of
UNIFIL. As Prime Minister Begin said in the Knesset on
7 May:

International Luw: A Treatise. 8th ed., H. LautcrLongman’s),

vol. I. pp. 292-293.

2Hans Kelsen, Principles of International
Lmv. 2nd ed., Robert W.
i’ucker. ed. (New York, Holt, Rinehart and Winston. Inc). pp. 205-206.

’ Oflciai Records ofthe Security Council, Fourth Year, SpecialSupplemerit No, 4.
’ OJicial Records of the United Nations Conference on the Luw of
Treaties, Documents of the Conference (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.70.V.Q

document

A/CONF.39/27.

“Israel wishes to co-operate with UNIFIL.
The
Force fulfils an important function in Lebanon. No

art. 60.

6

injury must be caused to the men of UNIFIL. They
must not be placed under siege. They must not be
shelled. They must not be firedat.”
56. Israel would like to take this opportunity to express
its condolences to the families of UNIFIL soldiers of all
nationalities. who have lost their lives in Southern
Lebanon in recent months and to convey its wishes for a
speedy recovery to the offtcers and men of UNIFIL who
have been wounded during this period.
57. Let me repeat that the position of Israel vis-a-vis
Lebanon remains consistent: Israel supports the national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized boundaries. The Government
of Israel wants peace with Lebanon, and made a formal
proposal to that effect last month. On 31 May, and again
on 12 June, in this chamber, I drew the attention of the
Lebanese representative to that proposal to make peace
between our two nations. The Government of Israel still
awaits the response of Lebanon to that proposal. A quotation from an American newspaper, as offered by the
Lebanese representative two days ago, cannot be
regarded as an adequate response.
58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Ireland, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
59. Mr. KEATING (Ireland): Mr. President, first of all
may I thank you and the other members of the Council
for your courtesy in giving me this opportunity to express
my country’s views to the Council today. May I also
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and wish it every success in
its deliberations under your distinguished leadership.
60. This has been a very wide-ranging debate. It is my
purpose not to extend its limits but to concentrate on one
particular aspect of the matter which has been raised by
the Secretary-General in his report on UNIFIL for the
five-month period ending on 8 June and the present role
and future of the Force. It is not usual for the Irish
representative to seek to intervene in the debates before
the Council, but we feel we have a particular interest in
making a contribution on this matter because of the
involvement of an Irish contingent in the Force we are
now discussing.
61. In making this statement, my delegation does not
intend to minimize or to show any lack of appreciation
for the very great problems and difticulties that face all
the participants in the Southern Lebanon tragedy. We
know that they are all faced with serious and weighty
choices which affect inevitably the future of all they hold
dear. Any comments we make are made with a view to
being constructive and are made with that particular
restraint which we feel our involvement in a United
Nations peace-keeping operation in the area imposes.
62. The Government and people of Ireland have been
particularly moved by the tragedy and suffering of the
people of Lebanon in recent years. We have felt a fellow

feeling for the inhabitants of small countries entangled in a
geopolitical ‘situation which imposed difliculties and hard
choices. Hence we welcomed Security Council resolution
425 (1978) of March 1978 which seemed to us to offer all
participantsan honourable solution to the entangled situation which had arisen and which contained concrete and
constructive proposals to bring about the withdrawal of the
Israeli Defence Forces from Southern Lebanon and to
reestablish the authority of the legitimate Government of
Lebanon in that area. The achievement of those two objectives, we hoped, would bring peace and security to the
people of Southern Lebanon and contribute to the attainment of the same peace and security by the peoples of all the
States in the region.
63. We were encouraged by the fact that there appeared to
exist the requisite goodwill on the part of those involved in
the conflict in the area. The Government of Irelandin May
1978 agreed to contribute a contingent to the Force on the .
understanding that all sides would cooperate fully with
UNIFIL as it carried out the mandate entrusted to itby the
Council, and we accepted the necessity for it. We had no
direct interests or involvement in the region, but as a small
country we felt it a duty to respond to a request from the
Secretary-General to contribute to a peace-keeping operation established by the Council on behalf of the intemational community as a whole. This then is the basis on which
we made an Irish contingent available for service with
UNIFIL.
64. My Government is now extremely concerned at the
latest report of the Secretary-General which indicates quite
clearly that the requisite co-operation has not been forthcoming from all the parties to the contlict. On the contrary,
the report catalogues a history of harassment and intimidation of the soldiers of UNIFIL by various armed groups.
Those armed groups, equipped by external forces, have to
date prevented UNIFIL from deploying fully in its defined
area of operation and have intimidated, harassed and
directly attacked members of the Force.
65. Although UNIFIL has been harassed by both sides to
the present conflict, the most immediate threat continues to
come from the defacto forces of Major Haddad which have
been supplied and equipped by Israel. As is clear from the
Secretary-General’s report, these forces have prevented the
deployment of UNIFIL and have harassed and attacked
both the members of UNIFIL and the local Lebanese civilian population.
66. All the States Members of this Organimtion must, I am
sure, express the utmost concern at this situation. For the
troop-contributing States, this problem is a most immediate
one. Our Governments have contributed troops to the United Nations Force in order to help to bring peace to that
troubled region. We feel that all Member States have an
obligation to co-operate with the Force which is attempting
to implement the mandate entrusted to it by the world
community on their behalf. This obligation is particularly
great in a case where a State clearly has very considerable,.
influence over, and indeed supplies, the forces which harass
,United Nations forces.
67. The objectives of UNIFIL were set out in resoluti&
425 (1978) as confirming the withdrawal of Israeli Defence
.-*..~.

Forces from Southern Lebanon, restoring imernational
peace and security and assisting the Government of
Lebanon in ensuring the return of its effective authority in
the area.

and military personnel to tne area and, on the other: a :
consolidation of the cease-fire, an end to the harassment by ‘the defacro forces and further deployment by UNIFIL in
the border area, particularly around the headquarters of.
UNIFIL at Naqoura. My Government ishappy to note
from the Secretary-General’s report that part of the programme has been achieved, namely, the deployment of
Lebanese civilian, administrative and military personnel in
the UNIFIL area and agrees that these represent important
steps towards the restoration of the Lebanese .Govemment’s authority. We should lie to express our thanks to
the Government of Lebanon in this regard. However, my
Government must express its utmost concern that, in relation to the other part of the phased programme of
activities-to quote the Secretary-General-“little
progress
has been achieved so far” [S/13384, para. 203. This is despite much high-level diplomatic activity by various well-.
disposed parties.

68. The Force has confirmed that the Israeli Defence
Forces have withdrawn from Southern Lebanon. However,
my Government regrets the decision then made to hand
over many positions to the defucro forces of Major Haddad. We note that the Secretary-General’s report indicates
that a total of 291 border violations by the Israeli Defence
Forces have been witnessed by UNIFIL over the past five
months. My Government views this situation with the
utmost concern.
69. The Force in its initial stages has been successful in
ensuring peace and security for the inhabitants in its area of
operation and in ensuring the return of a level of normality
in Southern Lebanon. This has been perhaps the greatest
achievement of the Force. However, the continuing shelling, harassment and intimidation of both UNIFIL and the
civilii population by the defano forces in recent months
has led to a deterioration in this regard. I am sure that all
Member States must deplore and condemn the recent shellings which have forced much of the civilian population in
the area to flee their homes, as reported in paragraph 26 of
the Secretary-General’s report.

73. I have outlined in some detail the relative successesof
the Force which, I believe, are often too easily overlooked.
UNIFIL has been a force for stability in the region and has
achieved much in that regard. It has, -in our view, acted
impartially and to the best of its ability to implement the
mandate with which it has been entrusted by the world
community. I believe that no one can seriously question its
impartiality or its activities since its inception. There is,
however, as outlined by the Secretary-General, an urgent
need for progress to be made towards the complete fullilment of the UNIFIL mandate, in the first instance by a
cessation of harassment by the &facto forces of both the
members of UNIFIL and the Lebanese civilian population.
In addition, there is an obvious immediate need for an
adequate security perimeter for the headquarters of the
Force at Naqoura.

70. We recognize, of course, that there is also at times a
problem of the attempted infiltration of the area by other
armed elements seeking to make incursions into Israel and
we would not wish to minimixe that aspect of the issue.
However, we are encouraged to note that the SecretaryGeneral makes clear in paragraph 24 of his report that the
Force has been successful in preventing most of those incidents of attempted infiltration by armed personnel into or
through the existing area of operation of the Force and that,
as he also states, the Palestinian Liberation Organixation
has pursued a policy which has for the most part kept such
activities in check.

74. The situation in Southern Lebanon poses a serious
threat to the peace and stability not just of Lebanon but of
the entire region. The world community has through the
Security Council taken action to defuse this threat byestablishing an interim force which was given a defined mandate.
The international community cannot and indeed must not
allow UNIFIL to fall. A failure by UNIFIL to carry out its
mandate would have the most serious consequences for
peace in the region, for the peace-keeping role of the United
Nations and, consequently, for the United Nations itself. It
is the responsibility of all Member States to ensure the
successof UNIFIL.

71. It is clear from that report of the Secretary-General
and indeed from the experience of our own contingent, that
the major problem facing UNIFIL for some time now has
been, and remains, twofold-the entrenched position of the
Haddad forces in part of the area which has prevented the
full deployment of the Force, and the continuing and dangerous harassment which UNIFIL suflers from the Had&d
forces as it carries out its mandate in the area where it is
deployed. This regular interference with UNIFIL on a large
scale, and regrettably, it appears, with external support,
cannot but in’ the long run damage its effectiveness and
indeed possibly affect the over-all credibility of United
Nations peace-keeping forces in the region. It is that, as well
as the direct danger to our troops on their peace-keeping
mission, which causes my Government such grave concern
and which has led my delegatibn to take the, for us, unprecedented step of asking to speak in the Council in a debate of
this kind.

75. I should like to appeal to all the parties involved, and
particularly to the Government of Israel, to co-operate fully
with UNIFIL and to assist it actively in carrying out the
mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council. In that
connexion we note the statement of the representative of
Israel in the Council debate last,Tuesday [2147th meezing3
that Israel will continue to co-operate -with the Force. We
would hope that that cooperation will, as he said, lead to
the solution of the outstanding problem to the satisfaction
of those directly and legitimately concerned.

72. With the aim of ensuring the return of its effective
authority in the area, the Government of Lebanon, in consultation with the United Nations, drew up a phased programme of activities. The first phase of their programme
envisaged, on the one hand, a return of Lebanese civilian

76. In conclusion, I should like to express our thanks to
the Secretary-General and his most able staff and to the
Force Commander of UNIFIL, General Erskine, for the
way in which they have conducted this important peacekeeping operation of the United Nations. I should lie to
8

express the hope that the statements during this debate, and
the resolution which is to be adopted, will help in ensuring
the successof UNIFIL.

before us [s/13392], we must express our concern that its
operative paragraph 1 lacks balance. For that reason, if the
paragraph were voted on separately, it would be most
difficult for us to support it. We deplore acts of violence
against Lebanon, but we equally deplore acts of violence
and terrorism directed indiscriminately against Israeli citizens, including women and children. The Council must
insist on Israeli co-operation with UNIFIL; and it must also
insist with equal vigour that those in a position to influence
Palestinian extremists make strong efforts to end the mindless terrorism which contributes to the pattern of violence
and counter-violence on Lebanese and Israeli territory.

77. Mr. PETREE (United States of America): Mr. Prestdent, first of all I wish to join with others around this table in
welcoming you to the presidency of the Council. I am happy
to assure you of the full co-operation of the United States
delegation in the heavy schedule of work facing us this
month. I also wish to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation and admiration for the manner in which your
predecessor, Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal
handled hi responsibilities during the busy weeks of May.

84. Fourthly, the United States believes that Israel has not
co-operated fully with UNIFIL as it carries out the tasks the
Council has assigned to it. Israeli actions have contributed
to the atmosphere of tension which exists in Southern
Lebanon today. We simply cannot accept a situation in
which UNIFIL is constantly harassed by forces supplied
and supported by Israel and its officers’ and men’s lives
placed in constant danger, with some of those officers and
men having already been killed.

78. Recent events in Lebanon give our meeting a special
importance. The stability which we had hoped would flow
from the introduction of UNIFIL into Southern Lebanon
has not followed with the rapidity and the results that we
had expected. The co-operation which the Council has
every right to expect from the Governments and the parties
concerned has not generally been forthcoming. The result
has been persistent instability, terrorism and violence in
Southern Lebanon and a continuing challenge to the
authority of the Council and of its decisions.

85. As many at this table have noted, as a result of recent
actions, scores of innocent civilians have been killed or
wounded, and many have fled from the area fearing a
continuation of the violence. UNIFIL itself has lost brave
men and finds its authority flouted by the irregular Christian militia, by Israel and by the Palestinian terrorists who
attempt to infiltrate through UNIFIL lines. As a peacekeeping force which is not heavily armed, UNIFIL must
rely on the co-operation of the parties in the conflict. But the
lack of cooperation has meant that instead of concentrating on its major goals UNIFIL increasingly has had to
defend itself from unprovoked attacks by elements in the
area of operation who know that UNIFIL’s
defensive
weapons are no match for their fire-power.

79. As we renew the UNIFIL mandate, we must commit
ourselves anew to exploring what avenues and steps are
available to calm the situation, reduce the prospects of
violence and allow UNIFIL to fulfil its ultimate objectivethe restoration of Lebanese governmental authority in
Southern Lebanon.
80. Let me first state my Government’s position on the
issues involved.
81. First, the United States supports unconditionally the
sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial integrity of
Lebanon. Actions from any quarter which threaten, qualify
or raise reservations about Lebanon’s integrity are totally
unacceptable to the members of the Council and to the
international community as a whole.

.

86. Action by a variety of parties and Governments will
be needed if UNIFIL
is to achieve its objectives. The
Government of Lebanon must continue its efforts to extend
its authority in thesouth in co-operation with UNIFIL. All
Governments which have influence with the parties concerned must insist that UNIFIL’s authority be respected
and its mandate fulfilled. We note and welcome in that
regard Prime Minister Begin’s statement of 7May in the
Israeli Parliament in which he said that Israel supports the
territorial integrity and national sovereignty of Lebanon
and expressed Israel’s determination to co-operate-with
UNIFIL, whose role he called “important” and *‘positive”.
The Priie Minister further stated that UNIFIL must not be
shelled and that Israel had made that clear to the private
militias in the south. We hope that statement will produce
the desired results in the coming period.

82. Secondly, the United States supports UNIFIL and the
continuing efforts to ensure the implementation of its objectives. It is important to acknowledge that, despite the very
difBcult circumstances under which the officers and men of
UNIFIL have operated, some gradual progress has been
made in the direction of reestablishing Lebanon’s sovereignty over its territory. Two months ago a battalion of
Lebanese troops deployed south of the Litani. That deployment was not without difliculties, but it finally did take
place and succeeded because at least some of the parties
involved, including Israel, were willing to co-operate. Those
forces, along with the increasing numbers of Lebanese civilii and police administrators in the south, seem to us to
offer a hope of steady progress towards meeting the stated
objectives of the Council. We welcome these steps taken by
the Lebanese Government in conjunction with UNIFIL.

87. With regard to operative paragraph 6 of -the draft
resolution, we support the machinery provided by the 1949
Armistice Agreement as offering one way for the Governments of Israel and Lebanon to be in contact. The Armistice
Agreement remains in force, and we believe Lebanon and
Israel should attempt to use the arrangements under it.

83. Thirdly, the Arab world must assist Lebanon in
requiring the extremist elements of the Palestinians in
Lebanon, whose terrorist activities inflame the situation, to
ceasetheir activities against Israel. In this regard let me note
that, while my Government supports the draft resolution

88. We note also the Palestinian Statement of 5 June
expressing the intention of taking certain steps to reduce the
9

. ,’

tension and violence in Southern Lebanon. We are not
aware to date that those measures have been implemented.
We hope that commitment will be carried out in practice
and we shall watch closely to see ifit is translated into a new
reality on the ground. We would welcome stepsof restraint.
89. Finally, let me once again express my Government’s
admiration for the dedicated and selfless efforts of the
officers and men of UNIFIL. No peace-keeping force has
served in a more important capacity nor in more trying and
diflicult circumstances. The bravery those men have shown
is unmatched in the history of peace-keeping. They deserve
our heart-felt thanks and our support. Let us dedicate
ourselves to renewed, vigorous efforts to advance towards
the goals we have set for UNIFIL.
90. Mr. NEIL (Jamaica): I am pleased at the outset to
express to you, Sir, my delegation’s warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. Your formidable skills as a diplomat, your
experience and your excellent rapport with Council
members give full assurance of effective leadership in the
busy and possibly diflicult days ahead. We are pleased to
pledge our fti cooperation to you, particularly in the light
of the friendly relations which exist between our two countries and which have been further strengthened during the
recent visit by my Prime Minister to your country.
91. We should also like to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal, for his effective
presidency during the month of May when he displayed
impressive qualities of leadership, patience and perseverance in advancing the work of the Council.
92. As we continue our consideration of the problems in
Southern Lebanon, we are aware that, despite the efforts of
the Security Council, the Secretary-General and certain
Member States, the situation has continued to deteriorate.
Since the events of the latter part of April, sporadic incidents of fighting have occurred with distressing frequency,
Xusing considerable danger to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, the civilian population of the area and
difficulty to the over-all maintenance of peace. there. The
Secretary-General’s latest report gives a full picture of those
events.
93. Most alarming is the continued provocative attitude
of the rebel forces of Had&d and their persistent resort to
violence. In addition, Israel’s military incursions into
Lebanon, its bombardment of Lebanese territory and the
collaboration of its defence forces with the illegal forces
controlled by the rebel Haddad have continued. Since the
cease-fire arranged by UNIFIL on 31 May, there have
been reports of renewed violations by Israel of Lebanese air
space, as well as further Israeli-shelling of and air raids into
Lebanese territory. These actions have increased tension in
the area and made the search for a solution even more
difficult.
94. My delegation has noted the decision of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to withdraw its armed forces from
the villages and towns in Southern Lebanon and to remove
its offices from Tyre in an effort to prevent further Israeli
military incursions and bombardment of that area. We

welcome the announcement that the PLO leadership-has
reiterated its pledge not to initiate action against therfefacfo
forces and the Israeli Defence Forces from within, the
UNIFIL-controlled
sectors and to continue its policy of
co-operation with UNIFIL. To us that represents a positive
development which takes into account the interests, safety
and welfare of the Lebanese people and which, if matched
by a corresponding commitment from the opposed parties,
could significantly reduce tension and contribute to the
restoration of calm in Lebanon.
95.

Far from co-operating with UNIFIL,

however, the

de facto forces have remained intransigent and have de-

plorably escalated their harassment and attacks against
UNIFIL and the civilian population within the UNIFIL
area of operation. What is described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report in paragraphs 25 to 27 is tantamount to a
war launched by the defacto forces against UNIFIL. They
have shelled UNIFIL
positions, producing casualties
among UNIFIL forces and Lebanese civilians. They have
abducted United Nations military and civilian personnel
and cut the supply routes of three Irish positions. Most
recently, in the course of our consideration of the situation
in Lebanon and the question of the renewal of the UNIFIL
mandate, the defacro forces attacked the Dutch contingent
of UNIFIL and engaged it in a lengthy exchange of tire.
That assault was totally unprovoked, as was the initial
attack against the headquart’ers of UNIFIL at Naqoura on
19 April.
96. Not only have the illegal Had&d forces prevented
UNIFIL from extending its area of control in Southern
Lebanon, as mandated by the Security Council, but they
have so far resisted all efforts to establish a security zone for
the UNIFIL headquarters. In that very dangerous situation, UNIFIL has none the lesscontinued its efforts to carry
out its mandate. My delegation commends Major-General
Erskine and the troops of UNIFIL on their courage, their
discipline and their restraint in very trying and dangerous
circumstances. We strongly deplore the incidents that have
caused the deaths of four members of UNIFIL and we
regret the accidents that took the lives of six others. Jamaica
extends its deepest sympathies to the families of those who
have lost their lives or suffered injury.
97. When we consider the risks to which UNIFIL has
been exposed and the extremely dangerous situation in
which it must operate, we believe it all the more deplorable
that. a State Member of the United Nations should be
supporting the defacro forces in armed separatist activities
and thus in their war against UNIFIL. This collaboration
and Israel’s persistent military incursions into Lebanon and
its stated determination to continue to carry out preemptive strikes against PLO bases in Lebanon heighten the
intractability of the Middle East problem while at the same
time frustrating international efforts to restore calm,even in
the limited area of Southern Lebanon. It would undoubtedly be in the best interests of Israel to co-operate with
UNIFIL in fulfilling its mandate, which is essential for the
preservation of peace on its borders with Lebanon.
98. Jamaica recognizes the need for the retention of
UNIFIL since, despite the problems and the dangas of the
situation, UNIFIL has been a deterrent to an all-out war in

the area. We therefore support the recammendation of the
Secretary-General that the UNIFIL’ mandate be renewed
for a further six-month period. We commend and support
the steps taken by the Lebanese Government towards the
restoration of its sovereignty and authority and territorial
integrity. Jamaica will continue to support measures such as
those in the phased programme of activities to achieve that
result and thus facilitate the fulfilment of the UNIFIL
mandate.

the mandate granted to UNIFIL, a mandate which has once
again come up for renewal before the Security Council. I
should add that my Government supports the extension of
the UNIFIL mandate for a further six-month period.
104. Mv delegation would like to exuress its gratitude to
the Secretary-General for the lucid -and comprehensive
report on the activities of UNIFIL
during the period
between 13 January and 8 June 1979. The report in its
entirety, however, hardly bears any good news, as.it is filled
with frustrating details of the serious difXculnes facing
UNIFIL in the implementation of resolution 425 (1978),
which had the primary objective of restoring the authority
and sovereignty of the State of Lebanon in the southern part
of that country.

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretarion fhom Russian): I
thank the representative of Jamaica for the kind words that
he addressed to me. I should also like to thank him for his
reference to the amicable relations that exist between his
country and mine.

105. We have been told of endless consultations between
the Secretary-General and his representative, on the one
hand, and the Governments of Lebanon and Israel, on the
other, in order to facilitate the task of UNIFIL, as stipulated
in its mandate by the Council. It is a matter of deep regret
and concern to my delegation that those consultations have
not borne any positive results primarily because Israel has
persisted, even in the face of resolutions adopted in the
Council to the contrary, in continuing to take action the end
result of which subverts the independence, authority and
sovereignty of a Member State through the brazen support
given to the bandits in the so-called defacto forces under
Major Haddad.

‘100. Mr. BLANKSON
(Nigeria): Mr. President, as my
delegation is speaking for the frost time in the month of
June, I should like to join with others who have addressed
compliments to you in congratulating you on your accession to the presidency of the Council. I have no doubts
whatsoever that your great talents and qualities and your
rich experience will be valuable assets in your conduct of
our deliberations during your tenure of office. At the same
time, I should like to commend Ambassador Futscher
Pereira of Portugal on the able manner in which he handled
the affairs of the Council in the busy month of May.
101. My delegation has listened with a heavy heart to the
harrowing account of the scope of the devastation and
decimation wrought against Lebanon by Israel since 25
April. Ambassador Tueni of Lebanon has had to perform
the unpleasant task in the Council of giving a detailed
account of the aggression carried out against his country.
His version of what happened has since been vindicated by
the world press, even by those sectors of it which have
traditionally betrayed in their reportage a distinct bias in
favour of Israel. As a result of that unprovoked aggression,
tens of thousands of simple and peaceful Lebanese citizens
have become refugees in their own homeland. Israeli aircraft continue to pound what have now been cynically
described as terrorist bases. But what is the end result of
such raids? Innocent and defenceless Lebanese citizens have
perished; their homes have been destroyed; children have
become orphaned and parents have lost their offspring. It is
indeed a tragedy too pathetic to be described adequately in
words, and it is the Council’s obligation to put an end to this
situation.

106. UNIFIL, it may be recalled, set before itself four
main objectives-first, an increase by the Lebanese Government of a Lebanese civilian administrative presence in the
south; secondly, the introduction of a battalion of the Lebanese national army into the UNIFIL area of operation;
thirdly, the consolidation of a cease-fire in the area and the
cessation of harassment of UNIFIL and the local population in its area by the defucto forces; fourthly, the further
deployment of and control by UNIFIL in the border area
controlled by the defacto forces on the basis of the proposals put forward by the UNIFIL Commander.
107. Although the first two objectives seem to have been
achieved, it is not without significance that the latest round
of harassment of UNIFIL personnel, the shelling of their
area of operation and the unprovoked attacks on innocent
villagers, triggering off new and agonizing waves of immigration, were timed to coincide with Lebanon’s deployment
of its military units in the south.

102. My delegation believes that the Lebanese tragedy is
inextricably linked to the Palestinian problem, which continues to remain at the core of the larger Middle East crisis.
Only a political solution guaranteeing unfettered freedoms
and the right of self-determination to all Palestinians of the
diaspora is likely to lead to a durable peace in the region. In
order for that to be achieved, Israel must renounce in word
and in deed its expansionist policies and respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbours. It must also
desist from subverting the authority of the Lebanese
Government and sever all links with the notorious bandits
under the control of Major Haddad.

108. Major Haddad, apparently intoxicated by the assurance of continued Israeli military support, has had the
effrontery not only to declare the six-mile belt-which was
handed over to him, as it were, on-a platter of gold-the
independent State of “Free” Lebanon but also to demand
that his armed bands be paid by the Lebanese exchequer.
That action, like others before it, ranks among the worst
displays of military arrogance in recent times.
109. It is not my intention to recount in greater detail
some of the recent excessesof the &facto forces. The most
recent have been graphically described in the latest report of
the Secretary-General. But undoubtedly we are now confronted by an ominous escalation ofihe despicable activities
of the defucto forces. UNIFIL observation posts have

103. I should now like to offer some observations on the
situation in Southern Lebanon, with particular reference to
11

such blatant provocations by the defacto forces. We eqyi&y
commend General Siilasvuo and General Erskine for the
exemplary leadership they have provided during such trying ^
times. We equally laud the efforts of the Secretary-General,
his relentless and indefatigable efforts towards the successful and early completion of the UMFIL mandate. We wish
to assure him and all his staR of Nigeria’s unreserved sup
port as he continues in his dificult and delicate task.

become targets for illegal and provocative raids by Haddad’s men. UNIFIL soldiers have been abducted in full
view of their comrades and held for a long time. Those
UNIFIL soldiers were released only after a determined
intervention by the Force Commander. Some UNIFIL
units have been denied their regular supplies simply because
the Haddad men have decided to cut off their supply routes.
110. In the view of my delegation, Haddad is a puny
character who would,have long ago been put in his proper
place if all possible pressure had been employed to block the
flow of weapons .to him from Israel. It is that indefensible
policy of the Israeli Government that lies at the roots of the
current paralysis in which UNIFIL has found itself. Israel
has the most important answer to the current stalemate.in
Southern Lebanon. Haddad’s scope must be reduced if
UNIFIL is to be enabled to fulfil its mandate in accordance
with resolution 425 (1978). We reject Israel’s oft-repeated
declaration that the Haddad forces are beyond its control. It
is now clear that the cutting off of supplies to those surrogates or even the invocation of the threat to do so by the
Israelii is the major key to stability in Southern Lebanon
and, indeed, in the whole region.

114. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (inrerprerarion~om Chinese):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June and to express our appreciation
and congratulations to Ambassador Futschkr Pereira on his
outstanding performance in the presidency for’the month of
May.
115. The developments in Southern Lebanon have caused
widespread concern. Over a 1ong period, Israel has attemp
ted to dismember and annex Lebanese territories, undermine and sow discord in the relations between the Lebanese
and Palestinian peoples and undermine the Palestiniin
cause of national liberation.
116. Following its massive invasion of Southern Lebanon
in 1978, Israel instigated the secessionist forces to set up a
“State within a State” in Southern Lebanon in a stubborn
attempt to obstruct the Lebanese Government’s exercise of
its sovereignty there. Israel’s outrageous acts have been
unanimously condemned by the people of the world. The
General Assembly and the Security Council have adopted a
number of resolutions demandingthat Israel should immediately halt its aggression against Lebanon and strictly
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.

111. Now that it seems fairly clear why peace has eluded us
for so long in the area of the UNIFIL operation, my delegation is just wondering how long we shall sit with folded arms
here and watch rather helplessly while Israel continues to
defy the Council and to subvert Lebanese sovereignty by
proxy. Fortunately, there are provisions in the Charter
prescribing measures for dealing with States which indulge
in disruptive activities that have a potential for undermining
international peace and security. It is no longer enough for
the Council to call on Israel to respect its resolutions or to
condemn its acts of aggression against its neighbours. The
Council must now consider taking effective measures to
compel Israel to comply with its resolutions.

117. However, the Israeli Zionists, turning a deaf ear to all
this, have further intensified their aggression. In recent
months, they. have repeatedly and flagrantly dispatched
gunboats, military aircraft and ground forces to attack
Southern Lebanon and slaughter innocent civilians, causing
great loss of life and property among the Lebanese ‘and
Palestinian peoples. This is a renewed wanton provocation
committed by the Israeli authorities against the Lebanese
and Palestinian peoples and all the Arab peoples, as well as
a gross violation of and trampling upon the United Nations
Charter. The Chinese Government and people sttongly
condemn the Israeli Zionists for their crimes of aggression
and extend our deep sympathy and resolute support to the
Lebanese Government and people in their just struggle to
resist aggression and defend their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.

112. Unless we do just that, the Council NIB the risk of
institutionalizing peace-keeping forces all along Israel’s
borders and even of providing the Israelis with indirect and
illegal logistic support. Should it do so, the Council would
not only appear to be condoning aggression but would, in
consequence, be undermining .its own credibility as mankind’s custodian of international peace and security. My
delegation would not subscribe to a situation in which the
Council was merely summoned to rubber-stamp, as it were,
the renewal of the mandate cf UNIFIL. The Council is
obliged to act fast and firmly to bring an end to the political
charade created in the region by defiance and recalcitrance.
In that context my delegation hopes that the Council will
take concrete measures to underline its indignation if Israel
does not act soon to bring its surrogates-that is, the
defacto forces-back to the path of sanity so as to enable
UNIFIL to achieve the long overdue fulfilment of its mandate in the area.

118. We have always held that in order to solve the Middle
Fast question it is imperative to remove super-Power meddling and interference, force Israel to withdraw from all the
occupied Arab territories, and regain the national rights of
the Palestinian people. Only thus can peace be realized in
the Middle East and the security of the Arab countriesbe
ensured. We maintain that the Security Council should
speak up for justice, uphold the. principles of the Charter,
strongly condemn the Israeli crimes of aggression, take
effective measures to halt all Israeli acts of aggression
against Lebanon, firmly support the Lebanese Government

113. Finally, we should like to pay a tribute to those
vaiiant men of UNIFIL who have lost their lives or been
maimed in the course of the performance of their duties. My
only hope is that the Council will act in such a way as to
ensure that the supreme sacrifice they have made has not
been made in vain. We salute all personnel of the Force for
their courage, dedication and level-headedness in the face of
12

in m-establishing its sovereignty over Southern I&anon,
and give firm support to the Lebanese, Pale&km
and
other Arab peoples in their just struggle against aggression.
The independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon must be strictly respected, and must in no way be
encroached upon.

resolution 425 (1978), in regard to Israeli aggression in
Southern Lebanon, the Council called upon Israel to
respect strictly the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon and immediately to ceaseits
military action against Lebanon and to withdraw its forces
from all Lebanese territory. In January this year [resahdion
444 (Z979)], the Council deplored the lack of co-operation
by Israel with the United Nations Force to enable it fully to
implement its mandate; it deplored Israel’s assistance to
irregular armed groups io Southern Lebanon. On 26 April
[2ZQZst meering], in a statement by the President of the
Council on behalf of its members, the need for the full
implementation
of resolution 425 (1978) was reemphasized, and it was pointed out that if appropriate
measures were not taken and, particularly, if further serious
incidents were to occur, it would be necessaryfor the Council to meet without delay to consider the situation.

119. In view of the fact that the draft resolution contained
in document S/l3392 mainly concerns the extension of ,the
mandate of UNIFIL, and based upon the position ofprinciple we have always held on that matter, we have decidednot
to participate in the vote. Nevertheless, we support the
positive elements in the draft resolution condemning Israeli
aggression and demanding Israel’s strict respect for the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Lebanon.
120. The PRESIDENT (inrerprezurionfiom Ruxviun): The
next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

127. But all these demands and warnings by the Security
Council were disregarded by Israel. Recently the world has
been witnessing further, unceasing armed acts of provocation by-Israel against Lebanon. As we read in a memorandum of 30 May by the Lebanese delegation [S/13361], Israel
has been pursuing an unprecedented policy of State terrorism against Lebanon. It is perpetrating continuous acts of
aggression against the urban and rural population of
Lebanon aud against the Palestinian refugee camps. This
has resulted in many casualties among innocent civilians, in
particular. The armed attacks by Israel have brought
further misery ‘to the Lebanese people and the Palestinian.
refugees. Enormous -material damage has been done.
Hundreds of buildings have been destroyed. To escape
shelling and bombing, tens of thousands of Lebanese people have been compelled to leave their homes.
b
128. Notwithstanding Security Council resolutions, Israel
continues to maintain its military presence in Southern
Lebanon and thus makes it impossible for the United
Nations Force to discharge the mandate entrusted to it. As
is reafliied by the Secretary-General in his reports, the
Israeli military clique is continuing to operate actively in
Lebanon.

121. Mr. SHAMMA (Jordan): I need not recall to the
short memory of the Israeli representative that my statement this morning 12148th meeting,? contained nothing
about the PLG and its past differences with my Govemment. It seems, and of course it is, a Zionist habit to
side-track the discussion at hand if things do not go along
with Zionist values of cruelty, evil and hatred. But, since the
professor of international law has brought up the matter,
let me remind him that the events of September 1970 were
caused by the Zionist values of cruelty, evil and hatred.
122. A cancer of zionism is being planted in the midst of
our peace-loving Arab nation. Nurturing on the black
values of Zionism, this cancer has spread and brought destruction to the Palestinian people, and deprived them of
their homeland and their livelihood. The Palestinians
became refugees because of the cruel and evil values of
black zionism, which do not contain anything of the values
of peace, justice or humanity. It is because of that phenomenon that the Palestinians have not been allowed to go
back to their homes in Palestine. Frustration, deprivation
and misery led to the regrettable events of 1970 between
some Palestinian elements and the Jordanian army.

129. As a weapon in its aggressive policy in Lebanon,
Israel is actively using the anti-Government armed units led
by the notorious Haddad, who is attempting to foster the
implementation of Tel Aviv’s age-old plan to annex part of
Lebanese territory. It is not merely by chance that in Israel
people are saying openly that Israel will not abandon its
ally, and that the so-called “Christian enclave” in Southern
Lebanon is of “basic importance to Israel’s own security”.
It is well known that precisely by invoking its own security
interests, Israel is attempting to justify its occupation of the
Golan Heights, the West Bank and Gaza.

123. We value peace, we value justice, and we value
human life. But zionism values none of these, and that is
why it attacks with cruelty, terrorizes with evil, and murders
with no shame. That is exactly what zionism is doing in
Palestine, in the West Bank of Jordan, in Gaza and in the
Golan Heights-and now in Lebanon.
124. We ask the international community, through you,
Mr. President, to ensure that Israel is contained, that its
black Zionist values are eradicated, and that it is brought
back to the fold of human values.

130. Israel’s acts of aggression against Lebanon are being
perpetrated both directly by the Israeli armed forces and
‘with the assistance of Haddad’s units. These are being used
to prevent the establishment of control by the United
Nations Force and the Lebanese army over the border areas
between Israel and Lebanon. Armed drovocation is organized against the Force, and this has resulted in casualties
among its personnel.

125. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation flom Russian):
There are no other speakers at-this stage, and I should
therefore now like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.
126. Israel’s acts of aggression against Lebanon have been
discussed on several occasions in the Security Council. In
.

c

.

13

131. The dangerous situation which has ,resulted from
Israeli provocation obtains to this very day. Recently, Israel
has continued to perpetrate ever-new acts of aggression
against Lebanon, in flagrant violation of the sovereignty of
Lebanon and in open defiance of the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole.

resolutions of’the Security Council regarding strict obscrvance of the sovereignty and ‘territorial integrity of
Lebanon, but perpetrates ever more numerous .acts of
aggression.
138. But, instead of subjecting Israel to decisive censure
for those actions, certain persons would have us believe that
“diplomatic efforts” can lead to greater flexibility on the
part of Israel and can make it co-operate with the United
Nations. We have heard those appeals many times in the
Council. It is quite obvious now that those “‘diplomatic
effort.9 have not led to any practical results. In the meme
randum of the delegation of Lebanon dated 30 May, it is
noted quite correctly that:

132. As I noted in the letter of the representative of
L&anon dated 11 June [s/13387J, since the last cease-fire
declared on 31 May, Israel has perpetrated many new acts
of aggression against Lebanon. That letter quite rightly
points out that Israel’s policy is aimed at increasing tension
and preventing the restoration of peaceful conditions in
Lebanon.
I33:’ Israel has dealt blow upon blow to Lebanon, rcsorting to tactics of blackmail and military provocation against
that Arab country. Israel’s actions are directed not only
against the Lebanese people but against the Palestinian
people as well. They obviously intend, by any means,
hicluding the physical annihilation of the Palestinians living
.‘. in Lebanon, to prevent the Palestinian people from achieving their aspirations to national rebirth and the creation of
their own State.

“As there are no visible signs of any Israeli compliance
with the Security Council’s consensus, Lebanon can only
express regret that precious time was lost, and so was
hope and confidence in the ability of Israel’s friends to
flex her determination to kill, destroy, and arrogantly
disrupt every effort at establishing international law and
order.” [S/Z3362, armex, para. 3.1
139. The renewed armed acts of provocation by Israel
against Lebanon patently show us that all attempts to placate the Israeli aggressor only lead to an increase in the
aggressive expansionist trend of Israeli policy.

134. The Israeli leaders cynically state that they intend to
use further armed force against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon. They arrogate to themselves the
right to teach lessons in the future as well to those who stand
in the way of their expansionist policy. Attempts to elevate
international tyranny and lawlessnessto the status of State
policy have, as members know, been condemned by all
peace-loving countries.

140. Obviously, if those countries which are able effectively to infhrence Israel were to do so, then the Israeli
aggressors could not be so defiant and obstinate in their
refusal to abide by Security Council resolutions. The Security Council cannot and indeed should not accept this inadmissible situation in which Israel openly sabotages Council
decisions regarding the immediate cessation of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon, and the demand in those resolutions for strict respect for the sovereign rights of that
country. The Council should not disregard the appeal made
by the Lebanese Government contained in the memorandum:

135. The Israeli aggressors do not relent. It is noteworthy
that Israel’s armed provocation against Lebanon has
become particularly defiant since the signing of the separate
treaty between Israel and Egypt.
136. The Soviet Union, in accordance with United
Nations decisions, has always stressedthat a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East can be attained only by a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict on the basis of
a complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from all Arab territories which were occupied in 1967, the implementation of
the legitimate national rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including their right to create an independent State,
and the ensuring of peace and security for all countries in
that region. Events which are taking place now in the
Middle East prove the truth of the repeated warnings issued
by the Soviet Union that the path of separate deals not only
does not and cannot lead to a just and lasting peace in the
region but also creates the threat of even further complications and encourages Israel to launch new military adventures and attempts to entrench their occupation of Arab
lands and further expansion.

“Given the .very serious, tragic and persistent acts of
aggression perpetrated by Israel, the Lebanese Govemment considers that the Council must now be called upon
to take a most drastic attitude, in full cognizance of the
facts.” [ibid]
141. The Soviet delegation supports that just demand of
Lebanon and considers that the Council should vehemently
condemn the recent acts of aggression against Lebanon and
take effective steps to halt them. The need to adopt such
measures is a direct result of resolution 444 (1979) in which
the Council states that it is resolved
“to examine practical ways and means in accordance
with relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations to secure the full implementation of resolution
425 (1978)“.

137. Having gained a free hand in Sinai, Israel is stepping
up its machinations against other Arab countries and pcopies. Direct responsibility for that is borne by those who
virtually connive at Israel’s aggressive policy and, in particular, by certain United States interests. An entirely inadmissible situation is apparent. Israel not only does not show any
intention of complying with the repeated decisions and

142. The Soviet delegation considers that it is high time to
adopt decisive measures in the Council to put an end to the
gross, cynical contempt shown by Israel for its resolutions
and to obtain the cessation of Israel’s acts of aggression
against Lebanon.
14

143. The Soviet delegation will abstain in the voting on
the draft resolution contained in document S/13392, in
accordance with the position of the Soviet Union regarding
the United Nations Interim Force inLebanon. That position has been set forth several times in the past. The Soviet
delegation reallii
that position, including its position on
questions concerning the direction of UNIFIL by the Security Council, the p~rinciples according to which national contingents are recruited and also the method of financing the
Force. We should like to reaflirm that all expenditure
incurred as a result of Israel’s aggression against Lebanon
should l.+>borne by the aggressor.

149. The PRESIDENT (intepretation from Russian): A
number of delegations have asked to be allowed to make
statements after the vote. I shall now call on them.
150. Mr. wLG&D
(Norway): Sir, allow me first to
extend to you my warmest congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of June. We
feel confident that your experience and diplomatic skill
will facilitate the work of the Council during this busy
month. I should also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the representative of Portugal, for the persistent
efforts undertaken by him and for the eminent way he
conducted the presidency during the month of May.

144. The Soviet delegation expresses its regret that the
draft resolution does not contain a more vehement condemnation of Israel for its unceasing acts of aggression against
Lebanon and for its sabotage of Security Council
resolutions.

15 1. The Norwegian Government joined in the Council
decision to extend the mandate of UNIFIL for another
period of six months. We would, however, have preferred
a more balanced formulation of paragraph 1 of the resolution directed against all forms of violence. We supported the extension of the UNIFIL mandate because we
share the Secretary-General’s view that UNIFIL is performing an indispensable function in bringing calm to
Southern Lebanon, stabilizing the area and reducing the
active threat to international peace and security. It is also
for those reasons that my Government has decided to
continue its participation in UNIFIL.

145. Moreover, we consider it necessary to note that the
draft resolution of the Council quite definitively voices
indignation at the acts of violence perpetrated by Israel
against Lebanon which have led to the displacement of
civilians, including Palestinians, causing destruction and
the loss of completely innocent lives. The Council directly
demands that Israel cease forthwith its actions against the
territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon, in particular, its incursions into
Lebanon and the assistance it continues to lend to the
anti-Government units of Haddad.

152. Although we support the extension of the mandate, I must express our deep concern over the great
obstacles that continue to face UNIFIL. The SecretaryGeneral’s report provides an account of a number of
serious incidents in the area, some of which have led to
the loss of lives of UNIFIL personnel. That situation is
clearly unacceptable. The continued presence of UNIFIL
is dependent upon the co-operation of all.parties. We
demand a stop to the harassment and infiltration
attempts.

146. In accordance with the resolution to be adopted by
the SecuriQ Council, it is important that those countries
which are able to bring their influence to bear on Israel
should do their utmost to fulfil all Council demands. If
Israel persists in its aggression, the Council will be forced
very shortly to take appropriate measures in accordance
with the Charter to ensure the full implementation of resolution 425 (1978).
147. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
Council.

153. We regret that, in spite of the persistent efforts of
the Secretary-General, Presidents of the Security Council
and a number of Governments, it has not yet been possible to achieve a complete cessation of the harassment or
the establishment of an adequate security zone around
UNIFIL headquarters at Naqoura. Those are matters of
the highest urgency for the continued functioning of
UNIFIL.
We therefore urge the parties concerned to
extend their co-operation towards that end.

of the

148. The Council will now proceed to vote on the draft
resolution before us [S/I339zJ.
A vote was taken by show of hand.

154. UNIFIL
was established in March 1978. It is
regrettable that more than one year later UNIFIL is still
prevented from fulfilling all the tasks assigned to it by the
Security Council.

In favour: Bangladesh, Bolivia, France, Gabon, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia

155. Since our debate in January, some progress has
been made towards the restoration of the Lebanese
Government’s authority and sovereignty in Southern
Lebanon. The Norwegian Government welcomes the
steps taken by the Lebanese Government in that respect.
If those efforts are to succeed, full respect for the territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon within its iuternationally recognized
boundaries is required.

Against: None
Abstaitting: Czechoslovakia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics
The drdt resolution wasadopted by 12 votes to none, with
2 abstentions.’ One member (China) did not participate in the
voting.
s See resolution

156. In his statement to the Council on Tuesday [2147th
meeting], the Secretary-General listed several conditions

450 (1979).

15
r.

that must be met if UNIFIL is to complete its mandate.
All parties would do well to reflect on the‘serious warning
voiced by the Secretary-General ,that it might well
become necessary to envisage the .withdrawal of the
Force before the completion of its mandate unless there is
signif%ant progress towards the fulfilment of that
mandate.

as .a result of which it has been deprived of ail its seacoast,
cannot under any circumstances fail in a clear and .welIdefined manner ,to state its position on anything, which
might conspire against the territorial integrity of .,a State.
That position, which is embodied in paragraph4 of Article 2 of the Charter, is one of the basic principles of the
civilixed community of nations.

157. Further deployment of UNIFIL is now a matter of
high priority. We fully support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to achieve through diplomatic channels the further deployment of UNIFIL. We hope that in
the months to come all the parties concerned will extend
their co-operation towards the full implementation of the
mandate of UNIFIL.

165. The new crisis in the Middle East, which hasnow
taken on a more distressing aspect, owing to the deprivation
and suffering inflicted not only upon the civilian population
but also upon the United Nations forces, makes the
Secretary-General’s report acutely relevant. This is so, for
the noncompliance with the measures proposed in the
report would endanger the very capacity of the interim
Force to fulfil its mission, something which, in my deIegation’s view, is an extremely serious precedent in terms of the
authority and prestige of the Security Council, which is
primarily responsible for maintaining international peace
and security.

158. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to MajorGeneral Erskine and his staff, as well as to the of&em and
men of the various contingents of UNIFIL serving under
extremely difficult conditions. I should also like to reiterate
to the Secretary-General my Government’s support for his
efforts to implement the decisions of the Council. I should
further like to underline the Secretary-General’s appeal to
all Member States that urgent measures be taken to solve
the serious financial problems UNIFIL is faced with. The
financing of peace-keeping operations must be the collective responsibility of all States. It is unacceptable that the
troop-contributing countries should have to carry a disproportionate burden of the finances involved and it may
jeopardize the whole operation if that becomes the case.

166. Bolivia recognizes the essential function which
UNIFIL must fulfil. That is why we voted in favour of the
resolution, just as we shall decisively support any step aimed
at restoring the necessary authority of UNIFIL, as a first
measure leading to the full implementation of resolutions
425 (1978) and 444 (1979).
167. In conclusion, permit me to express to the.SecretatyGeneral my delegation’s appreciation for his accomplishments in regard to this diicult problem and also our
admiration for the selflessnessand sacrifice with which the
Force has been fulfilling its delicate task. My delegation
wishes to pay a special tribute to the memory of those
soldiers who have fallen in the cause of one of the noblest
objectives of the Organixation-peace on our pIanet.

159.. Mr. PALACIOS de VIZZIO (Bolivia) (interpretarion
from Spanish): Mr. President, I wish formally to convey to
you and the other members of the Council my appreciation
for the kind words of welcome addressed to me.
160. As this is my first formal statement in the Security
Council, I shall begin by fulfilling a pleasant duty, that of
congratulating you on behalf of my delegation, on the
dynamic and efficient manner in which you are exercising
the functions of the presidency of the Council for the month
of June.

168. Mr. BISHABA (Kuwait): I should have liked at this
stage to confine my remarks to explaining the vote of my
delegation but, having listened with great interest to the
well-orchestrated statements of the representative of Israel,
I must say that when we were kids in Kuwait we learned one
thing from our teachers, that is, that linguistic tantrums
never change the truth, which always remains the fmest art
of logic.

161. I also wish to express my delegation’s appreciation
for the competent and able leadership of your predecessor,
Ambassador Futscher Pereira of Portugal.

169. My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
contained in document S/13392 solely because the Govemment of Lebanon wanted the Council to adopt it. It contains
elements which are satisfactory and others which are not.
But it is the result of compromise and, therefore, my delegation supported it. The resolution just adopted should have
contained a condemnation of Israel for its persistent policy
of obstruction.

162, Once again my delegation wishes to express its deep
concern over the most recent developments in Lebanon.
They are but a part of the over-all problem of the Middle
East, which, as has been repeatedly pointed out by my
delegation, requires a coherent and comprehensive
solution.
163. In the report dated 8 June submitted to the Council
by the Secretary-General and in his statement of 12 June
[2I17th meering], special emphasis is placed on the difXcult
conditions in which UNIFIL has been fulfilling its specific
functions as established in resolution 425 (1978). They are
the safeguarding of the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon.

170. Members of the Council undoubtedly had in mind
the four conditions for the success of the mandate of
UNIFIL which were set out by the Secretary-General two
days ago [2147th meeting]. He mentioned the necessity for
the co-operation of the PLO. That is a legitimate demand,
and that co-operation has already been exhibited in the past
15 months since the arrival of the Force in Lebanon. It has
also been reinforced by the recent steps taken by the PLO.

164. Bolivia, as one of the countries in the Western hemisphere most seriously affected by international aggressidn,

!6

.171. Compliairciz .with ‘three other conditioris, ‘none of
which has been met, are expected from Israel. ‘zhe first is a
change of .attitude by rsrael towards UNIFIL. From all
signs given by israe and the statements of its leaders, that
condition remainsin the realm ofhope, a hope with a flimsy
chance of fulfilment. Israel is not going to change its attitude to UNIFIL, as it believes that the presence of United
Nations forces on its borders threatens its security. Israel
challenges the injunctions, resolutions and decisions of the
Council simply because it can get away with the challenge
and at the same time obtain what it wants,

an. automatic approval of requests for renewal of the mandate. In fhis r&@t, we note with appreciation Lebanon’s
eagerness,to assert its authority in the south and not to rely
indefinitely
. .. . . UNIFIL presence.
.I
,, on’the
179: Finally, my delegation would like again to place on
record its appreciation to the Secretary-General, his staff in
New York, General Erskine and the officers and soldiers of
UNIFIL for their efforts in the search for the attainment of
a noble goal.
180. We pray that this will be the last time thecouncil will
perform the semi-annual ritual of renewal.

172. How can the Council force Israel to abide by its
resolutions? As we see it, the impossibility of applying
sanctions against Israel encourages it to take the law into its
own hands and do what it likes without being deterred by
the Council. In the absence of the possibility of the application of sanctions, only diplomatic efforts, either bilaterally
or through the good offices of the Secretary-General, are
left. But the Secretary-General cannot on his own produce
miracles. The United States is the only country able to put
pressure on Israel. But, again, the United States has its own
priorities and UNIFIL is not at the top of the list.

181. Let us help Lebanon to stand on its feet in its own
territory in the south, unmolested and unharassed in the
search for a constructive future.
182. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Russian): The
representative of Israel has asked to be allowed to speak. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
183. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Israel welcomes the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. At the same time, Israel categorically rejects the
political elements attached to the resolution just adopted.
Those elements have resulted in a biased and unbalanced
formula which contains outright distortions and is marked
by grave acts of omission.

173. UNIFIL is no doubt the victim om
whichnone of us foresaw. The Secretary-General mentioned that
the co-operation of the &facto forces in the south of
Lebanon is necessary for the fulfilment of the UNIFIL
mandate. Those forces are controlled, manipulated and
managed by Israel. A change in their position depends
entirely on the attitude of the Government of Israel. It is
futile to expect a change of heart from the bride when the
mother-in-law is not in a position to compromise.

184. In paragraph 1, the resolution ignores the loss of
innocent Israeli lives, including those of women and children who have been murdered by PLO terrorists operating
from Lebanese territory. Israel strongly deplores the blatant
bias manifest in that paragraph, a bias which has regrettably
characterized Security Council resolutions in the past and
has contributed to a decline in the Council’s prestige, rcsonance and effectiveness. The conscious omission of any reference to acts of violence against Israeli~civilians may be
viewed as an indirect encouragement to the terrorists
against whom Israel has been forced to act in order to
protect its own population. Indeed, the resolution is deliberately devoid of whatever criticism was voiced by the
Secretary-General in his report concerning the increased
incidence of terrorism and acts of provocation directed by
the PLO against the men of UNIFIL within the UNIFIL
area of operation.

174. The fourth condition is the co-operation of the forces
in control to enable UNIFIL to have freedom of movement
and accessto the south. The militia group is not a master of
its decisionsand, since Israel has control over that group, in
the light of Israeli known policy one should not expect the
attainment of a climate conducive to success.
175. The future of UNIFIL
is not bright because its
options are limited and because it has found itself a prisoner
of an abnormal situation.
176. Israeli spokesmen talk about their country’s continued co-operation with UNIFIL. They talk of that cooperation, I must say, tongue in cheek, in an attempt to
deceive world public opinion rather than as a sincere expression of policy.

185. With reference to paragraph 2, Israel rejects the
unfounded implication that it is Israel which has endangered the territorial integrity of Lebanon. The integrity,
unity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon
have been progressively undermined for the past several
years by the terrorist PLO and by the Syrian army of
occupation to which the resolution contains no reference.
The Council may close its eyes to those facts, but world
public opinion is not so blinkered.

177. On the other hand, we appreciate the efforts of the
Lebanese Government to restore its authority in the south.
We encourage those efforts and hope that Lebanon will
succeed in extending its authority over all parts of its territory in the south.
178. The renewal of the UNIFIL mandate should not
become a semi-annual ritual that the Council is expected to
perform. UNIFIL is an interim force sent to Lebanon to
assist in carrying out a definite mandate. Its renewal should
not be taken for granted, and the Force cannot be a substitute for an effective Lebanese presence in the south. There is
no doubt an inherent danger in showing a tendency towards

186. Finally, Israel rejects the meaningless reference to the
1949 Armistice Agreement contained in paragraph 6. As I
have already pointed out in the course of the present debate,
it was Lebanon which abrogated that agreement by its
declarations and actions, both in 1967 and since. In the
17

present circumstances, the deference to the defunct Armistice Agreement is patently illogical and untenable. Israel has
made that clear on several occasions in recent years and
now re$ii
that it will not be a party to such a warped
and fictlt~ous concept.
187. The PRESIDENT (inrerpretarionflom Rur&zz): The
representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has
asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right of reply.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
188. Mr. ABDEL RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): If there werea prize to bc awarded for lying,
distortion and falsification, I am sure that the representative
of the Government of Menachem Begin would be the
winner. He has made a mockery of international law,
misused and adapted it for his own benefit. International
law cannot ignore the right of people who have been
expelled from their home and property, who have been
under military occupation for the past 12 years and who
have been denied their very basic human rights to selfdetermination and national independence, to struggle for
the achievement of those rights.
189. The Goveriunent of Israel, based on an obsolete
ideology, that contradicts history, a racist ideology-the
Zionist ideology-has conducted a war of genocide against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories
and in refugee camps in Lebanon, as well as against the
innocent Lebanese people.
190. I think the international community is aware of who
is the terrorist. Is it those who have converted a whole
nation into a homeless people? Is it those who have committed massacres of the Palestinian people %om 1948 until
now, massacres such as that committed against the villagers
of Deir Yassin by the notorious terrorist Menachem Begin;
.is-it those who fly jet warplanes and drop cluster bombs,
delayed action bombs and 1,000 pound bombs on Palestinians and Lebanese in Lebanon? Or those who struggle in
self-defence and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and all the resolutions of the United
Nations that allow people under military occupation to
defend their basic human and national rights? I think that
the international community is aware of who is the terrorist.
19X. I should like to respond to the statement made by the
representative of the United States, a statement that is
typical of that Government. It is characterized by hypocrisy
and imbalance and, probably positions that are out of step
with history. I wouId have expected the United States to
condemn Israel for its genocidal war against the Lebanese
and Palestinian peoples. I would have expected the United
States to condemn Israel for stealing Palestinian land from
Palestinian peasants. I would have expected the United
States to declare that it is halting its supply to Israel of
cluster and delayed-action bombs. I would have expected
the United States to stop supporting Israel with weapons
and aircraft. I would have expected the United States to
condemn Israel for closing universities and schools and
rounding up civilians. I would have expected the United
States to declare that it opposes and condemns vigilante
activities against Palestinians in the occupied territories. I

would have expected the United States, which considers
itself the godfather of peace, to declare its recognifion of the
national rights of the Palestinian -people. I wouId have
expected the United States to recognize the right of the
Palestinian neonle to self-determination. Instead, the reptesentative of the United States has quoted Menachem
Begin’s statement before the Knesset rather than his statement made yesterday in which he declared that the West
Bank and the Gaze Strip are integral parts of Israel. Where
else can we find a more biased position than that?
192. The challenge for peace is mill there. As I declared
before in this body, we the Palestinian people are struggling for peace. We ivant peace, but peace that is based on a
recognition of our national rights-our
right to selfdetermination, our right to establish our own independent
State and the right of our refugees to be repatriated in
accordance with the Charter and resolutions of the United
Nations.
193. The PRESIDENT (interpretationf
Russian): The
representative of Lebanon has asked to be allowed to make.
a statement and I now call on him.
194. Mr. TU&I (Lebanon): Thii has been a very difficult
day. To me and to my country it has been an historic day,
and we hope, Mr. President, that it is a good amen that
resolution 450 (1979) should have been adopted under your
presidency. I realize that it is diflicult to maintain one’s
serenity after such a debate. I shall.
195. In my opening remarks I- eked the Council that we
all be pragmatic in our approach to the problem and I
prdmised and undertook to be so. I think we have been so,
despite “lessons’* in law and “lessons” in history, and I shall
not satiate the Council with a response to any of those.
196. We are not dealing here with words; we are dealing
with human lives, we are dealing with the future of a country, we are dealing with a solid land which we love and to
which we are attached, and I need not remind the Council
or any of the members or speakers that it wasthe security of
Lebanon that we were debating, not the security of Israel
nor the solution of the Palestinian problem.
197. I think that I may be allowed ta say that after five
years of prejudice we have earned the right to seek for
Lebanon a Lebanese peace. We have earned the right to ask
the world, through this body, that our land be given back to
us, that peace in Lebanon be peace for the Lebanese and
that Lebanon be for the Lebanese to live in, in peace and
security.
198. I think that from the present debate ‘there has
emerged a consensus that UNIFIL has probably been overstretched and that we have arrived at a point where some
basic and historic decisions must be taken. My-colleague
and dear friend from Kuwait said that none of us should
take UNIFIL for granted nor the renewal of its mandate as
being automatic. I tend to agree with him, ruld I think we
should be called upon in the forthcoming six months to
proceed to refocus on UNIFIL, and I am glad that Commander Erskiie is Rere, because the real spirit inwhich the
Force should proceed in the forthcoming months has been

z

.

in this Council, and i neednot go into it any.

soldiersfrom Fiji and Norway, from lands far away from
my own land havecometo die for the causeof peacein my
country!Thattousismorethanachallcnge.Wetoo,willbe
preparedto die to safeguardLebanonand to p&serveit in
EUChamannertbatwewillonedaybecfiabled,againin
prosperity and stri~gth, to expressin this world body the
fti.gratitude that we owe.

199. I should.Jiketo concludeby Sayingr&rely this. We
are thankfiil to thosewho have-addressedwords of Ciendship and of pity, as well as to thosewho have spokenout
againstmy couwy. I think one should know how to draw
less6nsfrom such tragic and historic momentsand that
nothing emphasizes’thistragedy more thii~ the fact that

T&e keetfng rosf at Y.ZOp.m

.
>-.
/-

I.

.L

.

I

‘.

19

.,

.

*

--

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nationa
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PBOCUREB

NATIONS

PUBLICATlONS

may be obtained
,your book&ore

LB!5 PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributora
or write to: United
Nations,
Safes

DES NATIONS

Las publicationa
des Nations
Unies aont en vente dans les librairks
d&nmitairea
du monde entier. Infonnex-voua
aupr&s de votre libraire
i : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAE

IIOJIY’IHTb

H3AAHHII

OPPAHH

3AWAH

UNIBS
et fe agencea
ou adreaaez-vow

OWM!ZLWHGHHhIX

HAI&HH

H3xamn
Oprasu33aumi
Ofhe~mzemib~x
Haufftt
~oxno
xynrrm
a ummcxbrx
maraamnax n l feHTcTaax
eo acex pa*orrax
MHpa. HaBonfire
cnpasxn
06 u3nannnx
a
nwneu qumutou
naramtie
stm nmutre
no sapecy : Opram~aau~~
06senxrremxbtx
Haqsdl. Cerqxr
uo nponamce mnaimtt,
Hbro-Aopx
mx XCeiesa.
COMO

CONSBCUIB

PUBLICACIONBS

DE LAS

Las publicacionea
de las Naciones
Unidas
estan
buidoras
en todan partea de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

titko

in United Mm.

New Yoik

~.Pricc:$U.S2.50

NACIONBS

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
a EIJ librero
o.diijaae

y canas dish+
a: Nncionea

“.

79-70002--Few,
‘.

, I.
. ..’

Ip(u~~$tl
