United Nations

A/RES/70/166

General Assembly

Distr.: General
22 February 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 72 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2015
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/70/489/Add.2)]

70/166. Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the
Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and
Linguistic Minorities annexed to that resolution, and bearing in mind article 27 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 1 as well as other relevant existing
international and regional standards and national legislation,
Recalling also its subsequent resolutions on the effective promotion of the
Declaration, as well as Human Rights Council resolutions 6/15 of 28 September 2007 2
and 19/23 of 23 March 2012, 3 by which the Council established and renewed the
mandate of the Forum on Minority Issues, 16/6 of 24 March 2011 4 and 25/5 of
27 March 2014 5 on the mandate of the Independent Expert on minority issues, 18/3 of
29 September 2011 on the panel to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Declaration 6 and 22/4 of 21 March 2013 on the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, 7
Affirming that the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and dialogue between these
minorities and the rest of society, as well as the constructive and inclusive
development of practices and institutional arrangements to accommodate diversity
within societies, contribute to political and social stability and the prevention and
peaceful resolution of conflicts involving the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities,
_______________
1

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I,
sect. A.
3
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. III, sect. A.
4
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/66/53), chap. II, sect. A.
5
Ibid., Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
6
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/68/53), chap. IV, sect. A.
2

15-16920 (E)

*1516920*

Please recycle

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

A/RES/70/166

Welcoming the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 8 of
which the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on
Financing for Development 9 is an integral part, recalling that the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets seek to realize the human rights of all, and stressing
the need for Member States to integrate the 2030 Agenda into their respective national
policies and development frameworks, as appropriate, to promote the effective
implementation, follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda, in order to ensure that no
one is left behind,
Expressing concern at the frequency and severity of disputes and conflicts
involving persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minori ties in
many countries and their often tragic consequences, and that such persons often suffer
disproportionately from the effects of conflicts resulting in the violation of their
human rights and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through, inter alia,
population transfers, revocation of previously held identity documents, refugee flows
and forced relocation,
Emphasizing the important role that national institutions can play in the
promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic,
religious and linguistic minorities as well as in early warning and awareness -raising
measures to address problems regarding minority situations,
Emphasizing also the need for reinforced efforts to meet the goal of the full
realization of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities, including by addressing economic and social conditions and
marginalization, as well as to end any type of discrimination against them,
Emphasizing further the importance of recognizing and addressing multiple,
aggravated and intersecting forms of discrimination against persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and the compounded negative
impact upon the enjoyment of their rights,
Emphasizing the fundamental importance of human rights education, training
and learning as well as of dialogue, including intercultural and interfaith dialogue, and
interaction among all relevant stakeholders and members of society on the promotion
and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities as an integral part of the development of society as a whole,
including the sharing of best practices such as for the promotion of mutual
understanding of minority issues, managing diversity by recognizing plural identities
and promoting inclusive and stable societies as well as social cohesion therein,
Acknowledging that the United Nations has an important role to play regarding
the protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities by, inter alia, taking due account of, and giving effect to, the
Declaration,
Welcoming the publication of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights entitled Promoting and Protecting Minority Rights:
A Guide for Advocates, which provides information on main actors working on the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in
the United Nations and in key regional organizations and which constitutes a valuable
tool for advocates working on this issue worldwide,
_______________
8
9

2/7

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

A/RES/70/166

Recognizing the important role played by the Special Rapporteur of the Human
Rights Council on minority issues in promoting the implementation of the
Declaration,
1.
Reaffirms the obligation of States to ensure that persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities may exercise fully and
effectively all human rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination and
in full equality before the law, as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, 10 and
draws attention to the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, 11 including the provisions on forms of multiple discrimination;
2.
Urges States and the international community to promote and protect the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as
set out in the Declaration, including through the encouragement of conditions for the
promotion of their identity, the provision of adequate education and the facilitation of
their participation in all aspects of the political, economic, social, religious and
cultural life of society and in the economic progress and development of their country,
without discrimination, and to apply a gender perspective while doing so;
3.
Urges States to take all appropriate measures, inter alia, constitutional,
legislative, administrative and other measures, for the promotion and implementation
of the Declaration, and appeals to States to cooperate bilaterally and multilaterally, in
particular on the exchange of best practices and lessons learned, in accordance with
the Declaration, in order to promote and protect the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
4.
Calls upon States, with a view to enhancing the implementation of the
Declaration and to ensuring the realization of the rights of persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, to take appropriate measures by,
inter alia:
(a) Reviewing any legislation, policy or practice that has a discriminatory or
disproportionately negative effect on persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities with a view to considering its amendment;
(b) Developing awareness-raising and training initiatives, including for public
officials, judges, prosecutors and law enforcement officials, on the rights contained in
the Declaration;
(c) Dedicating departments, sections or focal points within existing
institutions or considering the establishment of specialized national institutions or
agencies to address the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities;
(d) Undertaking initiatives to ensure that persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities are aware of and able to exercise their ri ghts
as set out in the Declaration and in other international human rights obligations and
commitments;
5.
Recommends that States and other relevant actors ensure to the fullest
extent possible that the Declaration is translated into all minority language s and
disseminated widely;
_______________
10
11

Resolution 47/135, annex.
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

3/7

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

A/RES/70/166

6.
Also recommends that States ensure that all measures taken with a view to
implementing the Declaration are, to the fullest extent possible, developed, designed,
implemented and reviewed with the full, effective and equal participation of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
7.
Calls upon States to give special attention to the situation and specific
needs of women, children, older persons and persons with disabilities belonging to
minorities while promoting and protecting the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
8.
Encourages States, in their follow-up to the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, to include
aspects relating to persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities in their national plans of action and, in this context, to take forms of
multiple discrimination fully into account;
9.
Calls upon States to integrate the promotion and protection of the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, as well as
effective non-discrimination and equality for all, into strategies for the prevention and
resolution of conflicts involving these minorities, while ensuring their full and
effective participation in the design, implementation and evaluation of such strategies;
10. Recommends that States adopt holistic, inclusive and non-discriminatory
security and policing strategies, which are important elements in preventing and
combating discrimination, including racial profiling, and violence against persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and encourages
States to develop and implement these strategies in consultation with the minority
communities and incorporate them into wider law enforcement and protection
strategies and ensure equal and effective access to justice;
11. Condemns all acts of violence specifically targeting persons belonging to
national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
12. Recognizes that women and girls belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities can be exposed to both gender-based violence and violence
on the grounds of their belonging to minorities in conflict and post-conflict situations,
urges States to take special measures to protect them from all forms of violence,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence, and stresses the importance of their
empowerment;
13. Calls upon States to take all appropriate measures to ensure the protection
and care of children belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
who are at risk of or have experienced violence, in accordance with relevant
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child; 12
14. Expresses its appreciation for the successful completion, in November
2014, of the seventh session of the Forum on Minority Issues, on the theme
“Preventing and addressing violence and atrocity crimes targeted against minorities”,
which, through the widespread participation of stakeholders, provided an important
platform for promoting dialogue on this topic and, as part of its outcome, produced
recommendations to prevent violence and related crimes, to address ongoing violence
and for post-violence situations, 13 and encourages States to take into consideration the
relevant recommendations of the Forum;
_______________
12
13

4/7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
A/HRC/28/77.

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

A/RES/70/166

15. Invites States, United Nations mechanisms, bodies, specialized agencies,
funds and programmes, regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and national human rights institutions as well as academics and experts
on minority issues to continue to participate actively in the sessions of the Forum;
16. Reaffirms that the universal periodic review, as well as the United Nations
human rights treaty bodies, constitute important mechanisms for the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in that regard calls upon States
to effectively follow up on accepted universal periodic review recommendations
related to the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, and further encourages States parties to give serious consideration to the
follow-up to treaty body recommendations on the matter;
17. Commends the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on
minority issues for the work that has been done and the important role played in
raising the level of awareness of and in giving added visibility to the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and for her guiding
role in the preparations for and the work of the Forum, which contributes to efforts to
improve cooperation and coordination among all United Nations mechanisms relating
to the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
18. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur in
the performance of the tasks and duties mandated to her, to provide her with all the
necessary information requested and to seriously consider responding promptly and
favourably to the requests of the Special Rapporteur to visit their countries in order to
enable her to fulfil her duties effectively;
19. Encourages the specialized agencies, regional organizations, national
human rights institutions and non-governmental organizations to develop regular
dialogue and cooperation with the mandate holder as well as to continue to contribute
to the promotion and protection of the rights of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities;
20. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to promote, within his mandate, the implementation of the Declaration, and
to engage in a dialogue with Governments for that purpose and regularly update and
disseminate widely the United Nations Guide for Minorities;
21. Welcomes the inter-agency cooperation among United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes on minority issues, led by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and urges them to further increase t heir
coordination and cooperation by, inter alia, developing policies on the promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities, drawing also on relevant
outcomes of the Forum and taking into account the work of relevant regional
organizations;
22. Takes note in particular, in this regard, of the initiatives and activities of
the United Nations network on racial discrimination and the protection of minorities,
coordinated by the Office of the High Commissioner and aimed at enhancing dialogue
and cooperation between relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
and invites the network to continue to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur on
minority issues and the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and to consult and engage with
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and civil
society actors;

5/7

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

A/RES/70/166

23. Invites the High Commissioner to continue to seek voluntary contributions
to facilitate the effective participation of representatives of non -governmental
organizations and persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic
minorities, in particular those from developing countries, in minority -related activities
organized by the United Nations, in particular the activities of its human rights bodies
and of the Forum, and in doing so to give particular attention to ensuring the
participation of young people and women;
24. Welcomes, in this regard, the decision of the Human Rights Council to
establish a special fund for the participation of civil society and other relevant
stakeholders in, inter alia, the Forum on Minority Issues, 14 aiming to facilitate the
broadest possible participation of civil society representatives and other relevant
stakeholders, with particular attention being paid to participants from least developed
countries, and calls upon States to support the participation of civil society and other
relevant stakeholders in the Forum and, to that end, to make voluntary contributions to
the special fund;
25. Calls upon the Secretary-General to make available, at the request of
Governments concerned, qualified expertise on minority issues, including in the
context of the prevention and resolution of disputes and conflicts, to assist in
resolving existing or potential situations involving minorities;
26. Invites the human rights treaty bodies, as well as special procedures of the
Human Rights Council, to continue to give attention, within their respectiv e mandates,
to situations and rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities and, in this regard, to take into consideration relevant
recommendations of the Forum;
27. Invites the United Nations mechanisms and bodies, the specialized
agencies and regional organizations, within their respective mandates, to continue to
contribute to the protection and the prevention of violations of the rights of persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, including by
strengthening cooperation in respect of information-gathering and improving the
information flow between themselves and with States;
28. Encourages regional intergovernmental bodies, within their respective
regions, to promote greater attention to the rights of persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by, inter alia, actively raising awareness of
and promoting the Declaration in their work, encouraging its implementation at the
national level and considering the creation of thematic and/or special mechanisms on
this issue;
29. Encourages national human rights institutions to pay due attention to the
rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities by,
inter alia, considering the establishment of, for instance, a department, section or focal
point within their secretariats to address those rights and to play a role in stopping
violence, including by monitoring situations of potential threats for persons belonging
to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities, and by investigating and
reporting, in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (the Paris Principles) 15

_______________
14

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/68/53/Add.1), chap. IV, decision 24/118.
15
Resolution 48/134, annex.

6/7

Effective promotion of the Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging
to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities

A/RES/70/166

and their respective mandates, episodes of targeted violence against persons belonging
to minorities, including, when necessary, to regional and international bodies;
30. Encourages civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to
promote awareness of the Declaration and to review the extent to which it integrates
the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities
and the Declaration into its work, as well as to inform persons belonging to national or
ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities about their rights;
31. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Special Rapporteur on
minority issues and their special focus on preventing and addressing violence and
other serious crimes against persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities 16 and on minorities and the criminal justice process; 17
32. Requests the Special Rapporteur to report annually to the General
Assembly and include recommendations for effective strategies for the better
implementation of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and
linguistic minorities;
33. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the effective
promotion of the Declaration; 18
34. Takes note with appreciation of the “Guidance note of the SecretaryGeneral on racial discrimination and protection of minorities” providing guidance for
the United Nations system on how to address racial discrimination and the protection
of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities and
aimed at, inter alia, integrating their rights into the work of the United Nations system
at the global, regional and country levels, including through coordination
mechanisms;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-second session a report on the implementation of the present resolution,
including information on activities undertaken by Member States, the Office of the
High Commissioner, the Special Rapporteur, relevant United Nations entities and
other relevant stakeholders to enhance the implementation of the Declaration and to
ensure the realization of the rights of persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious
and linguistic minorities;
36. Decides to continue consideration of the question at its seventy-second
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
80th plenary meeting
17 December 2015

_______________
16

A/69/266.
A/70/212.
18
A/70/255.
17

7/7
