A/54/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

96th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 10 May 2000, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Morel
(Seychelles), Vice-President, took the Chair.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis.

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.

Mrs. Browne (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I speak
today on behalf of the Permanent Mission of Saint
Kitts and Nevis. I would like first of all to express my
gratitude to you, Mr. Vice-President, for your statement
and kind remarks expressed in honour of the late Sir
Lee L. Moore. I am confident that he would have liked
me to express appreciation for the cordial relations that
he shared with the members of the Assembly and for
the general spirit of cooperation that exists between our
Mission and the United Nations system.

Tribute to the memory of the late Permanent
Representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Lee Llewellyn
Moore
The Acting President: It is my sad duty to
inform members of the passing of one of our
colleagues, Mr. Lee Llewellyn Moore, the Permanent
Representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis to the United
Nations since 1995.
Ambassador Moore had a long and distinguished
career as a civil servant and an esteemed diplomat, and
was well respected both at home and abroad for his
admirable qualities and devotion to his country and to
the ideals of the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly and its
President, and on my own behalf, I should like to
convey our heartfelt condolences to the Government
and people of Saint Kitts and Nevis and to the bereaved
family.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of Mr. Lee
Llewellyn Moore.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.

I share the Vice-President’s comment that Sir Lee
L. Moore had a very distinguished career: he served the
Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis in the fields of law,
politics and diplomacy. It was in January of this year
that Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II conferred upon
him the title of Knight Commander of the Order of
Saint Michael and Saint George for his sterling
contribution to the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis.
In his address to the Federation on the passing of
Sir Lee L. Moore, The Honourable Denzil Douglas,
Prime Minister of the Federation, stated, “The
Federation has lost yet another of its illustrious sons”. I
join The Honourable Prime Minister in saying that the
Permanent Mission of Saint Kitts and Nevis mourns the
loss of a remarkable diplomat.
The mortal remains of Sir Lee L. Moore will be
laid to rest in Saint Kitts and Nevis at a State funeral

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-42553 (E)
`````````

A/54/PV.96

on Friday, 19 May. A memorial service will be held in
his honour in New York at a date to be announced. I
would also like to inform the Assembly that a book of
condolences will be open for signature at the
Permanent Mission of Saint Kitts and Nevis tomorrow,
Thursday, 11 May, and on Friday, 12 May, between the
hours of 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. I take this opportunity also
to thank representatives who have already conveyed
expressions of condolences.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/54/730/Add.5)
The Acting President: In the letter contained in
document A/54/730/Add.5, the Secretary-General
informs the President of the General Assembly that
since the issuance of his communications contained in
document A/54/730 and addenda 1 to 4, Mali has made
the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in that
document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions

(h)

Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/54/110)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/54/110, in accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, having consulted the regional groups
concerned, and on the basis of the candidate submitted
by the African States, as well as through a consultation
by secret ballot with the General Assembly, the
President of the General Assembly requested Austria,
Burkina Faso, Germany and Romania to propose
candidates.
As further indicated in document A/54/110, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General in his capacity as Chairman of
the Administrative Committee on Coordination, the
President of the General Assembly submits to the
Assembly the candidatures of Mrs. Doris BertrandMuck of Austria, Mr. Ion Gorita of Romania,
Mr. Wolfgang M. Münch of Germany and Mr. LouisDominique Ouédraogo of Burkina Faso for
appointment as members of the Joint Inspection Unit
for a five-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2001 and expiring on 31 December 2005.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint those candidates?
It was so decided.

Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/54/541/Add.1)
The Acting President: In paragraph 5 of the
report contained in document A/54/541/Add.1, the
Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Nathan Irumba of Uganda as a
member of the Committee on Contributions for a term
of office beginning 10 May 2000 and ending 31
December 2000.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the person recommended?
It was so decided.

2

Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit

Agenda item 49 (continued)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
(b)

The Millennium Assembly of the United
Nations
Draft resolution (A/54/L.83/Rev.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/864)

The Acting President: In view of the urgency
unanimously expressed by Member States that a
decision on the organizational aspects of the
Millennium Summit should be taken without delay, I
have consulted with the Secretariat and I can advise
Member States that if draft resolution A/54/L.83/Rev.1

A/54/PV.96

is adopted today, it will be possible to have the drawing
of lots to establish the list of speakers for the
Millennium Summit on Friday, 26 May, in the morning.
Before we proceed to consider draft resolution
A/54/L.83/Rev.1, I should like to submit to members
some oral revisions to the draft resolution.

of the General Assembly about the preparations for the
Millennium Summit. It is the view of the President that
this will help facilitate the smooth and successful
co-chairmanship of the Millennium Summit. The
President has discussed his intentions with the
Permanent Representative of Finland, who has
expressed her satisfaction in that regard.

The first revision is to the second paragraph of
the preambular part. The first line of the second
preambular paragraph should read:

We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/54/L.83/Rev.1, as orally revised.

“Recalling also its resolution 54/254 of 15 March
2000, in which it:”.

I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of position before action
is taken on the draft resolution.

At the beginning of subparagraphs (a), (b) and
(c), add the words “Decided that”.
After subparagraph (c), add the following
subparagraph, taken from paragraph 4 of resolution
54/254 of 15 March 2000:
“(d) Requested the President of the General
Assembly to hold consultations with all Member
States in an open-ended process with a view to
taking decisions on all outstanding issues relating
to the Millennium Summit, including its
outcome.”
The next revision concerns part A of the annex.
Paragraph 4 (a) of part A of the annex would be
substituted by the following:
“(a) Heads of State will thus be accorded
first priority, followed by heads of Government;
vice-presidents, crown princes/princesses; the
highest-ranking official of the Holy See and
Switzerland, in their capacity as observer States,
and Palestine, in its capacity as observer;
ministers; and permanent representatives.”
That is the end of the revisions.
With regard to paragraph 2 of part B of the annex,
in particular the last sentence, which reads:
“The choice of chairperson of the fourth round
table will be subject to further consultations”,
I should like to assure the Assembly that the President
will consult the interested parties concerned, notably
the two other regional groups, in the choice of the
chairperson of the fourth round table.
The President has also asked me to let the
Assembly know that he will inform the representative
of the country of the President of the fifty-fifth session

May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The draft resolution on the organization of
the list of speakers and the round tables for the
Millennium Summit reflects to a large extent the views
expressed by various delegations on procedural matters
relating to the Summit.
We would, however, like to be quite clear about a
number of provisions in the draft.
First, we support the proposal that the draft
should clearly set forth the order of statements to be
made at the Summit, on the understanding that priority
will be given to heads of State and then heads of
Government, vice-presidents and so forth. In this
connection, we note that this idea is reflected in the
amendments that have just been read out to us.
The second point relates to paragraph 2,
subparagraph (b), of part A, which provides that
consultations will continue regarding the possible
participation by one or more representatives of
intergovernmental organizations, parliaments and civil
society. In this connection, it is our understanding that
none of the Member States would object to the
participation at the Summit by representatives of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union. Thus we consider that this
question in principle is settled, and that further
consultations will relate only to participation by other
invitees,
as
referred
to
in
paragraph
2,
subparagraph (b).
Lastly, we deem it important that after the
adoption of this draft resolution, the focus of our work
should be shifted immediately to preparations for the

3

A/54/PV.96

outcome, the final document of the Summit, as
provided for in resolution 54/254. We reaffirm our
willingness to cooperate constructively with all
delegations and, of course, with the President of the
General Assembly, with a view to reaching agreement
on an important political declaration of the Summit.
Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea): I would like to
support the oral revision that you, Sir, proposed with
regard to paragraph 4 (a) of annex A of the draft
resolution.
My delegation believes that the paragraph as
revised is in conformity with the letter and spirit of the
well-established practice of the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I would like to thank you
very much for your support.
We have heard the last speaker in explanation of
position before action is taken.
I call on the representative of Venezuela on a
point of order.
Mr. Herrera Marcano (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): I want to point out a substantive discrepancy
between the English and Spanish versions of the draft
resolution on which we are about to take a decision, in
the second sentence of paragraph 2 of annex B.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/54/L.83/Rev.1,
entitled “Organization of the list of speakers and the
round tables for the Millennium Summit”, as orally
revised.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/54/L.83/Rev.1, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/54/L.83/Rev.1,
revised, was adopted (resolution 54/261).

as

orally

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Tello (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the adoption of this resolution,
which at last allows us to move from consideration of
procedural matters to debating the substantive aspects
of the Millennium Summit.

4

In this connection, we respectfully request that
there be prepared and distributed a timetable of
meetings for the consideration of the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Summit. Those meetings should
be scheduled to begin as soon as possible, so that the
outcome or outcomes that are to be adopted in
September by our heads of State or Government can be
prepared.
This resolution, together with the decision
adopted this morning by the Fifth Committee, makes it
perfectly clear that we are preparing for the holding of
a single event – a unique and singular event to which
our heads of State or Government have been personally
invited by the Secretary-General.
We mention this because we are concerned that in
this building’s hallways we continue to hear about
ongoing initiatives aimed at diminishing this solemn
occasion through the holding of parallel events. So that
there will be no mistake, I will say that I am referring
to the idea of having meetings at the level of heads of
State or Government of the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council.
We trust that the countries that make up those two
principal organs share with us the desire to ensure the
greatest success and visibility of the Millennium
Summit.
The Acting President: I would like to welcome
the observations made by the representative of Mexico
and to assure him that the President has informed me
that, when he returns during the week of 22 May, he
intends to hold consultations with the SecretaryGeneral with a view to establishing a timetable so as to
have successful preparations and to implement the
decisions taken today.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We are extraordinarily pleased that the
General Assembly has been able to adopt this
resolution at this time, after 18 months of consultations
and numerous meetings.
As we stated on 27 April of this year, the fact that
we have been able to adopt these important decisions
puts us in an excellent position to undertake the most
important part of the preparations for this summit.
The Millennium Summit will not go down in
history – or fail to do so – on the basis of the
procedures and modalities of its organization, but on
the basis of the expressions of political will by the

A/54/PV.96

Member States and of the commitments undertaken and
results achieved. In this connection, the delegation of
Cuba greatly welcomes the fact that, with the adoption
of this resolution, we have concluded the lengthy stage
of organizational decisions, despite the fact that during
this morning’s meeting of the Fifth Committee, we
raised a number of issues on points that were open to
interpretation in connection with technical aspects or
inaccuracies relating to the budgetary aspects of this
resolution.
In our opinion, the most important requirement is
that the President of the General Assembly be able
immediately
to
announce
a
timetable
of
intergovernmental consultations on the substantive
issues to be considered by the Summit. We welcome
the explanation that you, Sir, have just given, but we
would also like to point out that if the consultations
with the regional groups are to begin on 22 May in
order to determine the way in which the
intergovernmental process is going to take place, it will
be very difficult to accomplish that goal before June,
which is less than two months before that important
universal event.
Our delegation would like the General Assembly
immediately to begin to consider the important report
of the Secretary-General and other inputs that are no
less important, such as the communiqué of the annual
ministerial meeting in Cartagena or the documents
adopted during the recent South Summit.
Our delegation believes that the Millennium
Summit will be a unique meeting of the General
Assembly that should have no competition from other
parallel events or initiatives that, albeit inadvertently,
might have unwanted consequences and diminish the
impact of the Summit or undermine the importance of a
summit meeting of the most representative and
universal body of the United Nations – the General
Assembly, whose powers should be wielded fully and
should not be diminished.
The Acting President: The observations of the
Permanent Representative of Cuba will be duly
conveyed to the President.

speakers. I would also like to refer to the rumours
continuing to circulate in the corridors about planned
summits, in connection with the Millennium Summit,
of two other United Nations organs, namely, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
It is certainly not for us to infringe upon the
responsibilities of those main organs of the United
Nations. The Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council are certainly entitled to hold meetings at
their discretion, whenever they consider it necessary.
However, as we see it, the Secretary-General initially
brought forward the idea of a Millennium Assembly of
the United Nations in order to convey to the world the
message of a family of nations, standing together,
shoulder to shoulder, to master the challenges of the
century that is beginning. We are afraid that this
message might be diluted if it develops into a more or
less regular event involving summit meetings by one,
two or three main organs of the United Nations.
We would like to draw the attention of the
President to these rumours and would very much
appreciate it if consultations could take place with the
other organs of the United Nations to make sure that
we are about to come together to bring our heads of
State to an event which will truly reflect the response
of this body to the challenges ahead.
The Acting President: The observations of the
representative of Germany have been duly noted.
We have heard the last speaker in explanation of
position.
Further to my earlier comments in response to the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Mexico, I wish to confirm to the Assembly that the
President will convene a meeting of the General
Assembly during the week of 22 May to allow Member
States to have an exchange of views on the report of
the Secretary-General entitled, “We the peoples: the
role of the United Nations in the twenty-first century”.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 49.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

Mr. Schumacher (Germany): I would like to
associate myself with the comments of previous

5
