S/PV.8584

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8584th meeting

Wednesday, 24 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/575)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22850 (E)
*1922850*

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

I believe that an impartial analysis of the current
environment gives rise to both satisfaction and concern.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2019/575)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
Ms. Zerrougui is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Kinshasa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/575, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Zerrougui and Ambassador Mansour
Alotaibi, Permanent Representative of Kuwait, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I welcome the
opportunity to speak to the Council about the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to brief
you on the progress made in the post-electoral transition
process and the main challenges we continue to face.
More than six months after the December 2018
elections, it is a good moment to review the progress
made and examine the political situation in the country.
2/23

24/07/2019

I would like to reiterate the message of hope
and optimism that I have consistently brought to the
Council. President Tshisekedi has clearly expressed
his intention to initiate bold reforms, which, if fully
implemented, should lead to strengthening Congolese
institutions and improving the living conditions of the
Congolese people.
We have also noted a gradual improvement in
relations between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its neighbours since the inauguration of
President Tshisekedi. In keeping with his determination
to transform the Great Lakes region into a haven of
peace and development through the promotion of
good neighbourly relations and regional economic
integration, the Head of State is actively engaged in
diplomatic initiatives with the countries of the region
to achieve that goal.
I will continue to work closely in that regard with
the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and with
relevant regional organizations to support the Congolese
authorities in implementing the commitments contained
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Although the Prime Minister was appointed on
20 May, we are still awaiting the formation of a new
Government. Painstaking negotiations on that subject
are continuing between the two platforms of the ruling
coalition — the Cap pour le changement of President
Tshisekedi and the Front commun pour le Congo of
former President Joseph Kabila.
We understand that the process is unprecedented
for the country. Nevertheless, I call on stakeholders
to overcome their differences so that they can quickly
meet the expectations of the Congolese people. The
absence of an operational Government is detrimental to
the establishment of strong relationships with partners
and the implementation of important governance
and institutional reforms that could contribute
to the consolidation of a transitional process that
remains fragile.
In recent months, I have met with key stakeholders
in the process and urged them to preserve the gains
made during the elections and the peaceful transfer
of power and to make the necessary concessions to
finalize the composition of the Government. I would
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

also like to point out that we have seen constructive
approaches at the local level, with significant initiatives
to promote stability and development being taken by
some governors.
(spoke in English)
In the context of the eventual exit of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the Mission has closed a number of field offices in
areas where there is no longer a serious threat of
armed conflict. That will permit us to concentrate our
resources on providing support to the strengthening
of State institutions and to the protection of civilians
in areas where conflict and activities of armed groups
continue to have a devastating impact on civilians.
The report (S/2019/575) before the Council
provides a detailed account of the security situation.
Over the course of the past weeks, however, the level
of violence has increased in several areas in the eastern
part of the country. I am concerned in that regard with
the current situation in Ituri province, where spoilers
are seeking to exploit ethnic tensions in order to
instigate intercommunal violence. In addition, attacks
by the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) continue to
exact an intolerable toll on civilians. Armed groups in
Masisi, including the Nduma défense du Congo-Rénové
(NDC-R) of Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, are responsible
for atrocities, notably conflict-related sexual violence,
committed against the population.
Violence continues to be the main cause of
humanitarian needs in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. As a result, the country is currently facing
simultaneous emergency situations, including mass
displacement and protection threats.
In Ituri, more than 350,000 people have been
displaced in Djugu, Mahagi and Irumu territories
following renewed violence. The deterioration of the
security situation is interrupting the return process
that had been gradually under way since 2018, causing
new displacements towards Bunia and forcing the
humanitarian community to reorient its assistance to the
most vulnerable populations. Important gaps remain.
To date, 733,000 people are in need of assistance in
Ituri province.
In South Kivu, the surge of intercommunal
violence and armed group activity has displaced up
to 180,000 people, while the Ebola epidemic remains

S/PV. 8584

an ever-increasing concern and has claimed the lives
of more than 1,700 people to date. Recent isolated
cases, both in Goma and across the border in Uganda,
have heightened concerns about its spread outside the
Beni and Butembo areas, leading the World Health
Organization to declare the epidemic a public health
emergency of international concern.
I take this opportunity to underline that the
problems faced in eradicating that disease are not only
epidemiological in nature; they are linked as well to
a variety of political and social factors, including the
activities of armed groups such as the ADF and Mai
Mai, along with continuing high levels of community
distrust of the response to the epidemic. That confluence
of factors has resulted in a deadly environment for the
people working to counter Ebola, to the point that some
of them have been specifically threatened and killed by
armed groups.
I would like to thank countries and donors for their
generosity, which has helped to fund the Ebola response,
and I call on everyone to generously support the fourth
strategic response plan for the Ebola virus disease,
which was just presented to member States in Geneva
last week. I would also like to underline the serious need
for financing the response to other epidemiological and
humanitarian crises that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is facing. The measles outbreak, for example,
has already claimed the lives of more than 2,000 people
since the beginning of this year, even more than Ebola.
In response to those challenges, we are leading a
One United Nations approach that combines a number
of different tools. At both the national and provincial
levels, we are engaging with a variety of stakeholders
to defuse social and political tensions. Our military
and police components continue to provide support to
the Congolese security forces in efforts to secure the
affected areas and adequately respond to the activities
of armed groups. The Mission is supporting the
Congolese authorities in executing an arrest warrant
against NDC-R leader Guidon and strengthening the
performance of Congolese justice to fight impunity.
For their part, United Nations agencies are working
under the coordination of my Deputy, who serves as the
Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, to
provide an effective response to the humanitarian crisis.
MONUSCO is also providing political and logistical
support to the newly appointed United Nations Ebola
Emergency Response Coordinator.

19-228503/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I would also like to draw the Council’s attention to
the opportunity presented by the increasing number of
armed combatants who have expressed their willingness
to lay down their weapons since President Tshisekedi’s
assumption of office. The groups in question include the
Kamuina Nsapu in the Kasais, as well as Mai Mai and
Twa militia in South Kivu and Tanganyika. MONUSCO
is working closely with the Congolese authorities to
support their response to that opportunity, including by
helping to mobilize funds from the World Bank and the
Peacebuilding Fund.
In the context of my good offices, I have placed
a priority on encouraging the authorities to adopt a
community integration approach for ex-combatants,
advising against any broad-based plan to integrate
them into the security forces. The broad integration
of ex-combatants into the army and police forces in
previous years has resulted only in the degradation
of their capacities, the hijacking of security policy by
parallel networks and the incentivizing of the creation
of illegal armed groups.
There is still a great deal of work that lies before
us as we continue the process of charting MONUSCO’s
future drawdown and exit. I believe that the
independent strategic review, which recently completed
its information-gathering mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region, will later this
year present a report to the Council that outlines clearly
the challenges that remain in that regard.
In the face of those issues, MONUSCO is making
the best use of the funds made available to the Mission,
even though our budgetary challenges are stretching
our resources to the limit.
I thank the Council for its support, while
underscoring that the continued support of the Council
and Member States for MONUSCO will be critical to
the ultimate success of the Mission and its ability to
exit the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the
appropriate conditions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Alotaibi.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
a statement in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In my briefing this morning, it is my intention
4/23

24/07/2019

to provide an overview of the work of the Committee
since my last statement to this Chamber on the topic, on
26 July 2018 (see S/PV.8318).
Since my last briefing to the Council, the Committee
has held a total of seven meetings. In 2018, during
the briefing to Member States held on 26 July, the
Committee heard a briefing via video-teleconference
by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts on the
Group’s final report (S/2018/531). During the informal
consultations held on 31 August, the Committee was
briefed by and exchanged views with the Group of
Experts in connection with the Group’s programme
of work pursuant to the new mandate set forth for
it in resolution 2424 (2018). During the informal
consultations held on 6 December, the Committee was
briefed by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts
on the Group’s midterm report and discussed the
recommendations contained therein.
To date, in 2019, the Committee has met on four
occasions. A briefing for all Member States was
convened on 1 February, in which the Committee
heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the Group
of Experts on the Group’s midterm report. During the
informal consultations held on 25 March, the Committee
was briefed by the former Coordinator of the Group of
Experts on the illegal exploitation of natural resources
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
During the informal consultations held on 24 May,
the Committee was briefed by the Acting Coordinator
of the Group of Experts on the Group’s final report
and discussed the recommendations contained therein.
During the informal consultations held recently, on
8 July, I provided the Committee with a brief overview
of my visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and the United Arab Emirates, which took
place from 27 April to 6 May, in which I presented the
report of the visit.
Since my last briefing to the Security Council,
my delegation also hosted six “informal informal”
meetings at the Permanent Mission of Kuwait with
the senior official of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo follow-on mechanism, Mr. Robert Petit, in
the course of his periodic visits to New York. The
Committee continues to support Mr. Petit and his team
of technical experts as they provide assistance to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in its investigations into the March 2017 murders of two
former members of the Group of Experts, Zaida Catalán
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and Michael Sharp. Prior to my visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the United Arab
Emirates, I also convened two “informal informal”
meetings in April.
Allow me to provide the Council with several brief
remarks on my recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Uganda and the United Arab Emirates,
including some personal comments and observations.
As previously mentioned, the report of my visit was
discussed with the Committee on 8 July.
At the outset, I wish to reiterate the Committee’s
appreciation to the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the United Arab
Emirates for having made notable efforts as hosts of the
visit. In this regard, it is unfortunate that my delegation
was unable to hold meetings in Dar es Salaam, as
originally envisaged.
With regard to the visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, several interlocutors expressed the
view that the sanctions list should be updated and
reorganized in a way that clearly identifies current
spoilers of the political transition and those currently
committing grave human rights violations. To this end,
in its adoption of resolution 2478 (2019) on 26 June, the
Security Council requested that the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo provide
updated information on the sanctioned individuals and
entities. Additionally, during the visit, I noted that there
was interest among some Committee members and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
list individuals based on the designation criteria listed
in sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph 7 of resolution 2293
(2016). However, there were some Committee members
who did not deem it necessary. During my visit, there
was also a clear difference between the rhetoric that
the Chair’s delegation encountered during the meeting
with the Congolese Government, which primarily
featured the outgoing Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities, on the one hand, and the incoming
President’s positive public statements on the work of
MONUSCO and the international community in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, on the other.
I intend to capitalize on the momentum of the visit
back here in New York. I believe that this mission served
as an excellent forum to follow up with the relevant
States, continue to build channels of communication
and promote better understanding of the Sanctions

S/PV. 8584

Committee’s work. To this end, on 25 June, I sent letters
to the Permanent Representatives of Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania on the visit, and, on 5 July,
letters were sent to the Permanent Representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Arab Emirates. On 9 August, the Committee plans to
hold a briefing for all Member States in connection with
the final report of the Group of Experts (S/2019/469), as
well as my recent visit.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Alotaibi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
I warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and my
Kuwaiti colleague, Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, for their very
informative briefings.
As we noted prior to the last meeting of the
Security Council on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/PV.8563), the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been enjoying an atmosphere of optimism
since the 30 December elections. President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi has pledged his willingness to respond to the
desire for change expressed by the Congolese during
the elections, and several measures have been taken to
satisfy this desire. Several opponents have returned to
the country, prisoners of conscience have been released
and the country is experiencing a certain opening of the
political space.
On the security front, President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi has committed to working to put an end
to the conflicts affecting the country, particularly
in the east, and the intercommunal clashes that have
affected some regions recently. Several rebel groups
have announced that they want to lay down their arms
and return to civilian life. France is encouraged by
such developments and hopes that the path mapped out
in recent months will continue, both in terms of civil
liberties and national reconciliation.
Attending to the combatants wishing to demobilize
is a pressing need so as to prevent them from being
tempted to return to the bush and renounce civilian
life. The Security Council has mandated the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to
assist the Congolese authorities in this regard, but

19-228505/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Mission will not be able to do so without their
determined leadership.
New steps must be taken very soon in the country’s
institutional sphere to confirm the path upon which
it has embarked. I am thinking, in particular, of the
Government, the formation of which will facilitate a
re-engagement of partners and the holding in 2020 of
the first local elections in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the regional level, President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi has undertaken commendable
initiatives to revive the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. Meetings of the Heads of State from the
Great Lakes in recent months have been positive. France
encourages the countries of the region to respond to this
call and mobilize to fully implement the Framework as
they approach the next follow-up summit, scheduled to
be held in Kinshasa in the fall.
But the situation is not yet normalized. Several
challenges remain to be addressed. First, in the east,
the predatory action of armed groups persists, financed
by the illegal exploitation of natural resources. Efforts
have been made with the support of MONUSCO, which
is positive.
The announcement of the rotation of troops of the
Congolese armed forces, some of whom have remained
far too long at the front, is very encouraging, and
I hope that this will materialize soon. The sustained
professionalization of the army and the police is
crucial. However, military involvement will always
be insufficient without political dialogue, at both the
provincial and national levels, to convince the armed
groups to disarm. The restoration of the State and
the development of these regions will be essential
for a lasting return of peace. France therefore calls
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and on all
the countries in the region to act in a concerted and
determined manner to put an end to these conflicts.

24/07/2019

(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has demonstrated that we need to tackle them
firmly and collectively if we want to stop their abuses.
The region will receive unparalleled benefit from the
formalization of the mining sector, trade, economic
advantages and peace. After all, Europe was built after
the Second World War on regional collaboration in the
mining sector. Natural resources can be a factor of
peace when the political will is there.
The Ebola epidemic continues in the east of the
country and must be controlled. I wish to commend the
exemplary commitment of the Congolese authorities,
the World Health Organization and humanitarian
actors in the fight against this epidemic, as well as the
support provided by MONUSCO. France welcomes the
appointment of Mr. David Gressly as the United Nations
Emergency Ebola Response Coordinator. We all know
his qualities as we have seen his work in the past within
MONUSCO. Once again, on behalf of France, I would
like to strongly condemn the attacks on humanitarian
personnel who come to the aid of the sick and who must
continue to receive our full support.
The humanitarian situation remains very worrying.
The tensions in Ituri and in the Kivus, in particular,
have provoked the displacement of people. There is
no funding to support these displaced persons. France
calls on the partners of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to rally to provide the necessary resources.

Women and children are the first victims of the
atrocities committed by these armed groups. France
is determined to protect them, which is why President
Macron has mobilized the Group of Seven to support
the foundations of Dr. Mukwege and Nadia Murad for
the benefit of victims of sexual abuse in conflict.

In all the aforementioned areas, France will
continue to stand alongside the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. During his visit on 20 May, our Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, announced
the relaunch of a long-term partnership between France
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo with a
pledge of €300 million euros over five years in three
priority areas. The first is education, with the increase
of our aide to training schools. The next priority area is
health, wherein we will continue our cooperation with
referral hospitals and do more in the fight against Ebola.
Accordingly, Professor Yves Lévy has been appointed
French special envoy in charge of the fight against
the epidemic. The final priority area is stabilization
assistance via the training of senior executives and our
support for security sector reform.

Coordinated regional action is also needed to
drain the finances of armed groups and put an end to
their trafficking. The work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533

I would like to conclude by commending the
exemplary action of Ms. Zerrougui and her entire team
at MONUSCO. The Council mandated MONUSCO
to protect civilians and support the Government in

6/23

19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the fight against armed groups. With the determined
involvement of the Congolese authorities and those of
its neighbours within the framework of an approach that
combines military pressure, if necessary, and dialogue,
it is possible to normalize the situation throughout the
country. France’s stands ready to lend its support to
achieve this objective.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing
and for the continued efforts of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to support peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, protect civilians
and secure access for public health organizations
responding to the Ebola outbreak. We deeply appreciate
the Mission’s efforts. I also wish to thank Ambassador
Alotaibi for his update on his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The United States is extremely troubled by the
recent clashes across the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including violence in the
provinces of Ituri, South Kivu and North Kivu, which
left hundreds dead and displaced hundreds of thousands,
as Ms. Zerrougui just highlighted. The United States
commends President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s efforts
to stem this violence by dispatching senior officials to
negotiate peace in South Kivu, launching community
dialogue initiatives and ordering a military offensive
in Ituri, all of which have helped address the violence.
We also welcome the decisions of several militias
to lay down their arms since President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi took office, and we urge Congolese officials
to lead a demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
(DDR) process. We encourage key officials to consider
whether the DDR process should provide willing
former fighters, such as those of the Force de résistance
patriotique de l’Ituri militia, a path to transition into a
peaceful and productive civilian life rather than simply
absorbing them into the armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and risk perpetuating cycles of
human rights violations and abuses. We encourage the
Government to clarify confusion with regard to the
DDR’s focal point as well.
At the same time, we recognize that DDR is only
one part of a larger political solution. The United
States remains committed to fighting impunity and

S/PV. 8584

supporting the rule of law, and we are encouraged by
the ongoing trials of warlords, such as Sheka, and by
the warrant issued for Guidon Shimiray Mwissa. We
applaud MONUSCO’s assistance with these efforts.
The flow of arms and the illicit trade in gold and
other precious minerals enables the violence in the east
to persist. We thank Ambassador Alotaibi for leading the
recent trip of the Sanctions Committee to the region and
the United Arab Emirates, during which we witnessed
significant goodwill to help Congolese leaders tackle
these challenges. However, we remain concerned that
the Congolese generals under United States sanctions,
such as General Gabriel Amisi Kumba, continue to
participate in illicit gold trafficking. Removing these
bad actors is critical to ending cycles of violence in
the east.
Ending the Ebola outbreak also remains a top
priority for the United States. The United States is the
largest single country donor to the Ebola response,
having contributed more than $98 million to stop the
spread of the disease. We urge existing and new donors to
consider making contributions as well. We also welcome
the World Health Organization’s recent decision to
designate the outbreak as a public health emergency of
international concern and to release the public-health
pillar of the fourth phase of the strategic response plan.
We urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations to finalize and
release the enabling-environment pillar as soon as
possible so that donors can holistically assess priorities
and resource requirements. The United States also
encourages all partners to ensure that response efforts
align with and enable clearly defined leadership and
coordination, engage and empower Congolese actors
and address the security, humanitarian and development
needs of Ebola-affected communities.
Finally, it is important to raise the key concern that
progress is slow on a number of issues, especially DDR
and the Ebola response, which has been caused by the
absence of a national Government owing primarily to
the intransigence of political actors aligned with former
President Kabila. It compromises all other progress to
which the Congolese people aspire. We call upon those
blocking the formation of a Government to adopt the
flexibility required to seat a Cabinet and fulfil the
hopes of the Congolese people for a better future.
We will continue to consider sanctions designations
and visa restrictions for those who engage in or provide

19-228507/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

support for acts that undermine the peace, stability
and security of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the light of the aforementioned challenges we
welcome the strategic review of MONUSCO and look
forward to receiving the report. We place great value
on these reviews and other United Nations reports
examining peacekeeping activities and performance.
We appreciate that the Secretary-General’s report to the
Security Council (S/2019/575) included performance
assessments as well as overall assessments of progress
on mandated tasks and would urge the inclusion
of even more details. MONUSCO cannot fulfil its
mandates without high-performing troops, police and
civilians committed to a clear set of standards and to
the protection of civilians. We urge the Secretariat
and MONUSCO to continue to implement the reforms
outlined in resolution 2436 (2018), which will be
essential to planning a troop drawdown.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their briefings.
Today, I would like to focus my statement on
three major points. First, we welcome the new positive
momentum given by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi.
Nevertheless, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo continues to be complex. Belgium remains
concerned about the security situation, especially in the
two Kivus and Ituri. We strongly condemn the latest
attacks on the Ebola standby teams in North Kivu.
We are concerned about inter-ethnic violence in Ituri,
which has already displaced more than 300,000 people,
as the Special Representative informed us. We call on
all parties to reduce tensions and show respect for the
civilian population.
We also remain concerned about the humanitarian
situation. In addition to the Ebola epidemic, there have
already been more than 87,000 cases of measles since
the beginning of the year, and cholera continues to exact
a heavy toll. As the President stated, respect for human
rights and the restoration of the rule of law remain
crucial challenges. In this regard, it is troubling to note
that the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo and the Congolese National Police were able
to continue to commit human rights violations during
the period covered by the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/575). Security sector reform, which
8/23

24/07/2019

involves the professionalization of the security forces,
must remain a priority.
Secondly, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the new sanctions
regime continue, and must continue, to contribute to
ensuring the protection of civilians and the restoration
of peace and State authority throughout the country.
By supporting the Congolese Government, MONUSCO
continues to play a key role. Therefore, within the
framework of the Mission’s current independent
strategic review, Belgium expects the development
of benchmarks to clearly measure the capacity of
the Congolese authorities to take over the various
tasks currently being carried out by MONUSCO. The
adequate protection of civilians and respect for human
rights in all circumstances remain imperative.
Belgium also welcomes the renewal of the
sanctions regime and the new mechanism for updating
the sanctions list. While welcoming the positive
cooperation between the Congolese authorities with
the sanctions regime’s Group of Experts and the
commitment of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to
improve the human rights situation, we also hope that
the forthcoming renewal of the sanctions regime can be
used to make them more effective and better targeted.
Thirdly, as the future of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and that of the Great Lakes region remain
closely linked, we call on all stakeholders to take
advantage of the current positive momentum. After the
recent quadripartite presidential summit held in Luanda
and the latest initiatives to strengthen the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, we hope that this
dynamic will prove to be sustainable and have tangible
effects. Improved regional cooperation could have
considerable benefits for the Congolese population, in
the contexts of the struggle against the various armed
groups, economic cooperation and the fight against the
illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi for their comprehensive briefings.
I would like to focus my statement on three
issues: the political process, security aspects and the
socioeconomic situation.
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

First, with regard to the political process, Poland
welcomes positive developments in the political
transformation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in recent months. We appreciate the progress
achieved by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, such as
the opening of political space, the release of political
detainees, the return of political actors and the
upholding of fundamental rights, for example, freedom
of speech. Poland supports the further stabilization and
strengthening of State institutions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In that spirit, we emphasize that the immediate
formation of the Government and the deployment of
State institutions throughout the country are necessary
for the full implementation of the essential reforms.
Poland appreciates the constructive attitude presented
by the majority of political actors in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo so far, and we hope that this
approach will be maintained. We also encourage
the authorities to further enhance cooperation with
civil society actors, in particular with women’s
representatives and young people.
Secondly, with regard to security aspects, despite
efforts made so far, the activities of foreign and
domestic armed groups, especially in the eastern part
of the country, continue to have a serious impact on
the security situation. We welcome the encouraging
decisions by several armed groups to join the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme. Opportunities to neutralize the destructive
activities of the groups, without military intervention,
should not be missed. The DDR programme should
therefore be at the centre of the stabilization of the
security situation in the country.
At the same time, Poland is worried at the persistence
of the risk of a further escalation of violence and ethnic
tensions. The relevant State institutions are responsible
for ensuring the security of its citizens. The fact that
most human rights violations and acts of sexual abuse
are committed by State agents continues to be one of
the major problems. Therefore, the immediate reform
of the security forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo so as to increase their professionalization should
be considered a matter of priority. We once again
emphasize the imperative need to hold accountable
those accused of crimes against humanity, war crimes
and other grave violations of international law.

S/PV. 8584

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo should be seen in a wider regional context. We
welcome all efforts to give new impetus to the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region. We encourage the signatories
of this agreement to increase their engagement in order
to overcome the causes of instability in the region.
Thirdly, with regard to the socioeconomic situation,
political and security volatility has significantly
hampered the humanitarian situation and development
of the country. We encourage the authorities to attain
critical momentum and implement reforms that are
necessary preconditions for creating an attractive
investment climate and economic growth. Accordingly,
Poland welcomes the recent resumption of cooperation
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
International Monetary Fund.
We remain concerned about the persistent Ebola
outbreak in the east of the country, especially in
terms of the latest declaration by the World Health
Organization, namely, that it is a public health
emergency of international concern. We strongly
condemn the continuous attacks on humanitarian
workers and medical personnel, as well as hospitals
and other medical facilities, and call on all parties on
the ground to enable the safe delivery of humanitarian
assistance for Ebola-affected areas. Let me reiterate our
full appreciation for efforts of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
and other international partners to combat the Ebola
virus disease.
In conclusion, Poland praises the important work
carried out by the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We hope for the further constructive cooperation of
the authorities with the Mission to consolidate the
considerable achievements made to date. We encourage
the Secretary-General to provide the Security Council
with the comprehensive strategic review of the Mission,
which will allow for a reliable and responsible decision
to be taken concerning the future engagement of the
United Nations on the ground.
Lastly, I would like to take this opportunity to
express our thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and the whole
MONUSCO team for their tireless efforts to support
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

19-228509/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation congratulates Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), as
well as Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their detailed briefings on
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the positive developments
in the sociopolitical situation in the country, marked
by the gradual establishment of institutions following
the most recent elections held for Parliament and the
provincial Governments and the appointment of the
Prime Minister. In addition, the return to the country of
several opposition members clearly reflects the desire
of the new authorities to open up the political space. My
country also notes with great interest the new impetus
given by the Congolese Government to the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. It particularly appreciates
the emphasis on justice sector reform, the fight
against impunity and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR), which are essential pillars
of peacebuilding. Côte d’Ivoire urges the Congolese
authorities to maintain that momentum through the
careful formation of the new Government in order to
implement the sectoral reforms necessary to meet the
pressing needs of the Congolese people.
Persistent intercommunity violence and attacks by
armed groups on civilians and humanitarian personnel
involved in the fight against the Ebola epidemic in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo remain a
major concern for my delegation. It deplores the two
attacks perpetrated on 23 July by Ugandan militias of
the Allied Democratic Forces in Beni, in the east of
the country, which resulted in the death of 12 civilians,
including two children.
My delegation therefore urges the Congolese
authorities to further strengthen the DDR process
for the benefit of the ex-combatants of armed groups
operating in Tanganyika province and to encourage
all other armed groups to abandon violence once and
for all by firmly joining the process. Similarly, my
country calls on international partners to support the
DDR programme and the efforts of the authorities and
10/23

24/07/2019

MONUSCO to restore peace and stability in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Instability in the east of the country continues to
have a negative impact on the humanitarian and health
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed, according to the estimates of humanitarian
organizations, some 13 million people, including
refugees from neighbouring countries, are in need
of protection and humanitarian assistance, while the
resources mobilized to respond to the crisis are well
below expectations.
With regard to the health situation, the persistence
of the Ebola epidemic in the east of the country
remains a matter of particular concern and highlights
the need for diligent and appropriate measures. My
country therefore welcomes the commitment of the
Congolese authorities, the World Health Organization
and MONUSCO to combatting the epidemic and urges
them to step up their efforts to eradicate the disease.
In that regard, my delegation strongly encourages
humanitarian organizations, donors and all other
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
increase their assistance in order to provide an urgent
response to the needs of those affected.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Congolese authorities, Ms. Zerrougui and her
entire team, and reiterates its call on the international
community to maintain its support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with a view to stabilizing and
consolidating peace.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to add my
voice to those who have thanked Ms. Zerrougui and
Ambassador Alotaibi for their work. I would like to
underline Ms. Zerrougui’s personal engagement on
the issue. We really appreciate it. I thank both of them
very much for their briefings and for the written report
(S/2019/575). I subscribe to what was said by those
who spoke earlier, in particular the representatives of
France, Belgium, Poland. I can therefore be brief.
I share Ms. Zerrougui’s positive take on President
Tshisekedi. She quoted his vision of establishing a
haven for peace and development in the region. I note
that some members, including my French colleague,
talked about the climate of optimism and the opening
up of the political space. That is certainly the case, but
we are not yet in heaven. Many challenges that have
already been mentioned remain, such as the formation
of the Government. I can understand that the former
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

President, Mr. Kabila, clings to power but he has to let
go. He has to understand that. People must tell him that
so that the Government can finally be formed.
As was said earlier, the justice system has to be
established in order to effectively fight impunity. The
increased violence in the east is a concern. There are
too many spoilers, in addition to displacement and the
continuation of sexual violence against children and
women, who are most affected by the conflict. The
attack on humanitarian workers, in particular during
an Ebola outbreak, is unacceptable. Ms. Zerrougui said
that it has health and political dimensions. Therefore, it
would be really good if we could have a special Council
meeting to address the Ebola crisis.
With regard to the response, I can only subscribe to
what Ms. Zerrougui said about the One United Nations
approach, at both the national and the regional levels.
Neighbouring countries also need to play on the same
team, as was also implied in Mr. Alotaibi’s briefing,
with regard to the need for regional players to play ball
and be involved.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is
also important and some success has been had in that
area, but more is needed. Efforts must also include the
cooperation of civil society. Young people must also be
involved. It is unfortunate that for health reasons we do
not have a civil society briefer with us today.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
remains key. We appreciate its redirection through
the One United Nations method and strategy. We
look forward to the independent review team’s
recommendations with regard to how best to address
the challenges and how MONUSCO can have a real
impact. We look forward to receiving that report.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui and Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi,
Permanent Representative of Kuwait and Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for their briefings.
At present, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is stable overall. National and
provisional legislative and executive institutions have
generally been established and the country’s economy
has enjoyed steady development. President Tshisekedi

S/PV. 8584

has paid visits to countries of the region to improve the
security situation in the east by strengthening regional
cooperation. Those positive developments demonstrate
that the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has the ability and the will to keep the
country stable and that the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) is effective.
Meanwhile, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
continues to face challenges and the security situation
in the eastern part of the country remains grim. The
Ebola outbreak has deteriorated and has been declared
a public health emergency of international concern,
with a greater risk of spillover. China calls on the
international community to increase its input to help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo overcome its
challenges in the security, humanitarian, development
and other spheres.
First, it is necessary to assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo with its security capacitybuilding. Peace and stability are the necessary
foundations to guarantee that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo can advance its political process and realize
economic and social development. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo bears the
primary responsibility for safeguarding its national
security and stability. The international community
should respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, fully respect the leadership of the Government
in handling its own affairs and, on that basis, help the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen its
security capacity-building. All international partners
should help to push the armed groups in the country to
give up the military option and find solutions through
dialogue and consultation.
Secondly,
regional
and
subregional
organizations — such as the African Union, the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region — should continue to play their roles as the main
channels of mediation to facilitate greater interaction,
dialogue and consultation between the parties and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The United Nations should play a coordinating
role to form synergies at the international level so
as to effectively implement the Peace, Security and

19-2285011/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Cooperation Framework between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
Thirdly, there is a need to help the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo bring the Ebola
outbreaks under control as soon as possible. The World
Health Organization (WHO) has declared the Ebola
outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo a
public health emergency of international concern.
The top priority is to step up assistance according to
the needs of the Government and, at the same time,
lend strong support to the work of the WHO and the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies. United Nations agencies should improve
coordination among themselves and work in synergy.
Fourthly, economic support should continue to be
provided to the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. International partners should focus
on increasing investment in education, health care,
infrastructure and other sectors to help the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to increase employment
opportunities, improve people’s livelihoods, restore
socioeconomic development and tackle the root causes
of the conflict. It is hoped that the United Nations
Development Programme and other agencies, as well
as the Peacebuilding Commission, will play a more
visible role.
China welcomes Ambassador Alotaibi’s recent
visit to the countries of the region. We believe that this
will help to better inform members of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
about the situation on the ground and to strengthen
the Committee’s cooperation with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries of the region.
Sanctions are not an end but a means to an end. We hope
that the Panel of Experts will continue to work strictly
within the parameters of its mandate, supporting the
efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in strengthening weapons management
and eliminating the threat of armed groups.
Since last year, China has been providing
emergency humanitarian assistance for the prevention
and control of Ebola in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo through bilateral and multilateral channels
and has sent groups of experts to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda to support their
anti-epidemic efforts. China will continue to maintain
close communication with the WHO, the Democratic
12/23

24/07/2019

Republic of the Congo and other African countries.
We will continue to provide all necessary assistance to
the best of our ability for the prevention and control of
Ebola, in accordance with the dynamics of the disease
on the ground and the needs of African countries.
MONUSCO has played a vital role in maintaining
peace, security and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and responding to Ebola outbreaks.
China hopes that MONUSCO will continue to increase
coordination and communication with the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and actively
fulfil its mandated functions. The international
community must continue to lend active support to the
work of the Mission. China firmly supports the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
actively participates in the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the country. We have contributed military
officers, military experts, engineering units and
medical units to MONUSCO.
China stands ready to join the rest of the
international community to continue contributing to
the early realization of peace, stability and development
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): At the outset,
we wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing
on the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). South Africa recognizes the
important role that MONUSCO plays in addressing
the perennial instability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the protection of civilians.
We also thank Ambassador Alotaibi for his
statement on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
acknowledgment of the positive steps taken by
President Félix Tshisekedi towards the launch of the
reform agenda. This includes the opening of political
space, the release of political detainees and progress
with regard to freedom of speech.
On the security front, South Africa notes the
relative stability in the western provinces. However, we
acknowledge and are concerned by continued instability
in parts of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular the Kivus and Ituri provinces.
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In this regard, we welcome the vital role played by
MONUSCO in collaboration with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities in securing these
regions. South Africa reiterates the need for continued
support for MONUSCO’s efforts in stabilizing the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
need for the establishment of an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, in addition to
financial support, as requested by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite continued instability in the east of the
country, a positive trend has been observed in President
Tshisekedi redefining his strategic approach to conflict
resolution and peacebuilding in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. This is reflected
in the trust- and confidence-building initiatives with
neighbouring countries and his reinforced personal
commitment to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region through the appointment of a
Coordinator for the National Oversight Mechanism to
oversee the Framework’s national implementation.
It is South Africa’s belief that the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework remains a fundamental
agreement with the potential to unlock stability,
peace and economic development in the region. In
this respect, we encourage all parties to abide by their
commitments set out in the Framework, including
at the national, regional and international levels. We
commend President Tshisekedi’s outreach efforts in the
region, which could contribute to the stabilization of
the security situation. We reiterate our continued role
in promoting peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as a guarantor of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.
South Africa supports the Southern African
Development Community’s continued commitment
to assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
achieving sustainable peace, security and stability. We
are encouraged by the cooperation between the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations in undertaking to
continue engagement in support of the consolidation of
stability and democratic governance in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
We express our concern with regard to the
humanitarian situation in parts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and are especially concerned
by the Ebola virus outbreak, which has been declared

S/PV. 8584

a public health emergency of international concern
by the World Health Organization. Furthermore, we
are concerned by and condemn the attacks by armed
groups on Ebola treatment centres and staff. We
would like to take this opportunity to commend the
efforts undertaken by MONUSCO and other United
Nations agencies in the fight against the Ebola virus
outbreak. Furthermore, we welcome the AU’s response
in strengthening capacities to combat the disease. It is
important for the international community to support
all efforts to bring the situation under control.
Allow me to reiterate our position with regard to the
sanctions regime. South Africa continues to assert that
any sanctions regime should supplement peace efforts.
Furthermore, sanctions should neither be politicized
nor hinder the provision of humanitarian assistance and
should not affect ordinary citizens.
In conclusion, we are of the firm view that it is
imperative for the international community, working
through the AU, the United Nations and regional
partners, to continue to maintain solidarity with the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to provide the necessary political, financial and other
support in an effort to ensure that there is no reversal of
the gains made thus far.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, for her valuable briefing.
In my statement, I would like to address three issues:
first, the political situation; secondly, the security
situation; and thirdly, the humanitarian situation.
With regard to the political situation, we welcome
the positive steps taken by President Tshisekedi since
he took office. We commend his visits to Kenya,
Angola, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, Gabon
and Equatorial Guinea to enhance cooperation with
the countries of the region and to discuss stability,
security and peace. We also welcome the steps taken
by the President to open the political space by releasing
political detainees and guaranteeing freedom of speech.
Those positive steps reflect his commitment to creating
an environment conducive to development and reform.
We also welcome the fact that the President has
activated the National Oversight Mechanism of the

19-2285013/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We
commend him for focusing on reforming the justice
sector, fighting impunity and supporting disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, and we
welcome the meeting held on 5 and 6 June in Kinshasa
at the initiative of the National Oversight Mechanism,
with the participation of the heads of intelligence and
security services of Uganda, Tanzania, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. That meeting led to
the adoption of a number of recommendations to follow
a comprehensive approach to combat the capabilities
of armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We welcome the support provided at this very
important juncture by regional organizations such
as the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community, as well as all international
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that the support will continue throughout the
upcoming phase.
We call on all Congolese parties to give priority to the
public good and to support the Congolese Government
and the positive steps taken by the President. We call
on them to refrain from all acts of violence and to move
on to a new phase of reconstruction and development in
order to consolidate the gains achieved thus far.
As for the security situation, it has generally
improved in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, violence and armed conflict are still
ongoing and are cause for concern in some parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
the east, in North Kivu province, which is now seeing
armed escalation that is directly affecting the lives of
unarmed civilians and putting them in harm’s way.
In addition, we are witnessing deliberate killings,
kidnappings and attacks on positions of Government
military forces and Ebola response centres. We call on
all parties that commit violent acts to refrain from doing
so in order to protect the lives of civilians and achieve
stability and security. We commend MONUSCO and
its personnel for their efforts to combat those armed
groups and ensure the protection of Congolese civilians.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, it
unfortunately remains dire in some areas as a result of
ongoing conflict among armed groups. Approximately
14/23

24/07/2019

12 million people are still in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance and approximately 13 million suffer from
food insecurity.
Chronic diseases, such as cholera and measles,
still persist in some parts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in addition, of course, to the spread of
Ebola in North Kivu and Ituri provinces. We commend
the efforts of the Congolese Ministry of Health, in
coordination with the United Nations and the World
Health Organization, to fight Ebola and we call on
all armed groups to halt active violence in the areas
affected by Ebola. They must end such attacks,
especially those on health workers and facilities. We
hope to be able to eradicate Ebola once and for all in the
not-too-distant future.
In closing, we would like to express our
deepest gratitude to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MONUSCO. We also thank all Mission personnel for
their tremendous efforts and for their continued support
to the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/575), which outlines the main recent
developments in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the progress made by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in fulfilling its
mandate. We appreciate and commend the work of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui and all MONUSCO staff.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea urges the
Government and all the political actors of the Democratic
Republic of Congo to continue to take advantage of this
historic juncture of the peaceful transfer of power and
the activation of the political structures arising from
the elections. We are confident that these actions will
help to strengthen national sovereignty and consolidate
democracy, peace, stability and socioeconomic progress
in the country.
We welcome the post-electoral gains, the
installation of national and provincial legislative and
executive institutions and the return of opposition
leaders, which reflects the opening of the political
space. We encourage the Government and all actors
involved to pursue negotiations for the establishment of
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

a Government and functioning institutions to meet the
challenges currently facing the country.
Since his accession to the highest office of State,
President Tshisekedi has committed to working to
consolidate peace, the rule of law, democracy and
socioeconomic development, and to address the
scourge of armed groups. In addition, after assuming
his responsibilities as Head of State, he has initiated
significant reforms in the security sector that have
strengthened good relations throughout the region,
which has resulted in his various visits to Kenya, Angola,
Uganda and Rwanda, with the aim of consolidating
stability in the country, creating the necessary
conditions for its development and maintaining an
atmosphere of peace and post-electoral harmony.
However, we remain concerned about the
destabilizing activities of armed groups and the ongoing
intercommunal conflicts, which has resulted in more
than 13 million people still in need of humanitarian
assistance and protection, 4 million internally displaced
persons and 540,000 refugees from neighbouring
countries who remain exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola. We are extremely worried by the
deteriorating Ebola situation in the country and we
call on the international community to prioritize this
public health emergency of international concern. In
that connection, it must provide sufficient funds for
updating the three-year humanitarian response plan
that ended in mid-January.
We condemn the frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel, their means of transport and their
equipment. Such attacks are considered violations of
international humanitarian law. All parties to armed
conflict must ensure and facilitate full, safe, immediate
and unhindered access for humanitarian and medical
personnel, their equipment, transport and supplies and
the timely delivery of medical assistance to affected
areas and populations in need.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
President Tshisekedi’s focus on justice reform,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
fight against impunity, as well as his promotion of the
National Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region.
We believe that the only way out for armed groups
is for them to lay down their weapons and surrender. For
its part, the Government must continue to strengthen

S/PV. 8584

the processes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants and persons
associated with armed groups.
We call on the States members of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the
African Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie, the Southern African Development
Community and international partners to continue to
resolutely support the Democratic Republic of Congo in
order to promote stability and democratic governance.
We also encourage the Congolese authorities and
their regional partners to take the steps necessary to
strengthen cooperation and good-neighbourly relations
among the countries of the Great Lakes region,
including in the fight against armed groups and the
search for economic integration.
In conclusion, we emphasize once again the great
work for peace, security and stability being done by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the fact that
the Mission has risen to the occasion and successfully
carried out its work in accordance with its mandate in
such a complex context.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Permanent Representative of Kuwait,
Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, for their briefings.
Today, we are witnessing important changes in the
largest State in Central Africa. We welcome the efforts
of the new leadership of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to promote political stabilization,
including through dialogue with the opposition and the
establishment of constructive relations with regional
neighbours and international partners. We call on the
Congolese to continue to work for peace and to take
measures to prevent all forms of violence.
We remain seriously concerned about the situation
in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where the political and military situation
remains complex and incursions by illegal armed
groups and intercommunal clashes continue unabated.
In addition to this is the outbreak of Ebola, which the

19-2285015/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

World Health Organization has classified as a public
health emergency of international concern.
We have carefully read the Secretary-General’s
latest report on the work of United Nations
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(S/2019/575). In general, we share the assessments and
recommendations contained in that document. We
believe that the Mission should continue to support
Kinshasa’s efforts to normalize the situation in the
post-electoral period. We believe it important to
make the most of the constructive approach taken by
the new President of the country, Félix Tshisekedi.
At the same time, we would like to stress once again
that the United Nations interference in the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would
be unacceptable.
Russia, including as a member of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, intends to continue
to support the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the stabilization of the region as
a whole.
With regard to the work of our sanctions
Committee, we believe that it is important to maintain
the practice of considering different aspects of the
Congolese sanctions regime in the meetings and to
invite the representatives of Kinshasa to participate in
the discussion. We welcome the visit of the Chair of the
Committee to the region in late April and early May. We
support the continuation of such contacts with regional
actors in the future. It is necessary in this work to base
ourselves on the recommendations of the final report of
the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (see S/2019/469), as endorsed by the Committee.
In general, we call for a very careful approach to
the sanctions regime. We should not forget that the main
purpose of our work is to help the Congolese restore
order and security in their country.

24/07/2019

Despite the relative stability, the security situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains worrisome. Attacks on civilians and the
armed forces by Congolese and foreign armed groups
continue to lead to a loss of lives and displacement.
We urge the Congolese authorities to join efforts to
neutralize armed groups and prosecute human rights
violations without exception; to advance in the fight
against corruption; and to promote the National
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. Greater attention should
be paid to justice reform, the fight against impunity,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We encourage the promotion of development zones
that generate jobs for young people, provide greater
opportunities for women’s participation, secure the
border and eliminate trafficking in natural resources
and firearms.
We must continue to support the Congolese people
in implementing their stability initiatives and provide
resources to alleviate the worrisome humanitarian
situation and create the material conditions for
sustainable development.
We are concerned about the spread of Ebola. With
more than 1,600 confirmed deaths, it is considered to
be the second deadliest outbreak in history. The World
Health Organization has declared it a global emergency.
We urge the international community to support the
efforts and plans of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the World Health Organization
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) to combat the outbreak and its spread
and to provide the economic resources necessary to
contain it.

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui and Mr. Mansour Alotaibi for their briefings.

In that regard, we condemn attacks on Ebola
response personnel and health infrastructure and
call for respect for international humanitarian law
and access for response teams to evaluate the sick in
affected areas. We also demand the strengthening of
public awareness campaigns on the Ebola situation.

The Dominican Republic welcomes President
Tshisekedi’s decision to launch initiatives aimed at
implementing the national emergency programme,
opening political space and improving security
conditions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that he will continue to act in that spirit.

We commend the work done by MONUSCO in
supporting measures taken by the Congolese authorities
in the fight against impunity in cases of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other human rights
violations. In addition, we deplore the persistence of
cases of sexual violence against women and children.

16/23

19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We welcome the signing of the declarations and road
maps by the commanders of six armed groups to put
an end to the recruitment of child soldiers and other
serious violations perpetrated against children. We
hope that other groups will sign those declarations and
implement them as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we are pleased that MONUSCO is
focusing its resources on areas affected by armed groups
that threaten civilians. We congratulate MONUSCO,
all United Nations personnel in the field and all local,
regional and international actors for their efforts and
dedication in the search for lasting peace and political,
social and economic stability for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Progress, in cooperation with
the countries of the Great Lakes region, especially
in the fight against armed groups and the search for
economic reintegration, provides an opportunity to
ease tensions and to implement regional initiatives that
will make it possible to address conflicts together and
offer the Congolese and the subregion the progress and
stability they so deserve.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me too join others in
thanking the briefers: Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui and my brotherly
colleague Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We welcome the 1533 Committee Chair’s visit
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in May. We
were a part of the visit, and we fully endorse the report
of the Chair.
I have taken note of Ms. Zerrougui’s briefing this
morning and would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of the new Prime Minister,
Mr. Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba. I hope that the
Government will be appointed as soon as possible,
because that is an important factor in paving the way
for a transition and moving forward in developing the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As of March, the Council has unanimously adopted
resolution 2463 (2019) and resolution 2478 (2019) on
the extension of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo sanctions, respectively. We
look forward to the independent strategic review of
MONUSCO and urge that such a review be done in
close consultation with related parties, including

S/PV. 8584

the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and
police-contributing countries.
The Secretary General’s report of 17 July
(S/2019/575) provides food for thought for our discussion
today. To that end, I will try to focus my comments on
the following points.
First, we urge the international community to
provide sustainable humanitarian assistance to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We express our
solidarity with our brothers and sisters who are affected
by Ebola and commend the swift response of the World
Health Organization (WHO) in leading the international
effort through that crisis. In that regard, we welcome the
WHO’s recent declaration of an international emergency
and support the work of the newly appointed Emergency
Ebola Response Coordinator, Mr. David Gressly. It is
critical, now more than ever, for the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and WHO to enjoy
the support needed to prevent further outbreaks of
Ebola. We are also concerned after hearing the report
of Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
the increasing number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and pressure on humanitarian actors.
Secondly, on the security situation, which is
also related to the issue of IDPs, Indonesia is deeply
concerned by the continued presence of armed groups
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. For
far too long, the country has suffered from recurring
cycles of conflict, persistent violence and the loss
of innocent civilian lives. We are concerned that the
illegal exploitation and trade of natural resources,
which goes beyond the Great Lakes region, remains
one of the funding sources for those armed groups. We
have seen the report of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on that matter (see
S/2019/469) and will continue to monitor and support
its work. We are also concerned over the increasing
intercommunal violence.
Thirdly, we commend the critical work of
MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including its approach to the protection of civilians
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. We are encouraged to know that former
combatants in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
have begun disarming and returning to the community.
On our part, Indonesia is continuing to play its part
in keeping the peace in the Democratic Republic of the

19-2285017/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Congo as one of the largest TCCs to MONUSCO. We
currently have 1,044 personnel, including 28 women
peacekeepers, in the country and we hope to increase the
number of women peacekeepers. Our contribution also
includes an 850-person rapidly deployable battalion,
which was deployed at the end of last year.
The Indonesian contingent, through its close
community engagement, has facilitated since last year
31 weapon handovers, the reunification and certification
of 1,803 former combatants and the mediation of
communal conflicts, which is an important task. To
that point, we favour the continuation of community
engagement in peacekeeping as an important factor,
particularly in addressing the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In closing, we are here to save lives. Peace is a
luxury that the Congolese have desired for far too
long. Let us now work together to support the people
and their new Government to ensure lasting peace
in the country. I would also like to join others in
appealing to the international community to continue
to lend its support for the economic development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
Ambassador Alotaibi for their briefings today.
I will focus my invention on three issues: the
security, humanitarian and political situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
First, the deterioration in the security situation
in North Kivu and Ituri provinces is particularly
concerning. Civilians continue to face killings and
kidnappings in Beni territory. In the Petit Nord,
citizens face illegal taxation, rape and killing from
armed groups, like the Nduma défense du CongoRénové. Attacks against Ebola responders in North
Kivu continue to undermine the response to the
outbreak. The Government must do more to protect
civilians and responders and to provide greater general
stability, including by holding perpetrators to account
in the courts and doing more to address the underlying
drivers of conflict. We note with concern that armed
groups in North Kivu are reported to have perpetrated
over half of all documented cases of sexual violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the
reporting period.
18/23

24/07/2019

As the Ambassador of Kuwait noted during his
briefing, some members of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have expressed an
interest in listing individuals, including based on the
sexual violence designation criteria. In that regard,
the United Kingdom encourages the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide
the Committee with updated information on the
sanctioned individuals and entities and also to provide
statements of case, in relation to the sexual violence
designation criteria.
It is particularly alarming that some elements of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces
are alleged to have colluded with the Nduma défense
du Congo-Rénové, the largest perpetrator of attacks
against civilians in North Kivu. The United Kingdom
welcomes the issuing of a warrant for the arrest of
Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, the leader of the Nduma
défense du Congo-Rénové, who is also under United
Nations sanctions. We look forward to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo taking action
against Mr. Guidon and investigating and holding
to account any members of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo found guilty of
using armed groups as proxies.
In Ituri, we note with concern that renewed violence
has caused the significant displacement of civilians and
increased humanitarian needs. We also note that a hiatus
in the political process to demobilize the armed group
of the Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri has led
it to increase its activity. We look forward to President
Tshisekedi’s support to enable the disarmament process
of the Forces de résistance patriotiques en Ituri to move
forward, including the signing of a peace agreement
between the Government and that group.
Secondly, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is dire and deeply
concerning. More than one in ten Congolese are
expected to be in need of protection and humanitarian
assistance in 2019. The United Kingdom is at the
forefront of the humanitarian response. In 2013, we
provided $124 million to humanitarian appeals, making
the United Kingdom the second-largest humanitarian
donor in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
largest contributor to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo multi-donor humanitarian fund.
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We echo the Secretary-General’s call for donors
and partners to provide the necessary support in order
to close the humanitarian funding gap as quickly as
possible. That is particularly relevant to the appeal for
further funding to address the Ebola outbreak, where
much more is needed, and we urge other countries,
particularly those that have a presence and history
in the region, to support the response with funding,
technical expertise and political support.
Finally, let me say a brief word on the political
situation. Despite some positive developments, which
we have heard about today, attention must not drift
from the ongoing electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular the local elections
planned for late 2019 and 2020. In that regard, we
call for the prompt appointment of a new, balanced,
inclusive leadership of the Independent National
Electoral Commission. The production of an electoral
calendar for the upcoming local elections will also help
efforts to ensure that they are credible, free and fair. By
taking those steps, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would help to generate trust
among the population in future electoral processes and
strengthen democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The United Kingdom recognizes some positive
steps taken by President Tshisekedi since his election,
including the release of several political detainees and
efforts to promote regional collaboration. However, that
is just the start. It is vital that when the new Government is
finally formed, it makes concrete progress on President
Tshisekedi’s commitments to improving human rights,
strengthening transparency and the rule of law, driving
forward poverty reduction and tackling the Ebola
outbreak. The United Kingdom therefore urges all
Congolese parties to engage constructively to enable
the swift formation of a Government — a Government
that can deliver the change that the Congolese people
clearly voted for.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Peru.
I too thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Mr. Mansour
Alotaibi, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their briefings.

S/PV. 8584

I wish to begin my statement by welcoming the
progress made by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in its efforts to consolidate the
post-electoral transition process, which includes in
particular the intensification of bilateral and regional
cooperation and efforts to increase the opening of its
political space. However, we remain concerned about
the continuing deterioration of the security situation
following the resurgence of outbreaks of inter-ethnic
violence that have continued to cause fatalities and
forced displacement and to undermine the stability of
the country.
We are of the view that these sensitive
circumstances make the non-military component of the
work carried out by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) even more relevant, especially as
regards the promotion of dialogue between the various
actors in the country. In that regard, we emphasize
the importance of redoubling efforts leading to
disarmament, demobilization and social reintegration
of ex-combatants, since only a genuine reconciliation
process will lay the foundation for sustainable peace
in the country. We also welcome the implementation of
joint missions between MONUSCO and the Congolese
provincial authorities aimed at neutralizing the actions
of armed groups in the east of the country, as well as
the commitments reached to end the recruitment of
children in that area.
The emphasis placed on the cessation of violence
must in no way side-step the urgency of immediately and
simultaneously addressing the delicate humanitarian
situation looming over that country, which appears to be
deteriorating on the ground. Around 13 million people
face acute food insecurity, in addition to the serious
ravages among the population caused by the outbreak of
such diseases as cholera, measles and Ebola, the latter
recently having been declared by the World Health
Organization to be a global health emergency.
We stress that the fight against Ebola, due to its high
level of incidence and its having crossed the country’s
borders, requires a comprehensive approach in which
the central Government, local authorities, regional
organizations and relevant United Nations entities work
in tandem. In particular, we strongly condemn the acts
of violence perpetrated against Ebola response teams
deployed in the North Kivu region.

19-2285019/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We commend the positive measures adopted to
promote respect for the freedom of expression, as
well as the release of 700 political prisoners. That
notwithstanding, Peru expresses its deep concern about
the deplorable health conditions and overcrowding
that are still observed in various detention centres in
the country.
We also welcome the timely implementation within
MONUSCO of a comprehensive action plan to respond
to the increase in sexual violence against women in
conflict zones, the effective implementation of the
zero-tolerance policy and efforts to include women
in the political and conflict-resolution processes in
the country.
We conclude by reaffirming our strong commitment
to efforts aimed at surmounting the humanitarian
crisis, allowing inclusive economic development and
promoting full respect for human rights throughout the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July and to tell you how much my delegation and I
are honoured to see Peru, a friendly country, leading
today’s Council deliberations. I would like to thank
you for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council at this meeting, focused on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a subject of
particular importance to us.
I also take this opportunity to express to SecretaryGeneral António Guterres the gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the tireless efforts he has been undertaking
since he assumed leadership of the Organization with
a view to preserving the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country and to guaranteeing it peace
and stability.
I would also like to express the gratitude of the
Congolese Government and people to all members of
the Security Council for their commitment to the cause
of my country and their sustained efforts to ensure the
complete restoration of peace and stability throughout
the country.
20/23

24/07/2019

My delegation has taken note of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/575) on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
appreciates its content. I thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head
of MONUSCO, who briefed us earlier. I also thank
Mr. Mansour Ayyad Alotaibi for briefing us on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Having read the report under consideration, I wish
to make a few remarks and comments on some of the
points raised therein. These are areas mainly relating
to the political, security and social situation and to
MONUSCO. Before I broach those areas, however,
allow me to apologize on behalf of Mr. Ignace Gata
Mavita Wa Lufuta, Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of Congo to the United Nations,
who is unable to participate in this meeting as he is
currently visiting Kinshasa.
In the aftermath of the elections of 30 December
2018 and the peaceful transfer of power, the political
situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo remains
dominated by the establishment of new institutions,
the finalization of the electoral process and the
implementation of the campaign promises made by
the President of the Republic on the implementation of
measures to ease political tensions.
Indeed, after Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo
Tshisekedi took his oath as President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on 24 January and following
the approval of the mandates of the national deputies,
it was necessary to proceed with the establishment of
a new Government derived from the new legislature.
It is in that context that I note the appointment by the
President of the Republic on 20 May, in accordance
with the Constitution of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, of His Excellency Mr. Sylvestre Ilunga
Ilunkamba as Prime Minister. The latter is working to
finalize the composition of his entire Government with
a view to his inauguration by Parliament.
On another note, after the validation of the deputies’
mandates by the respective provisional offices, the
national and provincial assemblies proceeded to the
elections of the members of their permanent bureaus. To
date, all these assemblies have their definitive cabinets
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in place and are functioning normally. It is in that
context that it is important to mention the election of a
woman, Ms. Jeanine Mabunda Lioko, to the presidency
of the Permanent Bureau of the National Assembly.
With regard to elections, in accordance with its
revised timetable, the Independent National Electoral
Commission (CENI) organized senatorial elections in
May. In accordance with the timetable published by
the temporary Bureau of the Assembly, the election of
the members of the permanent Bureau of the Senate is
scheduled for Saturday, 27 July.
Finally, it should be noted that CENI has organized
all the elections scheduled in its calendar. The elections
of governors and vice governors in all provinces of
the Republic, as well as the legislative elections in the
provinces of Mai-Ndombe and South Kivu, which had
been postponed for health and safety reasons, have all
taken place. Elections at the local level have yet to take
place. For its part, the Constitutional Court also closed
its consideration of cases related to electoral disputes.
With regard to the fulfilment of the President of the
Republic’s campaign promises on the implementation
of political relaxation measures, it is fitting to point
out that this issue is at the heart of the work of His
Excellency Mr. Antoine Félix Tshisekedi Tshilombo.
Upon his accession to his high office, the Head of State
took important steps to relax the political environment,
preserve human rights and open up democratic space.
Those measures have made possible, in particular:
first, the repatriation of opposition leaders and political
exiles; secondly, the release of political opponents,
including high-profile prisoners; thirdly, freedom to
demonstrate for all political causes; fourthly, access
to public media for all actors of every political strip;
fifthly, the fight against impunity and corruption;
and others.
With regard to security, it should be stressed
that the continued presence of foreign and national
armed groups in the eastern part of my country and
the deleterious nature of their activities are a matter
of great concern for the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. As the President of the Republic
has stated,
“Restoring peace throughout the country is a
priority, for what is at stake is the survival of
hundreds of thousands of compatriots, the stability
of established institutions, economic recovery and
an environment of peace among all our neighbours.”

S/PV. 8584

That means that, so long as that part of the country
is unable to enjoy lasting peace, while negative forces
remain active and its people, in particular women
and children, continue to fall victim to every kind of
violation and abuse that we have condemned over the
past several years, the attention of the entire Republic
will remain focused on that part of the country. That is
why the Government stands ready and determined in its
work, with the help of its army, to restore order, peace
and security and pursue the struggle against and the
eradication of those national and foreign armed groups.
As the report before us acknowledges, our army
is working tirelessly to restore order and prevent
insecurity. In that regard, it is necessary to note that
the Head of State has launched large-scale military
operations, such as those in Djugu and Mahagi.
Those operations have enabled the recovery of several
weapons and ammunition caches abandoned by
criminal groups and the control of those territories by
the Congolese administrative authorities. In order to
build on those gains, at least 200 police officers from
the Légion nationale d’intervention in Kinshasa have
been deployed in Djugu territory in Ituri.
The mission of those elements of the Congolese
National Police is to stabilize, pacify and build peace
in all the villages conquered by the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) in
Djugu territory, which has been under attack since
mid-June by armed groups, resulting in the loss of
life and large numbers of displaced persons. Thanks
to those intensive military operations, the FARDC
has noted several instances of surrender among the
ranks of armed groups, in addition to those who have
voluntarily surrendered.
The Government is currently consulting with
MONUSCO to find the appropriate framework
for dealing with those compatriots with a view to
their reintegration into society. In that regard, the
Government calls on armed groups that remain active
to lay down their arms in order to benefit from the
advantages of this new demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration programme. It is incumbent upon me
to reassure the Council that, for their part, the Congolese
Government and its armed forces, which have made
many sacrifices in combating negative forces, remain
resolved to pursuing that noble mission, with the help
of its partners, including MONUSCO, until the total
eradication of those criminals is achieved, so that our

19-2285021/23

S/PV.8584

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

24/07/2019

people can live in lasting peace while contributing to
the development of their country.

human rights and the protection of the country’s
territorial integrity.

The Great Lakes region must aspire to improve its
well-being. Economic development can be achieved
only when there is peace and harmony among people.
Despite that progress, my country is curious as to how
armed groups have managed to acquire such large
quantities of heavy and sophisticated weapons when
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been living
under an arms embargo for more than 10 years. My
country therefore expresses its wish to see the Group of
Experts shed light on the arms and ammunition supply
chain to establish the responsibility of countries that
are violating the arms embargo and further examine
the link between those illegal weapons and ammunition
supplies and the illicit trafficking of the country’s
natural resources.

We take this opportunity to commend the work
done by the Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The Congolese people and their Government
express their gratitude to the United Nations, the troopcontributing countries and the peacekeepers for their
efforts in the struggle to achieve peace and security in
my country and their sacrifices, including the ultimate
sacrifice of laying down their lives for the cause of
the Congo.

My delegation welcomes the new dynamic in the
Great Lakes region since the assumption of power
by President Antoine Félix Tshisekedi Tshilombo. In
addition to bilateral meetings with his counterparts
of the region, it is also worth mentioning the summit
meetings held in Kinshasa and Luanda on 31 May
and 12 July, respectively, among the Heads of State of
Angola, Uganda, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The main purpose of those meetings was
to shore up relations and the struggle against armed
groups, while promoting peace in the Great Lakes
region. The joint communiqués that endorsed those
meetings reaffirmed the commitment of the Heads
of State to restoring peace and State authority in the
Great Lakes region, including in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
economic development.
We remain convinced that the new regional
dynamic will prioritize heightened security measures
and border controls in order to effectively comply
with the arms embargo on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to counter illicit trafficking in natural
resources, which is one of the major root causes of the
conflict in the country.
With regard to MONUSCO, as everyone knows
that United Nations force has been in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since 1999 — 20 years. Thanks
to its presence on Congolese territory, much has been
achieved and, at times, the worst has been avoided, in
particular with regard to the protection of civilians,
the struggle against armed groups, the defence of
22/23

Today, as the Government of my country is engaged
in strategic dialogue with the independent Team of
Experts, in accordance with resolution 2463 (2019),
the Congolese people expect that the recommendations
emanating from that dialogue will be responsible,
preserve and not sacrifice the gains made during the
past 20 years, prioritize the interests of the Congo and
the Congolese people, and take into account the wishes
of the Congolese people, whose most ardent desire
is the total eradication of the negative forces and the
various armed groups that plague the eastern part of
the country.
However, regardless of the nature of those
recommendations, it is essential to strengthen
MONUSCO’s operational effectiveness by focusing
on the quality of its troops, which should be more
specialized in tracking armed groups and able to handle
asymmetric threats. Those troops will have to continue
to work closely with the FARDC and be more agile,
mobile and equipped with the right equipment for
greater efficiency.
Moreover, with regard to the presence of armed men
on mining sites, it should be recalled that the law does
not allow the military to carry out mining activities. In
addition, the justification for the presence of FARDC
elements in mining areas, as has been mentioned several
times, is that they provide security at those sites, which,
regrettably, are generally located in conflict zones. The
Government deploys security forces in mining areas
to ensure the safety of all mining operators. If some
of the elements deployed for security reasons neglect
their duties and engage in mining activities, it is always
a good idea to report them so that the authorities can
punish them in accordance with the law.
With regard to social issues, the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo remains dominated
by the implementation of the President’s 100-day
19-22850

24/07/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

emergency programme and the fight against the Ebola
virus disease. With regard to the implementation of
the President’s 100-day emergency programme, it
is important to note that several projects launched to
construct critical infrastructure are under way and
regularly visited by the authorities in order to assess the
effectiveness of the work being conducted and develop
new recommendations and guidelines, if necessary.
Regarding the Ebola virus disease, let me
inform the Council that this is the tenth time that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has faced such an
epidemic. However, it is the first time the outbreak has
occurred in a conflict area. It is also the first time that
it has exceeded a six-month period and that such a large
number of victims has been reported. The meeting that
the Security Council intends to convene on the issue on
31 July will provide an opportunity to share important
information on the subject with the most appropriate
resource specialists. However, we would like to reassure
the Council that our Head of State, Government and
people as a whole, with the assistance of our partners,
are determined to eradicate the Ebola epidemic, now
declared a public health emergency of international
concern by the World Health Organization, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
At the initiative of President Tshisekedi, who on
20 July took the response to the epidemic under his own
supervision, the technical secretariat of the multisectoral
Ebola response committee that has been set up will now
be under the direction of an internationally renowned
epidemiologist in the treatment of the disease. The
technical secretariat and its team of experts are
responsible for coordinating all activities in the
implementation of the strategic response plan for the
Ebola virus disease outbreak and for putting in place

S/PV. 8584

every possible urgent, essential and innovative measure
for the rapid control of the epidemic.
The Ebola virus disease in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is no longer simply a health issue, but a
cross-cutting problem that requires the consideration of
the following aspects, above and beyond assessing the
quality of care and treatment scheme available to date
at the Ebola treatment centres. First, with regard to the
fight against insecurity and access to vulnerable people,
it is important to secure the territories affected by the
disease so as to enable response operations to proceed
smoothly and for health and humanitarian workers to
work without fear of being attacked by armed elements.
Secondly,
concerning
strengthened
preventive
measures, mobilization officers in the various health
zones and major centres in the affected provinces
should raise awareness about how to prevent the spread
of the epidemic. Thirdly, with regard to public support
for the response efforts, communities must collaborate
with response teams. Fourthly, a better coordination of
actions in the field is needed. Fifthly, adequate funding
is required to meet needs.
I would like to conclude by again thanking the
United Nations and the Security Council for their
commitment and efforts to promote peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Similarly, on behalf
of the Congolese people and Government, I again
thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Head of MONUSCO. Lastly, on behalf
of the Congolese people, I again thank MONUSCO
peacekeepers and troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and commitment to our country.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-2285023/23
