S/PV.8353*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8353rd meeting

Monday, 17 September 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

* Reissued for technical reasons on 19 September 2018.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28748 (E)
*1828748*

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: There have been several positive
developments related to the nuclear-weapon and
ballistic-missile programmes of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea over recent months. On 20 April, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea announced an
immediate halt to nuclear explosive testing and flight
tests of certain longer-range ballistic missiles.
On 24 May, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea reportedly dismantled its Punggye-ri nuclear
test site. It also reportedly dismantled missile-related
infrastructure at the Iha-Ri missile test stand in May
and the Sohae satellite launching site in July. However,
international experts were not invited to witness any of
these activities.
In the meantime, there continue to be signs that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is maintaining
and developing its nuclear-weapons and ballistic-missile
programmes. The International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) remains unable to access the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and verify the correctness
and completeness of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s declarations under its safeguards agreement.
The Agency continues to monitor developments
through commercially available satellite imagery
where possible. In his regular report to the IAEA Board
of Governors and General Conference submitted on
20 August, the IAEA Director General reported that
the Agency had observed signatures consistent with
2/23

17/09/2018

the continued operation of the plutonium production
reactor, radiochemical laboratory and alleged uraniumenrichment facility at Yongbyon.
The Secretary-General has welcomed the commitment
made by Chairman Kim Jong Un of the State Affairs
Commission of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on 5 September to realize the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
It is hoped that the positive developments that
have been seen, together with the important summits
between the leaders of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea and
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States, respectively, will contribute
to an atmosphere conducive to advancing sustainable
peace and complete and verifiable denuclearization on
the Korean peninsula in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Security Council unity helped create the opportunity
to engage diplomatically. A year ago, the Korean
peninsula was the most tense and dangerous peace and
security issue in the world. Today, progress has been
made on building trust, reducing military tensions and
opening or reopening channels of communication. A
foundation has been established for making tangible
progress on the core issues.
We encourage all Member States to support
the parties in their diplomatic efforts and to ensure
the full implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
I have been asked to brief today on the United
Nations Command, which is also referred to as the
Unified Command. Security Council resolution 84
(1950), of 7 July 1950, recommended that all Member
States providing military forces and other assistance to
the Republic of Korea should
“make such forces and other assistance available
to a unified command under the United States
of America”
and requested the United States to designate the
commander of such forces. The same resolution also
authorized the unified command at its discretion
to use the United Nations flag in the course of its
operations concurrently with the flags of the various
nations participating.
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

In its first report to the Security Council on the
operation of the Command, the United States informed
the Council that on 25 July 1950 the Unified Command
had been established, and the Security Council first used
the name “United Nations Command” in resolution 88
(1950), of 8 November 1950. Notwithstanding its name,
the United Nations Command is not a United Nations
operation or body, nor does it come under the command
and control of the United Nations. Furthermore,
it was not established as a subsidiary organ of the
Security Council and is not funded through the United
Nations budget. As such, there are no reporting lines
between the United Nations Command and the United
Nations Secretariat.
The Secretary-General, during the upcoming highlevel week of the General Assembly, will discuss how
he and the United Nations system can further support
the parties and how steps can be advanced towards
sustainable peace, security and the complete and
verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
in accordance with Security Council resolutions. He
hopes that the inter-Korean summit that is starting in
a few hours, as well as the planned summit between
the leaders of the United States and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, will further contribute to
this process.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
Whether international sanctions succeed or fail
depends on the difference between words and deeds.
Sanctions are just words on a page unless they are
effectively enforced. Russia originally called for
today’s meeting to discuss the implementation of
sanctions against North Korea. Then its representatives
changed their minds. But we thought that the issue
was important enough to bring forward and have a
briefing. The United States welcomes the chance to
examine the difference between words and deeds. We
welcome the opportunity to see whether or not Security
Council efforts to eliminate North Korea’s nuclear- and
ballistic-missile programmes are being honoured and
enforced and if not, why.
The measures we adopted last year are something
the Security Council should be very proud of. We
achieved historic unity by implementing historic
sanctions. The Security Council unanimously adopted
three major sanctions packages, thereby creating one

S/PV. 8353*

of the most restrictive sanctions regimes in history.
Together, we have also implemented sanctions against
dozens of specific North Korean individuals and entities
supporting the regime’s nuclear- and ballistic-missile
programmes. All of us pledged a ban on North Korea’s
exports and 30 per cent of its imports. All of us promised
to uphold the expulsion of all North Korean overseas
labourers and stop all joint ventures. We supported a
cap on North Korea’s imports of oil and other refined
petroleum products at 500,000 barrels a year, and a
total ban on the export of North Korean coal. We all
promised to expel North Korean overseas financial
representatives. We agreed that North Korea should
not be able to obtain chemical and biological weaponsrelated materials, and we all agreed to stop international
scientific engagement with North Korea. Such sanctions
were put in place for a very specific reason — to cut
off funding and materials for North Korea’s nuclearand ballistic-missile programmes — because we know
that the cash revenue going to North Korea is used to
build its weapons programmes, not to help the North
Korean people.
The difficult and very sensitive talks with North
Korea are ongoing. The Trump-Kim summit has set us
on a path to complete denuclearization. But we are not
there yet and, until we get there, we must not ease the
powerful worldwide sanctions that are in place.
It is important to note that, like the rest of the Security
Council, Russia voted in favour of all of the sanctions
I just described. Despite that, and despite not having
yet come close to the achievement of denuclearization,
Russia is now asking to ease the sanctions. Russia
originally requested today’s meeting for the purpose of
criticizing the United States for blocking rail projects it
wants to pursue with North Korea. Russia had planned
on asking the Security Council to begin to remove
sanctions on North Korea so it could pursue a project
for its own economic benefit. The question one should
ask is: Why? Why after voting in favour of sanctions
11 different times is Russia now backing away from
them? We know the answer. It is because Russia has
been cheating and has now been caught.
Despite its repeated support for United Nations
sanctions, Russia is actively working to undermine
the enforcement of the Security Council’s sanctions on
North Korea. Its violations are not one-offs. They are
systematic. Russia has not simply looked the other way
as its nationals and entities engage in activities explicitly
prohibited by United Nations sanctions; Russia has

18-287483/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

engaged in a concerted campaign in the Security Council
to cover up violations of sanctions, whether committed
by Russia or citizens of other States. The United States
has evidence of consistent and wide-ranging Russian
violations, which should offend every current and
former member of the Security Council that knows how
difficult it was to gain passage of those sanctions. It
should offend every country that has felt the looming
threat of North Korean nuclear weapons.
One of the main ways North Korea cheats is
through ship-to-ship transfers of banned items, mainly
oil but increasingly coal and other goods. To evade port
inspections, oil tankers come together on the high seas.
North Koreans use hoses to transfer refined petroleum
products to their ships to bring back home. Many tankers
are willing to provide oil to make a quick buck. One
Russian vessel — the Patriot — was captured on film
transferring refined petroleum in April this year to a
North Korean-controlled vessel that is United Nationslisted. The Patriot helped the North Koreans evade
sanctions by allowing them to obtain oil on the high
seas without having to dock in a port, since the North
Korean boat was subject to a global port entry ban.
With our allies and partners, the United States
has evidence of many more ships we have uncovered
providing oil illegally through ship-to-ship transfers.
Just this year, the United States tracked at least 148
instances of oil tankers delivering refined petroleum
products obtained through illegal ship-to-ship transfers.
We estimate that North Korea obtained at least more
than 800,000 barrels of refined petroleum products in
the first eight months of the year. That is 160 per cent
of the 2018 annual cap of 500,000. In reality, we think
it obtained four times the annual quota in the first eight
months of the year.
We presented evidence of those violations to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), which tracks sanctions implementation, but
Russia prevented the Committee from declaring that
North Korea had exceeded its oil quota. Today, North
Korea continues to illegally procure refined petroleum
products with the help of Russia. Not only that, when
we have pursued United Nations designation of the
Patriot and other North Korean, Russian and other
country flag ships that have been found to be illegally
transferring oil, Russia has consistently blocked those
designations in the sanctions committee.
4/23

17/09/2018

It is not just on the high seas that Russia is aiding
sanctions evasion. When North Korea assassinated Kim
Jong-nam with VX, a deadly nerve agent, the United
States moved to strengthen United Nations controls
on the flow of North Korean chemical and biological
weapons technology. Russia agreed with us in the
Security Council but turned around and again blocked
the sanctions committee from updating its 12-year-old
sanctions list, which is critical to preventing the flow
of dangerous weapons of mass destruction-related
materials to North Korea. When North Korea began
developing intercontinental ballistic missiles to target
the United States and other nations with nuclear
weapons, we tried to stop it, but even when it came
to denying North Korea the means to deliver nuclear
weapons, the Russians resisted the enforcement of
the sanctions.
The list goes on. Russia agreed with the rest of
the Security Council one year ago to sanction a North
Korean operative in Moscow who was raising money
for weapons programmes, but it never expelled that
operative. And when it came time to act, not only did
Russia fight to allow the operative to remain in its
country, but it is also fighting for him to retain access to
his Moscow bank account. For what? Is it to finance his
illegal operations in Russia, in violation of the United
Nations sanctions? Step by step, sanction by sanction
and time and again, Russia works across the board to
undermine the sanctions regime.
Last month, the independent Panel of Experts on the
implementation of North Korean sanctions submitted
its biannual report to the sanctions committee. The
report contained evidence of multiple Russian sanctions
violations. We have seen and read the report, but when
the Panel submitted the report to the Security Council
last week, we noticed something deeply troubling.
The evidence of Russian violations that was detailed
in the earlier report was missing. It has been removed
from the open section of the report. Apparently, Russia
threatened to prevent the release of the report unless
its demands to hide the evidence of its violations were
met. To our deep regret, the Panel agreed. That Russian
interference was so egregious that the United States
had no choice but to prevent the publication of the
tainted report.
The United Nations panel of experts reporting
process is our most valuable tool for ensuring that
sanctions are implemented fully and effectively. It
gives the Security Council and the world an impartial
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

and independent means of ensuring accountability for
violators, and a warning to anyone who is considering
violation sanctions in the future.
We have seen the Russian tendency to kill the
messengers of inconvenient truths before. They did
not like it when the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) concluded that Russia’s client, the
Al-Assad regime, used chemical weapons against its
own people in Syria, so they just killed the Mechanism.
Now, Russia has succeeded in discrediting the United
Nations independent panel reporting process because
it called out its violations. Russian corruption is like
a virus. It is impeding our ability to achieve complete
denuclearization in North Korea. It has now spread to
the sanctions reporting process. If we are not careful,
the sickness will make its way into the integrity and
effectiveness of the Security Council itself.
Finally, let us look at why Russia is so focused on
developing railways with North Korea — so focused
that it will tell us today that we should remove
sanctions. Russia’s far-eastern region has few economic
opportunities, but coal is one of them. Exporting coal
has not been easy without a warm-water seaport.
Russians have therefore been leasing the North Korean
port of Rason. It poured a lot of money into building
that port. We knew it was important for Russia, so we
have exempted it five times since 2016.
But that is not enough for Russia. It wants sanctions
relief so that it can connect its Trans-Siberian Railway
to North Korea to ultimately reach a global port in
South Korea. The problem is that it is not time yet to
relieve the pressure on North Korea — no matter how
lucrative it is for Russia. As we have all agreed, that
time comes with denuclearization, and not before. Now
is the wrong time to undo all the good work that we
have done in the Security Council. Now is the wrong
time to ease sanctions pressure on the North Korean
regime by repealing sanctions, and it is never the right
time to allow cheating to go unpunished. Every time
the Security Council overlooks sanctions violations,
and every time we allow the Russians to bury evidence
of violations, we remove incentives for Pyongyang to
end its nuclear programme.
The evidence we have presented today leaves
Russia with a choice; it is binary — either it wants
sanctions to succeed or it does not, and either it wants
to deprive the Pyongyang Government of the means to

S/PV. 8353*

finance its illegal nuclear weapons system or it does
not. Unfortunately, I think that we know the answers
to those questions. Either way, the Security Council
can no longer be indifferent to Russia’s actions. Russia
must cease its violations of North Korean sanctions. It
must end its concerted effort to cover up evidence of
sanctions violations.
The final and fully verified denuclearization
of North Korea is the international community’s
overriding objective. The evidence no longer allows
us to take Russia’s word that it shares that objective.
Russia must now demonstrate by its deeds that it shares
our objective in North Korea. The United States calls
on all members of the Security Council to join us in
demanding that the Panel of Experts submit its original
report to the Security Council. Every member of the
Council should go on the record on that request. Nothing
less than the integrity of the United Nations and our
unified approach to North Korea hang in the balance.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing this
morning, and I would like to say that I am very happy
to see our colleagues from the Republic of Korea and
Japan around the table.
The situation on the Korean peninsula has
momentous implications for international peace and
security. The unity of purpose among Council members
in addressing the situation has been decisive for the
progress made so far. Continued unity in our approach
will be critical to achieving our common objective of the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. The Security Council must
stand with the same unity in the implementation of the
resolutions we have adopted.
I would like to make three brief points on sanctions,
diplomatic efforts and the humanitarian situation.
First, we must effectively implement and uphold
the sanctions on North Korea until the demands of the
resolutions are fully met. It is with great concern that
we see widespread violations of the sanctions regime
continue in a range of areas, including arms exports,
petroleum trade and financial transactions. We call on
all Member States to fulfil their obligations and ensure

18-287485/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

their full implementation. We have worked actively in
the European Union to ensure that all countries have
the necessary guidance and capacity. We commend
the thorough work of the Netherlands and the tireless
efforts of our dear colleague, Karel Van Oosterom,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).
The important work of the Panel of Experts should
also be recognized, and we stress the need to respect its
independence and impartiality. It is never acceptable
for Member States to interfere with the work of the
Panel of Experts, seeking to influence its findings and
conclusions. That threatens to seriously undermine
the integrity of the United Nations independent panel
reporting process. Any difference of use should instead
be addressed through constructive discussions within
the framework of the sanctions Committee.
Secondly, diplomatic efforts and dialogue towards a
peaceful solution should be encouraged, acknowledged
and supported. We welcome the continued progress in
the inter-Korean dialogue and the upcoming summit
tomorrow. The inter-Korean family reunion process is
also a positive step forward, and we hope that further
such reunions can take place soon. The summit between
the United States and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in Singapore in June was very significant.
It is important now that both parties work to
maintain momentum and take positive steps. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should without
delay translate its commitments into legally binding
undertakings. Signing and ratifying the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty would be an important step
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
demonstrate its seriousness. It is also important that
the International Atomic Energy Agency get a role
early in the verification of the denuclearization and
disarmament process. We welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General and the United Nations system stand
ready to support those diplomatic efforts. Creative
diplomacy will also continue to be needed in the
next steps.
Lastly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
there is no doubt that the responsibility for the dire
humanitarian situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea rests with the Government. At
the same time, there are continued concerns about
reports of the adverse indirect impacts of sanctions
on humanitarian aid delivery and the ability of
6/23

17/09/2018

humanitarian organizations to respond to life-saving
humanitarian needs. Enhanced efforts are needed
to ensure that the humanitarian exemptions in our
resolutions are effectively implemented.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States presidency for convening this important
meeting on the North Korean issue, which has occupied
the Security Council for many years. I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her very enlightening
briefing. I also welcome the Permanent Representatives
of the Republic of Korea and Japan.
I would like to make three remarks today on the
context, the approach that should guide us and the
ultimate objective of denuclearizing the North Korean
peninsula, on which we should all come together.
Developments in recent months have contributed to
an easing of tensions. The intensification of exchanges
among all parties and the relaunch of the inter-Korean
dialogue are important and encouraging steps. But let
us be clear — we are still awaiting the signs of concrete
commitment on the part of the North Korean regime
concerning the denuclearization of the peninsula. The
International Atomic Energy Agency told us last month
that North Korea was pursuing its nuclear programme.
It is well known that Pyongyang continues to violate
and circumvent sanctions on a larger scale and in an
increasingly diversified and sophisticated way. It is also
well known that Pyongyang is doing that by exploiting
the shortcomings of the system and the gaps in the
arrangements made by certain States, and in some cases
their lack of will. It is not only a question of sanctions
in the area of petrol; all sanctions are involved, from
coal to the financial sector.
The report of the Panel of Experts (S/2018/171,
annex), which we were able to consider in the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), has confirmed that to us once again. The report
also indicates that Pyongyang is pursuing its nuclear
and ballistic programmes, in violation of Council
resolutions. That observation tells us that there is still
a considerable way to go and that we must remain
collectively vigilant to the highest degree. That is
why the call for unity and resolve that has guided us
so far must continue to prevail now more than ever.
That requirement should entail three areas of focus
in particular.
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

First, we need the strict, full and simultaneous
implementation of the sanctions. We believe that such
implementation is more essential than ever to preserve
our indispensable leverage over Pyongyang with respect
to serious negotiations on the denuclearization of the
peninsula. That is the strategy we have defined together,
and each of us must stick to it rigorously. Sanctions are
not an à la carte menu from which everyone can pick
and choose according to their wishes and preferences.
Turning to the second area of focus, we need
rigorous monitoring of the actions taken by North
Korea through the Committee and the experts who
support it. In that respect, I wish to assure them and
the Dutch chairmanship of the Committee of our full
support. The Committee and the corresponding Panel
of Experts are the most effective means of providing
impartial information and of encouraging all States to
comply strictly with their obligations. Their publicly
available reports are also an essential tool for verifying
the implementation of sanctions and for deterring
anyone, including North Korea, from engaging in
activities that would undermine the sanctions.
In that regard, France regrets the obstructions to
the Panel’s latest report. It is essential that expert panel
reports be published without interference. Let us be
clear. The professionalism and the quality of the work
of the experts are measured neither by our satisfaction
with their content nor by the a posteriori consideration
of our views. The independence and integrity of the
panels of experts are the DNA of sanction regimes, and
there can be no question of altering or manipulating
them. I wish to stress here France’s extreme vigilance
against any attempt at manipulation.
Turning to the third area of focus, we must be ready
to toughen sanctions if necessary. They remain the best
tool at our disposal to maintain the necessary pressure
and send a signal of resolve to the regime. That is why
we fully support United States efforts in that respect.
In conclusion, denuclearization discussions
must clearly continue, but certainly not at the cost of
relaxing our efforts. It is up to the North Korean regime
to demonstrate through concrete gestures that it is
sincerely ready to commit to the complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization of the peninsula.
That must remain more than ever our common goal.
France remains resolutely committed to its partners
in that respect, both here and in the framework of the
European Union. I call on the members of the Council

S/PV. 8353*

to remain united in achieving this essential goal for
international peace and security. It is my hope that the
General Assembly will help us to move in that direction
together at its next session.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo, the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for her briefing.
Since the beginning of the year, thanks to the joint
efforts of the various parties concerned, the situation on
the Korean peninsula has undergone positive changes.
The issue of the peninsula has returned to the correct
track of settlement through dialogue and consultation.
The leaders of the United States and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea have met, marking a crucial
step towards a political settlement of the peninsula’s
nuclear issue. China supports the United States and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in resolving
the nuclear issue on the peninsula through dialogue
and consultations, and wishes to see both countries
duly implement the outcome of their summit meeting
in a continuous push for a political solution of the
peninsula’s issue.
China supports the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea in maintaining
dialogue and engagement and in pressing ahead with
reconciliation and cooperation in a sustained manner. It
is our wish that the summit in Pyongyang between the
leaders of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and of the Republic of Korea will run smoothly and
yield positive results. China commends the important
efforts of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to achieve the denuclearization of the peninsula and to
maintain peace there. We hope that all parties concerned
will work in synergy to consolidate the momentum
of dialogue and rapprochement on the peninsula and
jointly move the peace process on the peninsula forward
for lasting peace and stability in the region.
Looking back on the evolution of events from several
rounds of escalation of tensions on the peninsula since
2016 to a series of positive changes in the peninsula’s
situation this year, we draw three important lessons
from that experience to inform and guide us.
First, we must uphold the goal of denuclearization.
Making the peninsula nuclear-free is the essential
requirement for lasting peace on and stability of the
peninsula and an imperative for safeguarding the
international nuclear non-proliferation system. The
measures taken on the part of the Democratic People’s

18-287487/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Republic of Korea, such as the cessation of nuclear- and
ballistic-missile tests and the dismantling of nucleartest sites, have demonstrated its good will to push for
the denuclearization of the peninsula and build mutual
trust with the relevant parties. That is helpful to the
political settlement of the issue on the peninsula. We
hope that all parties concerned will show political
wisdom and work together in a tangible manner for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula.
Secondly, we must persevere in maintaining
peace and stability on the peninsula. Central to the
peninsula’s issue is the question of security. It is
imperative to address the legitimate security concerns
of the parties concerned in a proper and balanced
manner in order to safeguard peace and stability on the
peninsula in earnest. There is no military solution to
the peninsula’s issue, and confrontation is a dead end.
Resorting to force will bring nothing but disastrous
consequences to the peninsula. The suspension of the
joint military exercises conducted by the United States
and the Republic of Korea will help ease the situation
on the peninsula. It is up to the parties concerned to
continue to make the sensible choice.
Thirdly, we must strive to resolve issues through
dialogue and consultation. History shows that dialogue
and negotiation are essential means for promoting
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and for
maintaining regional peace and stability. The positive
progress in the dialogue and exchange between the
North and the South on the peninsula and the summit
between the United States and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea clearly bear witness to the necessity
and the effectiveness of dialogue and consultation.
China has always been committed to the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, to the
maintenance of peace and stability on the peninsula
and to the resolution of issues through dialogue and
consultation. That position has always remained
steadfast and will continue to do so in the future. As a
close neighbour of the peninsula, China has maintained
close engagement and coordination with the parties
concerned in a responsible way, while promoting peace
talks and working tirelessly to resolve the nuclear
issue on the peninsula through negotiation. Our role in
that regard has been constructive. In the light of the
developing situation on the peninsula, China proposed a
dual-track approach and the suspension-for-suspension
initiative. The former refers to the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula in parallel to establishing a
8/23

17/09/2018

peace mechanism on the peninsula. Suspension for
suspension envisions the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea suspending nuclear and ballistic missile
activities and the United States and the Republic of
Korea suspending large-scale military exercises. China
and Russia have also developed a road map for resolving
the peninsula issue.
With regard to implementing the Security Council
resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, China has consistently and fully fulfilled its
international obligations. Whenever the Security
Council adopted a resolution on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the Chinese authorities
concerned issued a timely notice for the implementation
of the relevant measures on the ground. In accordance
with the provisions of the resolution, China submitted
an implementation report in a timely manner and
regularly reported the crude oil supplied and the
refined petroleum products exported to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
It should be recalled that China has actively
participated in the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006). China will never
allow Chinese citizens or enterprises to engage in any
activity that contravenes Security Council resolutions.
China will address any act found to have violated such
resolutions and Chinese laws and regulations in line
with the relevant laws and regulations. China’s serious
attitude towards implementing Security Council
resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the significant cost to our country are clear
to all. The reality has shown that China’s proposed
approach and initiative represent the right direction.
The results are significant and are in the common
interests of all the parties concerned. China has always
constructively striven to promote the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula. China will work with all the
relevant parties to establish a nuclear-free, stable and
prosperous Korean peninsula.
The current situation on the Korean peninsula is
two-fold: there is a rare historic opportunity but also
challenges. The parties concerned should make efforts
in the following areas.
First, they should strive for progress in terms of
dialogue and negotiation. In accordance with the phased
and synchronized approach and as a package resolution,
the denuclearization process of the Korean peninsula
should be coherently linked to and coordinated with the
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8353*

process of establishing a peace mechanism in order to
achieve early results as soon as possible.

become an obstacle to reconciliation and cooperation
between the South and the North of the peninsula.

Secondly, the overarching direction towards a
political resolution should be maintained. We hope that
the United States and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea will continue to maintain the momentum
for dialogue and that they will properly resolve their
differences on the basis of the existing consensus,
meet each other halfway, take each other’s concerns
into account, continue to strengthen mutual trust and
persevere in the negotiation process until it yields
results and establishes peace.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): Before I begin my statement,
I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the
victims of Hurricane Florence. Our thoughts are with
their families and loved ones and with everyone in the
Carolinas as they weather that storm. I would also like
to convey our heartfelt condolences to, and solidarity
with, China and the Philippines.

Thirdly, in order to fully and comprehensively
implement Security Council resolutions in the correct
way, we must not only step up non-proliferation
measures to promote the denuclearization of the
peninsula but also actively strengthen the political
and diplomatic approach in order to resolve the issue
peacefully, while avoiding an adverse impact on the
humanitarian and civilian needs of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. China is ready to continue
to provide the necessary support and assistance to
humanitarian activities in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The Security Council resolutions
clearly stipulate that, in the light of the progress on the
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the reversible provision should be considered
and the corresponding actions taken at the appropriate
time. That complies with the spirit of the resolutions
and facilitates the denuclearization process.
In the current context, the Security Council should
remain united, meet its historic responsibilities and
strive for the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and lasting peace and stability in North-East Asia.
China stands ready to work with the various relevant
parties within the international community and to
continue to play a positive and constructive role for a
nuclear-free Korean peninsula in the interests of peace
and stability on the peninsula.
Last but not least, in her briefing Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo referred to what is known
as the United Nations Command. I would like to affirm
China’s position in that regard. China is of the view that
the so-called United Nations Command is a product of
the Cold War era. Its name does not reflect the reality.
It is not legitimate and brings to mind overtones of
military confrontation. The so-called United Nations
Command has long been anachronistic. It should not

(spoke in Arabic)
They are also facing similar devastating storms, which
demonstrate the dangers resulting from the phenomenon
of climate change.
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting to discuss
the agenda item “Non-proliferation/Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea”. The request to hold today’s
meeting reflects your ongoing efforts in the area of
denuclearization and your commitment to ridding the
Korean peninsula from nuclear weapons. We would also
like to thank Ms. DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for her briefing.
The issues of non-proliferation and weapons of mass
destruction have always posed the gravest challenge
to the responsibility that we bear for maintaining
international peace and security. We are only nine days
away from returning to the Chamber for a high-level
meeting to consider the threat of those weapons to our
world today, as well as to discuss the main tools at the
disposal of the United Nations to limit such weapons
and ensure international peace and security.
A few months ago, the situation on the Korean
peninsula represented the most tense and dangerous
situation with regard to peace and security. We all were
concerned about the risk of military confrontation.
However, those fears began gradually to subside
after sincere diplomatic initiatives that resulted in
the convening of two presidential summits in just two
months. We look forward to the success of the summit
between the two Koreas that will be held tomorrow. The
resulting understandings in that regard were supported
by Kuwait and the entire international community in
order to achieve the desired goal of denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula and achieving peace between the
two Koreas.
It is also important to underline that those
diplomatic initiatives followed a series of resolutions

18-287489/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

adopted by the Security Council. The coherence and
unity of the Security Council have played a leading role
in condemning all the illegal programmes and activities
by North Korea, whether they be nuclear programmes
or others related to ballistic missiles. It is critical that
the Security Council remains united, firm and resolute
in fully implementing all its relevant resolutions.
My country’s delegation followed closely over the
past two months the discussions in the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). I would like to first underline our appreciation
for the great efforts made by our colleague the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, Ambassador Karel
van Oosterom, Chair of the Committee, and then to
underline our appreciation for the professionalism of the
members of his Mission. We underscore the concerns of
all parties involved, but the discussions that took place
in that Committee over the past two weeks and what
ensued were unfortunate and a source of concern for
my country with regard to the possibility that the unity
of the Council on this matter could be lost.
We call upon all parties to transcend our differences
and assume our responsibilities for maintaining
international peace and security. Adherence to the
rules of procedure and safeguarding the independence
of reports issued by groups of experts are matters that
govern our work in the Organization. As Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, I am well aware that there is an
urgent need to modify many of the matters affecting
the work of the Council. However, until we are able
to introduce the modifications that will improve the
performance and work of the Council, we have no other
choice but to work through the established procedures.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, as the Ambassador of Kuwait
did, allow me to express our most heartfelt condolences
for the victims of Hurricane Florence and other natural
disasters in other parts of the world.
We also wish to welcome the representatives of
Japan and Korea to this morning’s debate. We thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting, as
well as Ms. DiCarlo for her informative briefing.
On 30 August, the Security Council gathered to
hear the briefing on the midterm report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006). At its most recent meeting on this topic,
the Council ended up discussing the reasons behind
10/23

17/09/2018

the blocking of the report as well as some members’
disagreement about certain aspects of its content. As
we have always said, we believe that the members of
the Council know better than anyone the difficulties
we encounter in discharging our mandate when we lack
unanimity among our members. That is why we call for
the work and decisions of the Committee to be reached
by consensus. The same is true for the case under
consideration — we must ensure that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea scrupulously adheres to
and implements the sanctions unanimously adopted by
the Council.
After the hopeful developments concerning the
commitment to denuclearize the Korean peninsula
expressed in April by the leader of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Kim Jong-un, alongside his
counterpart, Moon Jae-in, President of the Republic of
Korea, and later in Singapore during the June meeting
with Donald Trump, President of the United States
of America, with agreements that included a set of
principles to denuclearize the Korean peninsula, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes that the leaders
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will
honour those voluntarily agreed commitments and seek
continued cooperation with the Security Council in order
to fulfil its obligations under the Council’s resolutions.
We are here to do what is right, namely, to promote
international peace and security. As such, we must
respect and truly analyse the information or concerns
advanced by any member of the Council. In the case
under consideration, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea will always promote international law, nuclear
non-proliferation and negotiation. Those elements will
always guide our position.
We must come to an immediate and common
understanding of the aspects that affected the
stalemate in the negotiations undertaken in June
and April between the United States of America and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and the
Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, respectively, on the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
The world’s nuclear weapons, many of them on
instant alert, continue to be counted in the thousands.
If we want to prevent cascading nuclear proliferation,
we need a major international effort and a sincere
will to destroy them all. That is the position of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea — we must destroy all
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction
in order for the world to live in peace and tranquility
without having to fear the constant threat posed by
such weapons.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to echo
the Kuwaiti and Equatorial Guinea representatives in
sending our condolences to all those around the world
who have been affected by the recent hurricanes and
flooding. I think the Kuwaiti representative was quite
right in pointing out the link with climate change. It
is one reason that the Security Council needs to stay
abreast of developments on climate change. I thank him
for raising that point.
I have listened very carefully to what colleagues
have said this morning. The unity of the Council has
been critical on this issue, all the more so because on
other issues, including those relating to weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs), Council action has been
blocked because of one Council member. We have a
very significant opportunity to improve the strategic
situation on the Korean peninsula. I think the Swedish
representative referred to it as momentous, and I
think that is exactly the right word to use. What is
happening on the Korean peninsula has the potential to
affect the countries of the two colleagues sitting at the
table, but if we can get it right — if we can succeed at
non-proliferation in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea — then we can improve the safety and security
of the region and the entire world.
You said, Madam President, that the Council had
adopted historic sanctions, showing historic unity. We
have a real chance for success, and I find it very hard
to comprehend why anyone, why one Council member,
would put that opportunity at risk given what is at stake.
The Chinese Ambassador referred to the 1950s and the
Cold War. We do not debate how the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea came to have nuclear weapons, but
we all agree that it is vital to achieve denuclearization
there. I will come back to that point in a minute, but it is
a very serious issue. It has been hanging over the region
and the world since the 1950s, and the Council has been
united recently in trying to tackle it. We would appeal
to all Council members to not put that unity at risk, but
to continue efforts.
I want to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for her briefing. I think there have been, as she said,
some important political developments. We welcome
the upcoming trip of President Moon Jae-in, and we

S/PV. 8353*

hope it will further encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take decisive steps towards
denuclearization. I did want to add, in that context, that
there is no equivalence between WMD possession and
threats to use them and the various bilateral cooperative
military exercises that we have seen between the United
States and the Republic of Korea.
I would like to echo other speakers before me in
noting the fact that next week our leaders will be here
for high-level week. These important questions will
be discussed. People will be looking at the Council
even more than usual to see our leaders take their
responsibilities and deliver unity and progress so that
this critical issue of WMD and nuclear proliferation can
be properly addressed.
Turning to sanctions, all evidence related to
sanctions implementation is reviewed with care, and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s neighbouring
States have a particular responsibility. Our unanimously
agreed sanctions measures clearly draw a distinction
between legitimate economic activity and sanctionable
offences. I very much welcome the assurances that the
Chinese Ambassador set out today.
We particularly need monitoring of coal and oil
exports to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
for the reasons you, Madam President, set out when
speaking in your national capacity. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has shown itself able
to seek creative ways to bypass checks and violate
sanctions. We support the United States assessment
that the Security Council-mandated cap on imports of
refined petroleum has likely been breached. We need
to be vigilant about that aspect, which includes shipto-ship transfers of refined petroleum to vessels of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at sea. The cap
demonstrates international commitment to upholding
the rules-based international order. We call on all
States, but particularly, given their special nuclear
responsibilities, the permanent five members of the
Security Council, to ensure that agreed sanctions are
adhered to.
You, Madam President, mentioned the Panel of
Experts, and a number of colleagues have also referred
to it. We think it is important that the report of the Panel
of Experts should be submitted in its usual form. The
Panel has produced an extensive and well-researched
report, showing the extent of sanctions evasion by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Security

18-2874811/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Council has unanimously agreed a comprehensive set
of resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, and publication of these reports is one of the
commitments we have all signed up to. We therefore
look to all colleagues on the Council to enforce those
commitments strictly, and I would like to stress that
reporting by the independent Panel is an essential tool
for carrying out sanctions implementation to the full
and ensuring that evasions are clamped down upon.
On the United Nations Command, I take the points
that have been made about history. As a number of
colleagues have said, it is a legacy from the 1950s,
and it is highly unusual. All requests for shipments of
material in the demilitarized zone must be scrutinized
and checked for compliance with sanctions. It is
important that such diligence continue.
There has been really important outreach both
by your Government, Madam President, and by the
Government of the Republic of Korea, but, sadly,
Pyongyang has not yet taken decisive steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
The Council debate next week will be a very important
window of opportunity that should not be wasted. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to supporting and
assisting denuclearization in any way that we can. I
hope that next week we can see very strong and firm
Council unity in support of that goal and in support of
full sanctions implementation.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the United States presidency of the
Security Council for the initiative of today’s briefing
on the status of implementation of the sanctions regime
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. My
delegation also thanks Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for her very
informative briefing.
Like others, I would like to express the condolences
of my country and my delegation to the Government
and the people of the United States for the consequences
of Hurricane Florence’s devastating sweep through
certain states of the country, including yours, Madam
President. More generally, I would like to express
my country’s and my delegation’s condolences to all
peoples who have suffered the consequences of climate
change in recent times. All of those consequences serve
to underline once again the need to awaken and prepare
our collective consciousness for the fight against such
climate disruptions.
12/23

17/09/2018

Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the signs towards a
resolution that have been seen on the Korean peninsula.
Since the beginning of the year, these signs materialized
in a series of important events, culminating in the
historic summit held on 12 June in Singapore between
the Presidents of the United States and North Korea.
The meeting will undoubtedly be remembered as
the event that would capture the attention of the
international community and raise real hopes, given
the risks of a military confrontation with potentially
disastrous consequences.
My country congratulates all those responsible
for those achievements and looks forward with great
interest to the conclusions of the third summit to be held
in less than a year between the North and South Korean
leaders, which is scheduled for 18 to 20 September.
Accordingly, Côte d’Ivoire urges the leaders of the two
countries to continue along the path of dialogue and
expresses the hope that the upcoming meeting will lead
to the taking of concrete steps towards the signing of a
peace treaty between the two countries, which would
obviously constitute an important step towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. In that regard,
my delegation would like to express its satisfaction with
the opening of a joint liaison office on 14 September,
which is an important milestone on the path towards the
reciprocal opening of diplomatic missions.
Notwithstanding those positive developments, my
delegation remains concerned about the impasse in
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), following the presentation
of the midterm report of the Panel of Experts on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The report,
which endorses the work of the Group of Experts and
whose publication has been awaited for weeks, is now
a source of contention among some members of the
Committee. With regard to the main blocking factor,
my delegation is of the view that it is essential, for the
better implementation of paragraph 5 of resolution
2397 (2017), that all members of the Security Council
agree on how to calculate the quantity of refined oil that
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is allowed
to import during each 12-month period. The lack of
consensus on the issue is not only likely to hinder the
effective implementation of resolution 2397 (2017),
but it also has a negative impact on developments on
the ground, thereby undermining hopes for the early
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

That is why Côte d’Ivoire calls on all parties
to engage in dialogue and compromise in order to
safeguarde the unity that has long prevailed among
the members of our Council on the North Korean
issue, particularly during the voting, in December
2017, on resolution 2397 (2017), which strengthened
the sanctions regime. In addition, my country would
like for the independence of the Panel of Experts to be
preserved in order to guarantee the impartiality and
objectivity of its investigations and the relevance of
its recommendations.
Reports from various and consistent sources of
recurrent violations of the Security Council sanctions
regime by North Korea, through illicit oil transhipment
operations, illicit arms trade and illegal financial
transactions, are a cause of great concern. They
reflect the porosity of the sanctions mechanisms that
have been put in place and point to the magnitude
of the multiple challenges to be overcome in the
effective implementation of the sanctions regime.
My delegation would also like to express its concern
about extending the deadlines for the consideration of
humanitarian exemptions. In our view, it is crucial the
right balance be struck between the implementation
of sanctions and humanitarian imperatives, as several
humanitarian organizations recently sounded the
alarm bell on the need to ensure food security in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea following the
severe drought.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate Côte d’Ivoire’s
commitment to our enduring common objective of the
total denuclearization of the Korean peninsula as an
indispensable precondition for peaceful coexistence
among the States of the region. My country therefore
encourages all stakeholders to show their resolute
commitment to safeguard the gains in the interests of
peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.

S/PV. 8353*

ballistic-missile programme of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It constitutes a flagrant violation of
international law, the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and specific decisions of the Security Council. That
programme and all related activities must be completely
abandoned in a verifiable and irreversible manner. Until
that occurs, the sanctions imposed by the Council must
remain in force and be universally implemented. Peru
implements them within its jurisdiction and believes
that the Security Council must remain vigilant and
adequately respond to any possible non-compliance,
wherever it may occur.
We wish to underscore the unity and commitment
of the Security Council on this matter. We attach
the greatest importance to maintaining that unity
and commitment with a view to achieving the
ultimate objective of the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
At the same time, we commend the high-level
diplomacy conducted by the authorities of the Republic
of Korea and the United States aimed at building the
trust required to alleviate tensions, reduce the risk of
miscalculations or misunderstandings and, ultimately,
achieve denuclearization.
In that regard, we stress that the sanctions regime is
a tool for bringing the North Korean Government to the
negotiating table, and should not lead to a deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the country or restrict
access to the assistance the civilian population needs.
Finally, regarding existing discrepancies in
compliance with the restrictions on refined petroleum
products, and the transfer of such to North Korean
vessels, we must express our concern and underscore
the need for strict respect for the provisions of resolution
2375 (2017).

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in expressing our solidarity with, and
sympathy for, the victims of Hurricane Florence and
other natural disasters around the world, which are
becoming ever more frequent and intense as a result of
climate change.

In conclusion, we commend the work carried out by
the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), our colleague
Ambassador van Oosterom, and underscore the need to
safeguard the independence of the Committee’s Panel
of Experts.

We want to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this meeting, and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.

Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing my solidarity and sympathy
with those affected by the devastating force of the
hurricane in the United States and the typhoon in Asia.
They have our full support.

Peru notes with deep concern the serious threat to
international peace and security posed by the nuclear and

18-2874813/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

I would also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her very informative briefing and to welcome the
presence among us of our colleagues the Permanent
Representatives of the Republic of Korea and Japan.
This meeting is an opportunity to prove the
Security Council’s unity and strong will to uphold
the implementation of the United Nations sanctions
imposed on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Those measures will not be effective unless they are
being implemented honestly by all States.
The sanctions regime serves the sole purpose of
limiting possible avenues for financing of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal military activities.
As soon as a political solution regarding nuclear
disarmament and the ballistic-missile programme of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is achieved,
restrictive measures can be eased. But, in order to reach
such an agreement, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has yet to take concrete steps that prove its
genuine will to denuclearize.
Poland is deeply concerned that Pyongyang has not
stopped its nuclear and ballistic missiles programmes
and continues to defy Security Council resolutions in an
increasingly sophisticated manner. That includes illicit
ship-to-ship transfers of petroleum products but also
attempted supplies of arms and other military equipment
to countries across the Middle East, continued abuse by
diplomats of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
of their status abroad, and other evasion practices.
We reiterate our position that, despite political and
legal difficulties, it is mandatory for all States without
exception to comply with obligations arising from the
Security Council resolutions.
Peace on the Korean peninsula can be achieved only
through dialogue. We welcomed the diplomatic process
related to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
marked by historic summits in Panmunjom and
Singapore earlier this year. We look forward to the third
summit this year between the leaders of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea,
beginning tomorrow in Pyongyang. We hope that event
will help to reinvigorate and maintain dialogue on
the peninsula.
Poland expresses full support and gratitude to
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) and his team for their hard work.
14/23

17/09/2018

We appreciate his efforts to ensure the greatest possible
transparency in the Committee’s processes.
Poland firmly believes that work of the 1718
Committee is instrumental to the achievement of
comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible disarmament
on the Korean peninsula. We were therefore disappointed
that the midterm report of the Committee’s Panel of
Experts has not yet been published. In recent weeks,
we have witnessed a dispute that is not only procedural,
regarding the validity of certain formulations in
the report. The sanctions regime imposed on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has crucial
meaning for regional and global peace and security, and
reports of the Panel of Experts play an important role in
implementation of the Security Council’s resolutions.
We are gravely concerned by the fact that there were
attempts to actively interfere with the conclusions of
the midterm report after it had been submitted to the
Committee. To effectively implement the sanctions
regime, it is crucial to uphold the independence and
impartiality of the Panel of Experts. We also believe
that the credibility of the Panel’s reports requires that,
once established, facts should not be negotiated. Each
and every country has the right to disagree with the
conclusions of the Panel, but that should not be to the
detriment of the Panel’s independence.
Reports of that body, acting under auspices of the
United Nations, are perceived by a majority of States
as the leading source of impartial information on the
current status of the implementation of sanctions.
It is therefore important to avoid ambiguity in the
conclusions of the Panel’s reports, as that may have
potentially devastating effects for the effective
implementation of sanctions.
Let me conclude by making a general remark
concerning procedures applicable in work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.
Recent developments concerning the 1718
Committee prove that Chairs of sanctions committees
need to have more flexibility in their activities. The
current guidelines of the subsidiary bodies, which are
much more restrictive than the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, often do not leave
room for action by the Chair, even on procedural issues.
That situation can be easily used to obstruct the work of
the Committees.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

important meeting. We also thank Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.
Let me repeat the words of condolence expressed
by our Kuwaiti colleague to you, Madam President, and
to our colleagues from China and the Philippines.
I will focus on three aspects in my statement: first,
the ongoing diplomatic efforts; secondly, the need
for full and effective sanctions implementation; and
thirdly, the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) and its Panel of Experts.
Let me also welcome to the Security Council our
colleagues from Japan and the Republic of Korea.
With regard to my first point, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports the ongoing diplomatic talks
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We hope that further steps can be taken during the
upcoming inter-Korean summit as well as during a
possible second summit between the United States and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. There are
obvious challenges inherent to such complex talks, but
no efforts, in our view, should be spared towards the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
Secondly, with regard to the need for the full
implementation of the sanctions, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should take meaningful
steps to address the concerns of the Council. Those
concerns are spelled out in the pertinent resolutions.
Until those concerns are adequately addressed, the
international community should maintain its pressure
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In our
view, it is therefore too early to talk about sanctions
relief. Furthermore, current developments are a reason
for concern. Let me mention some examples: first,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, which
remain a global threat; secondly, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continues to actively evade
sanctions in order to advance those programmes; and,
thirdly, several countries are not fully implementing
the sanctions.
Let me give some concrete examples about the latter.
First, there is an increase in illicit ship-to-ship transfers
of petroleum products to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea; secondly, there is ongoing use of front
companies and Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
diplomats to evade financial sanctions; and, thirdly,

S/PV. 8353*

there are attempts by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to supply arms and military equipment to
actors in the Middle East. Those developments are very
concerning. They should be a matter of grave concern
to the entire international community, and especially
to all members of the Council. We therefore call on
all States Members of the United Nations to fully and
effectively implement United Nations sanctions. In my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I will
continue to do my utmost towards that end, together
with my team.
That brings me to my third point, namely, the
important role of the 1718 Committee and its Panel of
Experts in that context. With the most recent Security
Council resolutions, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea sanctions regime has grown to be the most
comprehensive sanctions regime to date, and it is likely
also the most complicated to date. The 1718 Committee
plays a crucial role in implementing the resolutions
by taking appropriate action in cases of sanctions
violations, by providing guidance and support to the
wider United Nations membership and by minimizing
adverse humanitarian consequences of the sanctions.
The activities of the Panel of Experts, and
particularly its reports, serve as a cornerstone of the
United Nations sanctions regime on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. It is crucial that the Panel of
Experts can work fully and independently. All Member
States should fully respect the independence of the
Panel of Experts. The Panel’s reports are crucial for the
decision-making of the Committee and the Council, and
its reports are key for engagement with third countries.
The public release of those reports is important in order
to maintain the pressure on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We express our support for the work
of the Panel. With the expansion of the sanctions regime,
the task of the Panel of Experts has become ever-more
challenging. We would like to emphasize how crucial it
is that the Panel can do its job in an effective and secure
manner with full autonomy. The integrity of the Panel
of Experts must be safeguarded.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports the ongoing diplomatic efforts. It is necessary
to maintain pressure on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea through the full implementation of
sanctions by all Member States. The 1718 Committee
and its Panel of Experts play an important role in
that respect.

18-2874815/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Let me emphasize, as others have done, the
importance of the unity of the Council in all of those
efforts. A united Council has a tremendous impact. The
stakes are too high for the Council to be divided on
that matter.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We join others who have expressed
their condolences for the victims of the natural disasters
that have taken place in the past few weeks.
We also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, for her briefing.
Bolivia categorically reaffirms its commitment
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and to
their elimination and prevention in accordance with
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the
Security Council. In that context, we call upon all socalled nuclear-weapon States to take immediate action to
eliminate their nuclear and ballistic missile programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner in
compliance with Security Council resolutions.
With regard to the situation on the Korean peninsula,
we reaffirm our commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1718 (2006) and subsequent resolutions.
In that context, we have been strengthening national
inter-institutional coordination mechanisms so that
their implementation is effective and fully in line with
their mandates. We also underscore the summit to be
held in Pyongyang tomorrow, and we hope that it will
be a step forward with respect to the commitments that
must be fulfilled within a framework of consensus.
We reiterate that, for Bolivia, sanctions should
not be an end in themselves, but rather should serve to
bring the parties closer to the negotiating table and to
a transparent dialogue where primacy is given only to
the will to seek a negotiated solution to the conflict. My
delegation is concerned that the imposition of sanctions
has a direct impact on the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, who, as we have heard
on a number of occasions, have suffered from many
shortages, especially with regard to health care and
other aspects.
We reiterate the importance of complying with the
Charter of the United Nations, under which the Security
Council is the sole legal body that can take the necessary
measures to maintain or restore international peace
and security, thereby ruling out any unilateral action.
In that regard, we once again express our full support
16/23

17/09/2018

for a negotiated settlement between the parties leading
to the full denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
To that end, we are pleased about the progress made in
the inter-Korean dialogue, which began with a bilateral
summit held in the Joint Security Area between South
Korean President Moon Jae-in and North Korean leader
Kim Jong Un and which concluded with the signing of
the Panmunjom Declaration on Peace, Prosperity and
Reunification of the Korean Peninsula on 27 April.
It is also important to note that, since that signing,
significant progress has been made in the process of
rapprochement between the two States, such as with the
family reunions promoted by both States, which took
place on 20 August, during which at least 180 families
saw each other again after more than 60 years of forced
separation following the Korean War.
Finally, we express optimism that, in accordance
with international law and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, the inter-Korean meetings
and talks, as well as the rapprochement between the
highest authorities of the relevant parties and the highlevel summit held in Singapore on 12 June between
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and
the United States, made it possible for them to join
efforts in building a peaceful and stable regime on the
Korean peninsula. We view this and other signals as
the most important steps towards paving the way for a
peace agreement that could put an end to this conflict.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join other in
expressing our sympathy to all those who suffered from
the devastating hurricanes here in the United States, in
the Carolinas, as well as in the Philippines and China.
We thank the United States delegation for having
convened today’s meeting and Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her valuable update. We
are also glad to see our colleagues from South Korea
and Japan at this table.
Since this is the first public meeting this year on
the issue, I would like to briefly express my country’s
position regarding the developments taking place on
the Korean peninsula.
Unlike in the past, this year there have been many
positive and historic events that demonstrate the
relevance of the chosen path of political and diplomatic
efforts. We can say that this is a perfect example of the
spirit of creating and strengthening confidence-building
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8353*

measures, which are the optimal and most pragmatic
way of resolving bilateral and multilateral issues.

and prompts us to focus more on further developing
goodwill, openness and mutual concessions.

This is exactly what my President called for at the
January high-level thematic briefing of the Security
Council on non-proliferation and confidence-building
measures (see S/PV.8160). He believes that this is an
essential element in maintaining the global security
architecture and strengthening peace. He has always
been convinced that all conflicts and problematic
issues related to weapons of mass destruction should be
resolved through confidence-building and trust.

Kazakhstan, which has practical personal experience
in disarmament, understands how complex the process
of denuclearization is. We therefore hope that the
parties will be able to remain patient, redouble their
determination and political will, and bring to bear
extraordinary diplomatic skills and resources in order
to successfully move towards achieving a denuclearized
Korean peninsula.

I would recall that President Nursultan Nazarbayev
also stressed the need to resolve the issue of North
Korea’s nuclear programme by restoring these missing
elements, especially among the United States, Russia
and China. We would not like to see the contrary occur,
which could send the wrong signal.
Unity in the Council must be preserved and
used to achieve the overarching task at hand: the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Kazakhstan
supports the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), which is
called upon to achieve this task by exclusively peaceful
and political means. We acknowledge that sanctions
in this regard are only interim measures until tangible
steps on verified denuclearization have been taken on
the ground in North Korea.
We recognize that the workload of the Group of
Experts of the 1718 Committee is of the broadest scope
and also the most complex. It is entirely permissible
for the content and conclusions of the Panel’s report
to, at the same time, cause some controversy and
disagreements among the Member States. We underline
in this regard that it is not only important but imperative
to ensure full proof and the veracity of all the facts
and evidence as well as statistical data. This is crucial
in order to elaborate proper recommendations and
further measures.
As for the controversial points that have caused
disagreements among some members of the Council,
we hope that a speedy settlement can be reached on
the basis of mutual respect and patience. Only then we
can seek a common understanding and a pragmatic and
comprehensive solution.
Today the situation on the Korean peninsula is
much better and more favourable than ever before

We are firmly committed to the cause of nuclear
disarmament and are ready to contribute in the most
constructive way to all possible collective efforts in
this direction.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Madam President, we thank
you for having convened this meeting and express our
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing.
May I also join my colleagues in expressing our
deep sorrow and condolences to you, Madam, and to
the Government and the people of the United States on
the loss of life resulting from Hurricane Florence. Our
condolences also go to China and the Philippines, and
our prayers and thoughts are with the families that lost
loved ones.
I also wish to welcome our colleagues from Japan
and the Republic of Korea.
I understand that the Council had the opportunity
to discuss the issue of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea last month. We all have been observing the
developments following the recent summit meetings,
whose outcome had given us some sense of hope for
progress towards the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula and the advancement of peace in NorthEast Asia.
There may indeed be challenges in the area of
implementation, and we understand that this will not be
an easy task. We hope that all the relevant parties will
maintain the momentum generated recently with a view
to finding a comprehensive and peaceful diplomatic
and political solution to the issue of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that is in line with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
The Council must continue to support such
endeavours. In this regard, the talks on a follow-up
summit between the leaders of the United States and

18-2874817/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, as well as
plans for the holding of a third inter-Korean summit,
are encouraging.
In the meantime, the implementation of the
sanctions regime remains critical. We have noted from
the recent mid-term report of the Panel of Experts that
there have been implementation gaps in relation to the
sanctions imposed by the Council. In this regard, the
work of the Panel of Experts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) continues to contribute significantly to the full
implementation of the Council’s resolutions. This calls
for continued cooperation on the part of Member States
and for support for the work of the Panel of Experts.
Finally, preserving the unity of the Council in
addressing the issue of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea remains of vital importance. We
should continue to encourage dialogue and the quest
for a comprehensive diplomatic solution, with the
ultimate objective of achieving the denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I, too, like my colleagues, wish to begin by
expressing my deep condolences to all of those who
suffered from the effects of the natural disasters in the
United States, China and the Philippines.
I wish also to thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
Madam President, you suggested that we hold a
Security Council meeting today in an open format;
all the better, because we wanted to draw attention to
the fact that Russia, China and other members of the
Security Council have tried on many occasions, since
progress was made in inter-Korean reconciliation, to
initiate a positive reaction of any kind on the part of the
Security Council to those events. I would recall that six
months ago we would sometimes meet twice a week in
order to discuss yet another launch of a ballistic missile
by Pyongyang. But today we are already talking about
the prospect of signing a peace treaty and the final
rapprochement between the South and the North.
I would like the American delegation to explain to
us and all other Members of the United Nations why it is
opposed to the issuance by the Council of a presidential
statement in support of these positive developments. It
is blocking even such a reaction as press elements and
refusing to issue any kind of a positive statement.
18/23

17/09/2018

We have repeatedly stated that we fully support
the negotiation process that began at the beginning of
this year between the parties concerned. Russia also
welcomes what has already been achieved: a reduction
in military activity and the establishment of direct
contact between the leaders of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea and the
United States.
A liaison office for the two Koreas opened several
days ago in Kaesong. We also hope for a successful
outcome to the summit set to begin tomorrow in
Pyongyang between the leaders of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea.
At the same time, we are seeing today that the
negotiations between the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the United States are at the very least
encountering certain difficulties. The negotiating
process is a two-way street. Diplomacy in the twentyfirst century, or in any century, for that matter, is such
that it is impossible to come to an agreement if one
party offers nothing in return for its demands.
No one doubts the fact that a nuclear-missile
programme in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is unacceptable. However, what else can be
expected when Pyongyang is called upon to comply
unconditionally with all conditions under empty
promises? The world has already had the opportunity
to contemplate the price of such promises in May,
when the current United States Administration decided
that agreements reached by its predecessors under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action were bad and
made the unilateral decision to withdraw from it. Thus,
the promises made not only to Tehran but also to the
international community were all broken.
The path to denuclearization must begin with the
strengthening of confidence-building measures. For
example, one such measure could be the signing of a
peace treaty to end the war in Korea. We see that both
Pyongyang and Seoul have already come quite close
to achieving that goal. Restrictive measures imposed
by Security Council resolutions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea cannot be an end in
themselves. They should be a tool to engage the country
in constructive negotiations. It is impossible to resolve
the Korean peninsula’s nuclear problem only through
sanctions and pressure on Pyongyang. Sanctions cannot
replace diplomacy.
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), the delegation of the
United States has intentionally heightened tensions
surrounding the issue of submission to the Council
of the interim report of the Panel of Experts of the
North Korean sanctions committee, and wishes to use
the Council to impose its own view of the situation
on the international community. As has often been
the case with our American colleagues lately, today’s
meeting has become one on Russia, rather than on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
It is said that Russia is trying to exert pressure
on the Panel of Experts. We would like to put a stop
to such insinuations once and for all. In reality, the
work of the Panel — which, for reasons beyond our
control, has become increasingly politicized — was
held hostage to the view of Washington. The Panel
should be guided by the principles of objectivity and
impartiality. Regrettably, the first version of the
document prepared by it did not meet those standards.
In that regard, we and other members of the Committee
made some observations that the Panel of Experts
perceived appropriately and took into consideration
while preparing the report for the Security Council.
The Committee’s rules of procedure provide for
consultations with Member States on the content of
reports. The Council should not see ill intent in the
fact that Member States are not indifferent to the
section of the report that pertains to the Member States
concerned. The experts asked us relevant questions. It
is perfectly logical that the answers we provided should
be reflected in the report. However, in this case, exactly
the opposite has occurred.
Russia has been consistent in its well-reasoned
responses to the questions sent by the Panel, including in
its responses to the accusations made prolifically against
us today by the Permanent Representative of the United
States. Our views were not taken into consideration.
Unsurprisingly, therefore, we have insisted on having our
position reflected in the document. Let me reiterate that
this was not an attempt to pressure the Panel of Experts;
it was done in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). I hope that no member of the Council questions
the fact that if accusations are made, responses to
them should be made with equal transparency. That is
precisely why the Russian delegation insisted that its
position be taken into consideration and reflected in the
report in question.

S/PV. 8353*

After difficult negotiations, we believed that a
compromise has been reached. I would like to stress
that it was a difficult conversation, but at every stage of
the negotiations, we managed to reach an understanding
with all interested parties, including the American
delegation. In her emotional statement, the Permanent
Representative of the United States did not inform
the Council that a compromise was reached with the
agreement of its expert as well. What changed the next
day, when it was withdrawn? I hope that the Permanent
Representative of the United States understands that it
was her own delegation that prevented the submission
of the report of the Panel of Experts to the Security
Council. That delegation is now preventing the
publication of an independent report of the status of the
implementation of sanctions on North Korea because it
blocked the dissemination of its new version.
I underscore that it was signed by the entire Panel
of Experts, including the American expert. Is the
delegation of the United States preventing the reflection
of views in this document that do not coincide with its
own position? In that regard, the following question
must be asked. Is it not the delegation of the United
States that is currently putting direct pressure on the
Panel by demanding that it change its independent
decision on the report to be submitted to the Security
Council?
The ball is in the United States delegation’s court.
It presents the issue as an egregious precedent that
allegedly violates the independent status of the various
Panels of Experts. However, the situation is exactly the
opposite. Introducing changes into the report of the
Panel of Experts is a perfectly normal practice in the
work of the subsidiary bodies of the Council. We wish
to stress that no one is undermining the independence
of the experts, but let us not forget that they do not work
in a vacuum. We need to avoid situations where the
legitimate requests of Governments are not taken into
account. Let me reiterate a few points.
First, with regard to the oil tanker Patriot, the
Panel of Experts itself stated that it was not in violation
of the sanctions regime. That statement is in the
original draft of the report. Secondly, it is untrue that
we allegedly removed the section about violations made
by a Russian company. That is a lie It remains in the
report, unchanged, only it appears in the confidential
appendix with some additional details. Thirdly, we
requested additional information and evidence from the
United States on the issues of quotas and funding for the

18-2874819/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea in Russia. We are still awaiting that information.
We have been waiting for two months for information
on the issue of quotas and four months on that of the
representative of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Who is cheating the international community?
Who is spreading lies?
With regard to the implementation of the sanctions
resolutions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, we cannot fail to draw attention to recent
developments on the peninsula. Some time ago, the
so-called United Nations Command — let us not be
deceived by the name; it is a military structure, led by
the United States in the demilitarized area between
the two Koreas, using the name of the Organization
as a shield — blocked practical steps to implement the
inter-Korean initiative to restore rail traffic. However,
a connection between the railways of the north and the
south is one of the central inter-Korean agreements
fixed in the Panmunjom Declaration for Peace,
Prosperity and Unification of the Korean Peninsula. As
far as we know, the so-called Command did not allow
specialists from either side to inspect the conditions
of the tracks. Naturally, comments were made in the
press, highlighting the fact that the United Nations
was allegedly blocking the implementation of joint
inter-Korean projects.
We thank you, Madam President, for your in-depth
economic analysis of the issues facing the Russian Far
East. In that regard, I would remind you that cooperation
on rail transport, including the trilateral KhasanRason project, is not covered by the sanctions regimes,
including resolution 2397 (2017). Instead of creating
roadblocks, the Council should promote inter-Korean
dialogue. However, Washington, D.C., is prepared to
sacrifice all hopes for inter-Korean dialogue for its own
opportunistic interests. What is the United Nations
Command — an analog to the Berlin Wall in the twentyfirst century? What is being done by the United States
can be considered a violation of all Security Council
responsibilities under all resolutions of the Security
Council seeking a settlement to the North Korean issue
through peaceful diplomatic and political solution.
On the other hand, such steps are fully in line
with the so-called policy of maximum pressure on
Pyongyang. Here, the United States is increasingly
aggressive in trying to subjugate the Security Council.
We are sometimes left with the impression that
Washington, D.C., is beginning to confuse the United
20/23

17/09/2018

Nations Security Council with the United States
National Security Council, and unfortunately, today’s
meeting is no exception.
We also draw attention to the status of the so-called
United Nations Command in Korea. The Commander
of those forces is also the Commander of the United
States armed forces in Korea, as well as the Republic
of Korea-United States Combined Forces Command.
From the point of view of international law, when
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Republic of Korea became full Members of the United
Nations in 1991, the preservation of such an institution
as the United Nations Command in Korea, which
places the United Nations on the belligerent side of
the civil war, is legal nonsense. In present conditions,
as the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea officially declare their intention to
prevent a new inter-Korean conflict and are calling for
a declaration to end of the war on the Korean peninsula
and the signature of a peace treaty, we must analyse
the relevance of the role and troops of the United
Nations force, which, as we all know, was established
by resolutions 84 (1950) and 85 (1950), which were
adopted against a particular historical background.
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics boycotted
those meetings of the Council, while the Kuomintang
authorities occupied the seat of the People’s Republic of
China. In fact, the Unified Command bears no relation
to the United Nations. We should therefore consider
its withdrawal, in accordance with the decisions of
the thirtieth session of the General Assembly, which,
for example, provided for the possible dissolution of
the Command by 1976 and its replacement by Korean
border troops in the event of further normalization of
the situation on the peninsula.
The institutions and mechanisms of the United
Nations and the Security Council should be used
to support settlement processes, no to hamper
them. The common goal of all States involved is to
ensure the peaceful settlement of the rising issues
in the region, including the nuclear issue, through
dialogue and mutually acceptable arrangements. The
development of inter-Korean cooperation is in line
with that goal, contributes to easing tensions on the
peninsula and confirms the commitment undertaken
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at the
beginning of the year to the normalization of relations
with neighbouring countries and the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We emphasize that such cooperation should not
violate the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Discussions on future cooperation projects
and properly organized research efforts do not violate
them. The Security Council and its decisions should
not hinder but promote the rapprochement between
the North and South. We invite the members of the
Council to consider creating special conditions in the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) for temporary exemptions from the sanctions
regime for the implementation of inter-Korean
cooperation projects. As far as I know, both sides of the
Military Demarcation Line share that idea.
The sanctions committee on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is a clear example of what
the destructive behaviour of some of its members leads
to. It seems that the Committee is seen by the United
States as a kind of club meant to punish the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea for its intransigence in the
negotiations. It is very convenient, under the cover of
the collective name of the Security Council, to try to
exert pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea in its bilateral contacts. Washington, D.C.,
methodically refuses to allow Member States and
international organizations to have humanitarian,
diplomatic and sports links in Pyongyang, although they
have nothing to do with nuclear missile programmes.
The requests sent by our American colleagues are in no
way justified, since they are intended to be accepted as
the absolute truth by other Member States. They make
it impossible for the Committee to adopt any consensus
decision, even of a technical nature.
In conclusion, we call on all parties to exercise
restraint and we stress once again that the quest for a
mutually acceptable political-diplomatic course is the
only possible way to peacefully resolve the problems on
the Korean peninsula and create strong mechanisms for
security in North-East Asia, which is in the interest of
all countries of the region. However, imposing sanctions
and pressure on Pyongyang without taking into account
its legitimate interests will make it impossible to
achieve that. Once again, I draw attention to the fact
that it was in that vein that Russia and China developed
the road map for the settlement of the situation on the
Korean peninsula that, even with its setbacks, is now
being de facto implemented.
The Russian side stands ready to foster close
interaction with all interested countries to ensure peace
and stability in the region and achieve a comprehensive

S/PV. 8353*

settlement of the problem on the Korean peninsula on
the basis of equal and non-discriminatory negotiations
with the participation of all interested States.
The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.
“Deny, distract and lie.” We have heard that same
song many times before — whether it was aiding the
Al-Assad regime with chemical weapons, the attempted
murder of the Skripals with a dangerous nerve agent in
the United Kingdom, election-meddling in the United
States — which, by the way, did not work — or now
cheating on sanctions agreements and getting caught.
Lying, cheating and rogue behaviour have become
the new norm of the Russian culture. The Russian
Ambassador said “no one is denying the Panel of
Experts”. I take that to assume that he will allow the
original report of the Panel of Experts to be released.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by thanking the United States presidency for convening
today’s meeting and for giving me this opportunity to
take part in the discussion on this important issue. I
would also like to thank Under Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. Let me also echo
the words of condolences extended to the victims of
Hurricane Florence and those of other natural disasters
in China and the Philippines.
It was about 10 months ago that I made my last
statement at the Security Council meeting convened
to discuss the Democratic People’s Republic of Korearelated issue (see S/PV.7996). Since then, dramatic
changes have taken place on the Korean peninsula
and in North-East Asia. The PyeongChang Winter
Olympics in February provided a much-sought window
of opportunity to defuse tensions on the Korean
peninsula, and the leaders of both Koreas and the
United States did not fail to seize it.
As a result, the two inter-Korean summits took
place in Panmunjom in April and May, respectively,
after a hiatus of 11 years, and the first ever United
States-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea summit
was held in Singapore in June, which opened a new
chapter in the relations between the two countries.

18-2874821/23

S/PV.8353*

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Those developments have turned the atmosphere of
regional geopolitics from one marked by escalating
tensions to one marked by diplomatic efforts.
That turnaround was made possible through a wellmeasured combination of diplomatic tools. The Security
Council and the international community were united
in fully implementing the Security Council sanctions
regime, sending a clear message to Pyongyang that its
pursuit of a nuclear weapons programme will never be
accepted. At the same time, the door for dialogue was
kept open to bring the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea back to the negotiating table. The United
States took the lead in our efforts to that end, which
was fully supported by the key countries in the region
and the members of the Security Council in particular. I
would like to also commend the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), under
the able leadership of our Dutch colleague, and the
Panel of Experts in that regard.
Let me emphasize that to achieve the complete
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, we need to work to make the most of the hardwon momentum for negotiations towards a diplomatic
solution. That is exactly what the Republic of Korea has
been working, on in close consultation, with the United
States during the last several months. President Moon
and President Trump have taken the lead themselves
and have been directly engaged in the process.
As part of that process, in a matter of hours
President Moon Jae-in will visit Pyongyang for his third
inter-Korean summit. The summit is expected to add
renewed energy to the current diplomatic process. We
hope and expect that a significant breakthrough can be
made during the summit meeting in Pyongyang, which
in turn will help resume the stalled United StatesDemocratic People’s Republic of Korea negotiations.
In the meantime, my Government reaffirms that it
will work closely with the international community to
ensure the full implementation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions as we seek to implement the
27 April Panmunjom Declaration for Peace, Prosperity
and Unification of the Korean Peninsula. No doubt, the
road ahead will be bumpy. We must pursue our shared
goal of the complete denuclearization of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea with patience, persistence
and, above all, a united stance and solidarity. In doing
so we must also ensure that sanctions implementation
and engagement work in a mutually complementary and
22/23

17/09/2018

reinforcing way, like two wheels of a bicycle spinning in
unison. Mutual trust is essential to make progress in the
negotiations. Therefore, we also need to make efforts
to create an environment conducive to moving the
negotiation process forward by gradually and steadily
building trust. The ongoing inter-Korean dialogue will
help create such an environment, and we look forward
to the continued support of the international community
for such efforts on our part.
Keeping in mind that common goal, and the need
for a united approach to attain it, I must point out that
openly debating the United Nations Command’s legal
status or its action on a specific issue that is not part of
the agenda, especially in this official security Council
meeting, seems rather inappropriate.
Before I conclude, I would like to express my
sincere hope that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea will seize the window of opportunity to ensure
its security and a bright future by seriously engaging
in the negotiations and prove its commitment to
denuclearization by taking further meaningful steps.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
joining others in expressing our deep condolences and
sympathy for the victims and families of those recently
struck by natural disasters in the United States, the
Philippines, China and other countries. As a nation that
suffers often from natural disasters, Japan feels very
strong solidarity with the victims and their families.
I begin my remarks today by thanking you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting, and
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
The world witnessed a historic summit meeting
between the United States and North Korea. Japan
welcomes that undertaking and strongly hopes that
momentum will lead to the resolution of the nuclear,
missile and abductions issues. We are at a critical
juncture. Japan hopes that North Korea will seize this
opportunity and take concrete steps to achieve the
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of
all weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles
of all ranges, as required under the series of resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. We believe that only
those steps will help North Korea realize a bright future.
While engaging with North Korea we must fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
18-28748

17/09/2018

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

for North Korea to understand that there is no other
way but to change its policy. We must not waver in
that determination.
I would also like to underscore that now is not a
time to ease or lift any of the sanctions. If North Korea
believes it can get sanctions relaxed while keeping its
nuclear weapons, it would certainly reduce the incentive
for North Korea to achieve complete denuclearization.
Japan will spare no effort to ensure the effectiveness
of the relevant Security Council resolutions. We must
maintain the solidarity of the international community
to stop sanctions-evasion activities.
In that regard, Japan shares the United States
view that North Korea has breached the 2018 annual
cap for refined petroleum products established by
resolution 2397 (2017). It is important that all Member
States immediately stop supplying refined petroleum
products to North Korea. Japan will work closely with
the countries concerned, including the United States.
As already announced, some countries, including Japan
and the United States, are engaging in monitoring and
surveillance efforts against illicit maritime activities,
including ship-to-ship transfers, with patrol aircraft
stationing in Japan.
In order to achieve a comprehensive solution to
the issues related to North Korea, we ask the Security
Council to maintain its unity in fully implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We should
neither lose sight of our common cause of achieving
the complete denuclearization of North Korea nor allow
the very authority of the Council to be challenged by
diverting our attention away from cynical attempts
to flout the existing sanctions regime. Japan will
continue to accelerate efforts to ensure their effective
implementation, together with all countries.

S/PV. 8353*

Finally, we sincerely hope that the inter-Korean
summit meeting to be held this week will lead to
concrete actions towards the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): You misunderstood me, Madam President.
We stand ready to agree to the publication of a report
that objectively reflects Russian concerns. Let me once
again draw your attention to the fact that you are the
ones preventing its dissemination. There is no other
version of the report other than what the Panel of
Experts has conveyed to the Security Council, which
you have blocked. Therefore, Madam President, when
you ask to revert to the original version, you are the
ones who are exerting pressure on the Panel of Experts.
You perhaps did not listen to me attentively enough,
Madam President, or perhaps your further statement
was written beforehand. The lies and denials in our
statement to which you have liked to refer to so much
recently, as well as other insinuations shamelessly made
against our country, were absent from our statement.
What we did was to describe the reasons, very clearly
and in great detail, as to why we agreed, along with
other experts and including American experts, that
the report should include the changes that reflect our
concerns. That is a simple statement of fact. What you
are trying to do is to intentionally ascribe political illintent. I also have a request for you, Madam President:
please lift the hold on the report of the Panel of Experts
and make sure that it sees the light of day.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

18-2874823/23
