United Nations

A/RES/60/22

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 80

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 November 2005
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/516)]

60/22.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its fifty-seventh session

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-seventh session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the codification and progressive
development of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the
Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law
which, given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be
suitable for the progressive development and codification of international law and
therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with
appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Law Seminar,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of
the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,

_______________
1
2

05-48886

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/60/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

A/RES/60/22

Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on
the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth
Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commission as a
body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between
the two bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and
question time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in resolution 58/316 of 1 July
2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the
1.
work of its fifty-seventh session,1 and recommends that the Commission continue its
work on the topics in its current programme, taking into account the comments and
observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the General Assembly;
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
2.
work accomplished at its fifty-seventh session, and encourages the Commission to
complete its work on those topics that are near completion during its fifty-eighth
session, taking into account the views expressed by Governments during the debates
of the Sixth Committee, and any written comments that may be submitted by
Governments;
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
3.
International Law Commission of having their views on the following, which were
adopted by the Commission at its fifty-sixth session:
(a)

The draft articles and commentary on diplomatic protection; 3

(b) The draft principles on the allocation of loss in the case of transboundary
harm arising out of hazardous activities; 4
4.
Invites Governments to provide information to the International Law
Commission, as requested in chapter III of its report, 5 regarding:
(a)

Shared natural resources;

(b)

Effects of armed conflicts on treaties;

(c)

Responsibility of international organizations;

(d)

Expulsion of aliens;

(e)

Unilateral acts of States;

(f)

Reservations to treaties;

5.
Endorses the decision of the International Law Commission to include
the topic “The obligation to extradite or prosecute (aut dedere aut judicare)” in its
programme of work;
6.
Invites the International Law Commission to continue taking measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity;

_______________
3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/59/10), para. 59.
Ibid., para. 175.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/60/10), paras. 24-29.
4

2

A/RES/60/22

7.
Encourages the International Law Commission to continue taking costsaving measures at its future sessions without prejudice to the efficiency of its work;
8.
Takes note of paragraph 502 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at
the United Nations Office at Geneva from 1 May to 9 June and from 3 July to
11 August 2006;
Welcomes the enhanced dialogue between the International Law
9.
Commission and the Sixth Committee at the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly, stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
two bodies, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued practice of
informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth
Committee and the members of the Commission attending the sixty-first session of
the Assembly;
10. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission to adhere as far as possible to the structured work
programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider presenting concise
and focused statements;
11. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law
Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to
enable high-level discussions on issues of international law;
12. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on
which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in
written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
13. Takes note of paragraphs 503 to 509 of the report of the International
Law Commission with regard to cooperation with other bodies, and encourages the
Commission to continue the implementation of article 16, paragraph (e), and
article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its statute in order to further strengthen
cooperation between the Commission and other bodies concerned with international
law, having in mind the usefulness of such cooperation;
14. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
15. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission;
16. Approves the conclusions reached by the International Law Commission
in paragraph 498 of its report, and reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the
documentation and summary records of the Commission; 6
17. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to
be held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and
_______________
6
See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the annual reports
of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly.

3

A/RES/60/22

that an increasing number of participants, in particular from developing countries,
will be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, and appeals to States to
continue to make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Trust Fund for the International Law Seminar;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar
with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to
continue considering ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, together with such
written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following
established practice;
20. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after
the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its
report containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the
specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to
the Commission and the draft articles adopted on either first or second reading by
the Commission;
21. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the sixty-first session of the General Assembly commence on
23 October 2006.
53rd plenary meeting
23 November 2005

4
