UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

.

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1859) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(4 Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11892);

(6) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt

to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11893). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1859

’
-1

I’

NOTE
Symbols ofUnited, Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1859th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 4 December 1975, at 4 p.m.
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Article 3 1 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
I propose, therefore, if there
rules of procedure,
is no objection,
to invite the representatives
just
mentioned to participate in the Council’s discussion,
without the right to vote.

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr. Allaf (Syrian
Arab Republic) took seats at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council has
before it a letter dated 3 December 1975 from the
representative
of Egypt, which is inscribed on the
agenda, in which he requests the participation
of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in the debate.

agenda (S/Agenda/l859)

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 11892);

3. In the course of the informal consultations
that
have taken place prior to this meeting, the representatives of Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
the United
Republic of Cameroon and the United Republic of
Tanzania have put forward the same proposal. I have
been asked by those members of the Council to record
that this proposal is not being put forward under rule 37
or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, but, if it is adopted by the Council, the
invitation to the PLO to participate in the debate will
confer on it the same rights of participation
as are
conferred when a Member State is invited to participate
under rule 37.

(b) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1893)
The meeting

was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

4. I call on the representative
of order.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11892);

of France on a point

5. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
‘from French): Mr. President,
am I to understand
from what you have just stated that the representatives of the PLO would not be invited under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure?

(b) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11893)

6.

The PRESIDENT:

7.

Mr.

de GUIRINGAUD

That is so.
(France)

(interpretation

from French): In his letter addressed to you requesting
1. The PRESIDENT:
Letters have been addressed
to the President of the Security Council by the
representatives
of Lebanon, of Egypt and of the
Syrian Arab Republic in which they request to be
invited, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter, to participate in the discussion of the
question inscribed on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice and in conformity with

an urgent meeting of the Security Council,
the
representative of Egypt also asked that the representatives of the PLO be invited to participate in this
debate.
8. In view of the fact that the Israeli attacks which
gave rise to the request for a meeting of the Council
were directed at Palestinian refugee camps on LebaI

nese territory, my delegation-considers
that our work
could not but be assisted by any information
that
might be provided by representatives of the PLO.

15. The United States is not prepared to agree to
an ad hoc departure from the rules of procedure tailored
to meet the asserted needs of the PLO. What is
more important, my Government
is not prepared to
acquiesce in an action which will undermine
the
negotiating process, which is the only process that
can lead to peace. For the representatives of the PLO
have repeatedly. and as recently as the day before
yesterday, told the General Assembly of their disdain
for systematic negotiation. They have openly declared
their hostility-indeed
their contempt-for
the work of
the Council. They categorically
rejected Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), which for years has
served as the only agreed basis for serious negotiation.
And now we find the PLO citing actions taken in the
General Assembly and the Security Council as the
basis for still further erosion of the negotiating process.

9. We categorically
condemn the Israeli bombardements, as in general we condemn all acts of violence,
and we believe that before we adopt a resolution
on the quest&r before us, at theend ofthe debate;
it would be useful to hear the testimony and information of all the interested parties. We therefore believe
that the representative of the PLO should be invited
to participate in the debate. However, in the present
circumstances and within the specific context of the
complaints before us, it is my delegation’s view that
this invitation can be extended only on the basis of
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
which provides for the invitation
of any person
regarded as qualified to supply information.

16. For those fundamental
reasons we are totally
opposed to inviting the PLO. To do so will disserve
the search for peace in the Middle East.

10. In fact, the only persons who have so far been
heard by the Council outside the context of rule 39
have been representatives of Member or non-Member
States of the United Nations.
Since the formula
envisaged for hearing the representatives of the PLO
is different from that laid down in rule 39, my delegation will, to its regret, be unable to associate itself
with the decision that it is proposed the Council
should take,

17. The noblest and most fundamental
aim of the
Security Council is to achieve peace and security.
In the case of the Middle East, my Government
is
dedicated to active leadership in the pursuit of that
goal. My Government
has long maintained
that the
legitimate
interests of the Palestinian
people must
be reflected in the arrangements that will bring peace
and security to the Middle East. The effort which has
been made to flout the procedures of the Council
and to disregard entirely the sensitivities
of the
people of the State of Israel can only complicate
the search for peace.

11. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance
with ‘the
procedures agreed upon during our prior consultations,
I shall put the present proposal to the vote. Before
doing so, however, I shall call on those representatives who wish to explain their vote before the voting.

18. We urge all who share the hope for a just
peace in the Middle East to withhold their support
from this egregious attempt to use this body to deal
with an amorphous terrorist organization as though it
were a concrete entity with the attributes
of a
sovereign Government.
The United States will vote
. “No”.

12. Mr. ,MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President,
this unfortunate
occasion has the
one merit of providing me with the opportunity
to
express the great pleasure of the United States that
you have acceded to the most important
post of
President of the Security Council at this very critical
time. You will know of the utmost confidence which
the United States delegation and, I am sure, each of
the other delegations members of the Council have in
your judiciousness
and your commitment
to orderly
processes in the Council.

19. Mr. VINCI -(Italy): On 2 December 1975 Israeli
aircraft struck Lebanese villages as well as Palestinian
refugee camps in Lebanon, leaving a large number of
victims, including women and children. Such action,
which has been described as “preventive”,
meets
.with the same firm condemnation
that the Italian
Government
has expressed in the past in similar
deplorable cases.

13. The United States delegation has insisted upon
a vote on the issue of inviting the PLO appear before
the Security Council. As a matter of principle we
shall vote against the PLO being invited to appear.

20. Since I have the floor, I wish to convey at
once our sincere sympathy, deep sorrow and human
solidarity to the families of all those who have been
the victims of the air raids-that
is to say, Lebanese
and Palestinian civilians killed on Lebanese territory
in circumstances for which there can be no justification.

14.. We have witnessed a concerted attempt to disregard the rules of procedure and to accord to the PLO
a role greater even than that which over the years
the Council has granted .to observer Government,
and a role greater by far than has in more recent
times been granted to the’ spokesmen of legitimate
national liberation
movements’ invited here under
,
‘,
rule 39.

21. Once again we have been confronted with an act
of violence and I want to reiterate here, on behalf of
my Government,
our condemnation
of any act of
2

violence by whomever
it takes place.

it is undertaken

and wherever

far as to say that we can see some difference between
the present discussion and the debate planned for
January on the whole Middle East question, including
the Palestinian
problem,
since politically
speaking
-not legally, I must make that clear, but politically
speaking-it
is hard to deny that the Palestinians
represent one of the main parties concerned. On this
point, without prejudging our position at that time,
I wish to recall that Italy recognizes the right of the
Palestinian
people to a national identity and to a
homeland.
Moreover,
many points of law can be
referred to, and I am sure you are aware, Mr. President,
that, being the representative of a country which has
a long tradition in the shaping of the concept Of the
rule of law, I am rather keen on that subject. I shall,
however, refrain from developing this point and will
raise only one basic issue.

22. Following the air raids and in accordance with
their rights as State Members of the Organization,
two countries have asked for the opening of a debate
on the issue of the attacks. At the same time, the
representative of Egypt has requested that the PLO
be permitted to participate in this debate, as you have
just announced to the Council, Mr. President. We
consider that request relevant in the sense that there
is no doubt in our mind that the Palestinians
and
their representatives,
in present circumstances,
should be enabled to express their feelings and to tell
us whatever they deem necessary concerning the case
we are considering.
Moreover,
we are certainly
interested
in hearing whatever information
they
can give to the Council, thus helping us in examining
the matter falling within our competence.

26. Should we grant the PLO the same rights,
in this connexion, as those given to a State Member
of the United Nations? Would that not raise in this
case quite serious legal and political questions about
possible interference with the sovereign rights of a
State Member of the United Nations, whatever the
intentions may be? I am, of course, referring now to
Lebanon, to the extent that it is the territory of that
country that has been hit by the raids. In other
words, we have in this case one main party concerned.
We cannot have two as long as the Articles of the
Charter and the provisional rules of procedure stand
as at present. We believe, in other words, that Lebanon
is the only subject of international law which is entitled
to make its point, to present its claim, in response to
the Israeli
act of infringement
of its national
sovereignty.

23. In this connexion, I want to make it very clear
that we are indeed in favour of acceding to the request
of the representative
of Egypt that would afford an
opportunity
to the representative
of the PLO to
express his views on this tragic occurrence. However,
after very careful examination
of the Charter, the
provisional
rules of procedure of the Council and
relevant precedents, and taking into account the principles on which the Organization
is based, we have
come to the conclusion that there is no other way
that this can and should be done than under the
clear provisions of rule 39.
24. Unfortunately,
in our view, some members
of the Council feel differently and deem it inadvisable
to meet the request of the representative
of Egypt
under rule 39, a course which is supported by wellestablished practice. We are in fact faced with a motion
requesting the participation
of .the PLO in the present
debate on terms which are totally innovative
with
regard to such long practice. If that proposal were
to be accepted, I fear it would create a precedent
which might have unforeseeable
consequences. In
fact, to our mind this raises serious doubts and
reservations as to its acceptability
and its conformity
with the provisions of the Charter, the provisional
rules of procedure and the spirit of the Organization.

27. On our side, we, as Members of the United
Nations, have the duty, the individual and collective
responsibility,
to defend respect for the provisions of
the Charter and the rules of procedure as they now
stand. In our view, it is incongruous and incompatible
with the very essence of international
law that two
different entities-to
use very simple words-the
Lebanese State and the PLO, should be granted the
same right to act in the international
sphere, namely,
within the Council, with regard to the same complaint
and in connexion with a clear act of violation of territorial integrity. That, in our view, would set a very
dangerous example, and I wonder how many State
Members of the United Nations would claim that
the Council can indeed go beyond its powers and
prerogatives by allowing such a radical change, which
can certainly not be described as procedural inasmuch
as it raises a very substantive
matter of crucial
importance for world order; a problem, to my mind,
which goes much beyond the specific case under
consideration. It is for that reason that we are not in a
position to support such a proposal.

25. I should like to elaborate on this issue so that
the reasons for our doubts and reservations may be
properly recorded. First of all, no one can fail to take
for granted that so far the Organization is an organization of sovereign States. The rights, duties, privileges
and responsibilities
set and conceived within the
United Nations are linked to the very essence of
statehood.
Whatever
feelings,
consideration
or
sympathy we may have for a given organization,
whenever some form of relationship
is being established between that organization
and the United
Nations, we must accept the fact that there is an
inherent difference between it and a sovereign State,
to the extent that it lacks statehood. I would go so

28. Mr. SAITO (Japan): It is the considered view
of the Government
of Japan that no solution of
the Middle East problem can be reached without the
3

participation
of the PLO in any efforts to achieve a
settlement.
The PLO represents the Palestinians,
who are one of the major parties concerned in the
problem. My delegation therefore takes the position
that the PLO should be invited to take part when the
Security Council conducts its deliberations
on the
Middle
East problem,
including
the Palestinian
question, next January.

the status of Permanent
Observer,
as the sole
legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian
people.
Is that body to be invited to the Council to participate
under a rule which considers only members of the
Secretariat or individuals or other persons? We think
not. Nor could it be invited under rule 37, obviously,
because that applies only to the Members of the
United Nations.

29. As regards the question before the Council
today, namely,
the deplorable
Israeli attack ’ on
Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon in which serious
casualties, to our great sorrow, were suffered by the
Palestinians,
my delegation considers that the PLO
should be allowed to make its statement on that
attack in the Council. Rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure is, in our view, applicable
to the present case. We find precedents for extending
invitations under that rule to individuals representing
various organizations,
including
liberation
organizations. My delegation would give its full support to
a request under rule 39 for the participation
of the
PLO in the debate of the Council.

32. It has all along been said that the Council,
or any other body, for that matter, is the master of
its own rules of procedure. In this case, it is the
duty of the Council then to decide on these rules of
procedure, especially since the matter is not provided
for in the provisional rules we have before us.
33. The one other case in which there was an
analogy that might be considered a precedent was the
invitation
of Permanent
Observers from the two
Viet-Namese
States [1846th meeting].
Again, they
were awarded the status of Permanent Observers; they
could not be invited under any other rules of procedure.
An invitation
was extended to them to come and
appear before the Council without reference to any
rule of the provisional rules of procedure.

30. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): My delegation finds it
most unfortunate that the representative of the United
States has found it expedient to take this opportunity
to launch yet another display of an exercise in
propaganda,
using the Security Council
for the
benefit of the mass media of information of the United
States of America. He does not seem to be aware
of the fact that we are gathered here because of a
complaint
resulting from a most savage terrorist
attack, not by the PLO but by a State Member of
the United Nations which the representative
of the
United States saw fit to defend here today. If there
has been an act of terrorism, it is the one that is the
reason for our meeting here today, and it came from
the other side.

34. We have therefore decided, along with our colleagues from the non-aligned countries, to support the
request made by the representative of Egypt to issue
an invitation to the PLO to participate in the debate
in the Council under no particular rule, and it is for
the Council now to decide on this and to pronounce
itself on this proposal.

“The Security Council may invite members of
the Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers
competent
for the purpose, to supply it with
information or to give other assistance in examining
matters within its competence.”

35. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian):
The Security
Council is meeting today in order to discuss one of a
long series of acts of aggression and international
piracy, one of a long series of international
acts of
terrorism committed by Israel against a neighbouring
State, Lebanon. And no contortions or attempts by the
protectors of Israel to divert attention from this
clear and plain fact by references to terrorism on
the part of another party will be of any use in covering
up this new international
crime of Israel. The delegation of the USSR reserves the right to make a
separate statement on the substance of the question
under discussion. For the time being, it shall confine
itself to stating its position on inviting the PLO to
participate in this debate.

That is rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure
-and I emphasize: the provisional rules of procedure.
Unfortunately,
these provisional
rules of procedure
have not envisaged or taken into account the possibility of the participation
of a party not a Member
of the United Nations, nor yet a member of the
Secretariat or “other person”. We are faced with a
situation in which the PLO happens to be the main
target of this latest savage act of terrorism. This is
a body that also happens to have been granted an
official status within the United Nations-namely,

36. The Security Council at its informal meetings
considered this matter in some detail. It was agreed
that an invitation would be extended to the representatives of the PLO, but not under rule 39 or rule 37
of the provisional
rules of procedure.
Rule 39 is
inapplicable in this case. It provides for the Security
Council to invite members of the Secretariat or other
persons. In this case we are not dealing with members of the United Nations Secretariat or with any
private individuals.
We are dealing with the official
observer of the PLO, which has been recognized

31. It has been asked why this request for the
participation
of the PLO was not presented and is not
being presented under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure. I shall read out the wording of rule 39:

4

by the United Nations in its official documents and
in decisions of the General Assembly as the sole
representative
of the Palestinian people. Therefore,
members of the Council, let us reject the legalistic
casuistry that is being used here to conceal a deliberate attempt to prevent the representatives
of the
Palestinian people from taking part in the work of the
Security Council in the discussion of a new act of
international
lawlessness by Israel.

has contirmed that the Palestinian people is a principal
party in the establishment
of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. In a subsequent resolution adopted
at this session of the General Assembly, resolution
3375 (XXX), the Assembly officially decided that the
participation
of the Palestinian people was essential
in any efforts and deliberations aiming at the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The General Assembly in that resolution decided to
invite the PLO, the representative of the Palestinian
people, to participate
in all efforts, deliberations
and conferences on the Middle East held under the
auspices of the United Nations, on an equal footing
with other parties, on the basis of resolution 3236
(XXIX).

37. It was agreed in the consultations
that the
invitation
of offtcial observers to a meeting of the
Council was not provided for in the rules of procedure.
The rules of procedure of the Security Council
were drafted 30 years ago, and at that time the
notion of official observers simply did not exist in
the Organization.
So obviously the drafters of the
rules of procedure could not have been prophets; they
could not have foreseen such a new institution
at
the United Nations.

41. Moreover, at its twenty-ninth session, in resolution 3237 (XXIX),
the Assembly accorded the PLO
the status of Permanent
Observer at the United
Nations.
What more legitimacy
can one possibly
require? A decision of the General Assembly lays
down the law for the United Nations. The Assembly
invited the PLO to participate in the sessions and
the work of all international
conferences convened
under the auspices of the General Assembly, in the
capacity of observer. It emphasized that the PLO
had the right to participate in the capacity of observer
in the sessions and the work of all international
conferences convened under the auspices of other
organs of the United Nations.

38. Now there are official observers at the United
Nations and the question arises as to how they are
going to be given an opportunity
to take part in the
work of the Security
Council when a question
directly involving them is being discussed. A very
important rule, a matter of principle, is involved in
this point, that the Security Council has more than
once applied in the past. What is the substance of
that rule? It is that the Security Council is the master
of its own procedures.
That is why it has full
authority to invite representatives of the PLO to take
part in meetings of the Council, without invoking
either rule 39 or rule 37. That is the line the Council
took when inviting the official representatives of the
two Viet-Namese States to participate in the meetings
when the question of the admission of those States
to membership
in the United Nations was under
discussion, although for reasons known to us all that
request for admission did not gain approval.

42. The participation
of the PLO in discussions by
the Council I of the new Israeli aggression against
Lebanon is important
and indispensable,
because
the Palestinian
people, represented in the United
Nations by the PLO, is not only an equal party in
the Middle East conflict but, in this case, it is also
the principal victim of aggression because the-act of
international
piracy by Israel perpetrated not only in
the territory of Lebanon but in areas where Palestinian
refugee camps were situated. This was a dual crime
committed
by Israel: a violation of the integrity of
territorial
airspace and an unprovoked
attack on a
sovereign State; an attack which caused a great many
casualties on the site of a camp of refugees who had
been driven from their homes as a result of Israeli
aggression. What more legitimate basis is required for
the invitation
of the lawful representatives
of the
Palestinian people?

39. Therefore in this case, if there is a desire and
the will on the part of the members of the Security
Council to invite the representatives
of the PLO,
the sole legitimate representatives of the Palestinian
people, and to give those representatives an opportunity to take part in the discussion of this question,
this matter can be resolved entirely without casuistic
references to the rules of procedure. When the official
representatives of the two Viet-Namese
States were
to be invited to meetings of the Council, no rules of
procedure were invoked. A decision was made simply
to invite them.

43. The Soviet Union and its representatives
in
the Council firmly advocate the full participation
of the representatives of the PLO in the forthcoming
discussion in the Council of this new act of aggression committed
by Israel. We most resolutely support the considerations
and proposals advanced by
the group of non-aligned
countries in the Security
Council to the effect that representatives of the PLO
should be invited to participate fully in the debate in-..
the Council on this question. Such an invitation would
be fully in keeping with the resolutions of the General

40. With regard to the question of the responsibility
and the legitimacy of the PLO, one of the speakers
has pointed out that some observers at the United
Nations are legitimate, but the official observers from
the PLO are supposedly not lawful. Of course this
is entirely out of keeping with the truth. That argument
is contrived.
Let us refer to the facts instead.
The General Assembly in resolution
3236 (XXIX)
5

Assembly
and the
Security Council.

resolution

381 (1975)

of the

44. I wish particularly
to point out that when resolution 3210 (XXIX) of-the Assembly, concerning the
invitation of the PLO to participate in the Assembly
on the question of Palestine, was adopted, 12 out of
the total number of- the current members of the
Security Council voted in favour of the resolution.
In that resolution the General Assembly:
“Considering
that the Palestinian people is the
principal party to the question of Palestine,
“Invites
the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
the representative
of the Palestinian
people, to
participate in the deliberations...
on the question of
Palestine...”
45. Today the Security Council is discussing a
question of direct concern to the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian .people have suffered as a result of
a barbarous, unprovoked Israeli attack on Palestinian
refugee camps. The Council cannot disregard the
attitude of the General Assembly; if it did it would
bring great discredit on itself as the principal organ
of the United Nations responsible for ensuring international peace and security and taking decisive measures to curb aggression, no matter where it may occur
or by whom it is committed.

case was to invite the two Viet-Nams to make statements to the Council after the vote, not to participate
fully.
50. Secondly, that invitation
was extended on a
“no-objection”
basis. The President very properly
paused, and, after a moment,
said: “Hearing
no
objection,
-the motion
is adopted”.
There are
objections in this case.
51. Thirdly, although the then President made no
reference to any of the Council’s rules of procedure
when the Council invited the two Viet-Nams-there
was no reason for him to do so; we knew under
what rule we acted-the
fact is that the legal basis
of the invitation was rule 39. As the representative
of Italy has said today, there can be no other basis
under the rules as they now stand.
52. Finally, in this regard, whether we believe there
is one Viet-Namese State or two Viet-Namese States,
there certainly is at least one such State, but there
does not now exist any State of Palestine, nor does
the PLO claim that there exists a State of Palestine.
The PLO cannot therefore properly be treated as the
Government of a State.

48. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
I intervene briefly in the interest of keeping the record
straight. with respect to some of the things which
have been said here this afternoon.

53. In conclusion, a number of references have been
made here this afternoon to what was agreed or not
agreed in the private consultations which the Council
held prior to this formal meeting. I regret to say that
the recollections of the United States delegation are
vey much at variance on a number of points with the
recollections
of other members of the Council. I
regret this because it must surely be a sign that we
have a faulty memory. I do not in any way mean to
suggest that there has been misrepresentation,
much
less that there has been deliberate
misrepresentation, but there is some distress on our part that our
recollections and understanding should be so much at
variance with those of other members of the Council.
It must be a fact that if the practice which the Council has evolved of meeting in private and without a
record being taken is to become the source of
subsequent confusion or even disagreement,
and
conceivably
even the quest for advantage in consequence of the absence of a record, then clearly the
disposition of some members of the Council to continue that practice will be diminished and the use of a
creative innovation
in our procedures will perhaps
commence to decline. I make that point in the most
open and unaccusatory
manner simply because it
seems to me that it is not useful in this debate to make
reference to earlier agreements
which are not a
matter of record.

49. First, the representative
of Iraq asserted that
the decision of the Security Council in September
to hear the two Viet-Nams
[ibid.]
is a precedent
for the ‘proposal to invite what is called the “full
participation”
of the PLO. The Viet-Namese
case
was entirely different. What the Council did in that

54. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Bvelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretaridn
~from Russiun):
The Byelorussian
SSR associates itself with
the representatives
of the non-aligned
countries
members of the Security Council that have proposed
that the representatives
of the PLO be invited to

46. It would be most unfortunate if those members
of the Security Council which voted in the Assembly
in favour of inviting
the representatives
of the
Palestinian people, headed by their outstanding leader,
Mr. Arafat, were to change their position in the Council today and put obstacles in the way of inviting
the legitimate representatives of the Palestinian people,
the PLO. That is the position in connexion with this
question.
47. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers
that to invite the representatives
of the Palestinian
people, the representatives of the PLO, to participate
with official observer status in the consideration
of this barbarous act of aggression against Lebanon
and the Palestinian people, which is but one in a long
series of such acts, is just, necessary and logical.
No juridical casuistry can in any way justify opposition to the adoption of such a decision by the Council.

take part in the work of the Security Council in the
light of the fact that the PLO has observer status.,
and in accordance with the practice which the Council has applied in this case.
55. The objections that have been made to this are
merely formalistic casuistry, nothing more, and it is
quite impossible
to agree with them. The General
Assembly, in a number of its decision, has emphasized
the rights and the role of the PLO in the solution
of the whole complex of questions relating to the
Middle East problem. At the present time it is difficult to imagine that any question relating to the
Middle East could be discussed or resolved without the
participation
of the representatives
of the Arab
people of Palestine represented by the PLO. After
the adoption of a number of such decisions, with
which members of the Council are familiar,
one
cannot fail to express regret at the position of those
who, notwithstanding
the opinions
of the overwhelming majority of Members of the United Nations
and the world community, continue to ignore the PLO.
56. As for the substance of this question, which
has been referred to by other members in the Council, the aggressive acts of Israel were directed in
Lebanon against the Arab people of Palestine and
against a Palestinian refugee settlement. Why, in this
situation, should one ignore the PLO, which is the
only legitimately
recognized
organization
of the
Palestinian people? Who, in such a situation, is bestplaced to represent the interests of the Palestinian
people? There can be no doubt, in the view of my
delegation, that it is only the PLO and its representatives.
57. For these reasons, the Byelorussian SSR insists
that the PLO and its representatives, should take part
in the work of the Council from the very beginning
of the discussion of the question before the Council.
The Council will be doing its duty and taking a serious
attitude towards the question under discussion if it
invites the representatives of the PLO, in the light
of that Organization’s
observer status.

representatives
of the two Viet-Nams,
in that they
were invited without reference to any particular rule
of the rules of procedure.
6.1. Thirdly,
I do not remember-though
I too,
perhaps, may have a faulty memory-having
said that
the observers from the two Viet-Nams were asked to
participate fully in the deliberations and debate in the
Council. If I am right-and
the records would so show
and will perhaps back me up on this-1 said that the
invitation was extended to them to participate in the
debates of the Council.
62, ,Now, while I have the floor, I also seem to
remember that the representative of the United States
wanted to preclude the PLO’s participation
in this
debate because, he said-if I remember correctly-that
they have shown nothing but “disdain”
and “contempt... for the work of the Council” [para. 15, above].
63. Now, the representative
of the United States
may be forgiven for not knowing who, in fact, has
shown the greatest contempt and disdain for the
Council-he
is a newcomer-but
I would advise him
to read the records of the Council. He will find that
it is the State of Israel, which he seeks to protect,
that has shown the greatest contempt and disdain
for the work of the Council and of the United Nations.
64. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): I have asked for
the. floor in order to clarify a point. I think one
would have to be pretty daring, not having been
present at the informal consultations of the Council,
to interpret at one’s discretion
the discussion of
the question at that meeting as the representative
of the U.S. is now doing. Nor can we agree with the
idea of separating official observers at the United
Nations into first-class and second-class observers.
There is no rule of procedure or any United Nations
document one might ,mention that contains any such
division.

59. With regard to what was said just now by the
representative of the United States, I should like to
point out, first, that whether it is a State or a,liberation movement which is invited to participate
in
the debates of the Council, is, in our view, immaterial.
The invitation
is now being issued to a Permanent
Observer of the United Nations to participate inthe
Council’s debate.

65. ‘. One other point: I categorically
affirm that in
the case of the invitation
of the official observers
of the two Viet-Namese
States to take part in the
work ,of the Security Council [1846th meeting], the
President did not make any reference to rule 39,
because there would have been no point in so doing:
the official observers of the two Viet-Namese
States
are official .observers at the United Nations and not
private individuals.
And the then President of the
Council,
the’ representative
of Mauritania-I
am
sorry that he is. not here, because he could bear
me out on this-did
not invoke rule 39. So to try to
ascribe to him something which he actually did not
do is, to say the least, odd.

60. Secondlv. the nrecedent was set in terms of
participation,’ without
reference to any rule of
procedure. There is an analogy again between this
invitation and the invitation that was extended to the

66. In preparing for today’s meeting, I took the
trouble to’read the records of the Security Council,
precisely that part of the records where the President’s
statement concerning the invitation
to the official

58. Mr. ZAHAWIE
(Iraq): I apologize for taking the
floor again this afternoon, but if I do so it is purely
in the interest of keeping the record straight.

Council, who asked the Council to reply to a question
he put, a question to which he received a crystalclear reply that appears in the records of the Council.
I would ask delegations, therefore, to refer to the
President of the Security Council, and not to the
representative of Mauritania.

observers of the two Viet-Namese
States was under
discussion, and there was no reference at that point
to rule 39. I thought that we should set the record
straight on that. I think it is useful to do so.
67. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
I intervene, first, to assure my colleague from the
Soviet Union that the United States’ understanding
of the record is exactly as is his own. We do not have
any misunderstanding
or disagreement. It would not,
in any event, be of much avail, because there is in fact
the record. It would perhaps be useful if I were
simply to restate what I said on the occasion of commenting about the invitation
to the two Viet-Nams.
The third point I made a moment ago [para. 5f, above]
was:

72. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
I have the happy opportunity
to call to the attention
of my colleague from Mauritania
the fact that the
form of the statement I made earlier to the Council
and that I just a moment ago quoted was exactly
the * form which he quite understandably
prefers.
I said, and I shall say it once again:
“Thirdly,
although
the then President
made
no reference to any rule of the Council’s’ rules
of procedure when the Council invited the two
Viet-Nams...
The fact is that the legal basis of the
invitation
was rule 39. As the representative
of
Italy has said today, there can be no other basis
under the rules as they now stand.”

“Thirdly,
although the then President made no
reference to any of the Council’s rules of procedure
when the Council invited the two Viet-Nams...
The
fact is that the legal basis of the invitation
was
rule 39. As the representative
of Italy has said
today, there can be no other basis under the rules
as they now stand.”

73. Mr. KANE
(Mauritania)
(interpretation
from
French): I apologize for speaking again. I leave it to
the representative
of the United States to place
whatever interpretation
he deems fit to the statement
that was made-1
repeat-by
the President of the
Council when he made the proposal to the Council.

That was the end of that passage, and that is all
I wish to state.
68. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation
front Russian): In reply to the
representative
of the United States, that is your
own interpretation,
it is not the interpretation
of the
President. And as for what the President understood
by that, it would be better to ask him than to misinterpret him.

74. Now, Mr. President, as to the proposal you
have made to the Security Council, it is quite clear,
whether or not it is similar to, or identical with, the
one made earlier by the representative of Mauritania
when he presided over the Council. In any case,
your question is quite clear, and each delegation is
free to vote either in favour of, or against, that
proposal. I do not? however, think it is necessary to
go back to past sessions of the Council to find
interpretations
that fit into the position taken by
either side.

69. Mr. KANE
(Mauritania)
(interprefation
from
French): I believe that we are embarking on an endless debate. The question you put, Mr. President,
before the Security Council is quite clear. It would,
however, appear that Mauritania
is being quoted,
especially by way of reference, during our debate
today.

75. The PRESIDENT:
As there are no further
speakers before the vote, I should like, as the
representative of the UNITED
KINGDOM,
to make
a short statement in explanation of my own vote.

70. I shall now speak on behalf of Mauritania,
even though the Permanent Representative
of Mauritania is not here. To us, any representative
of
Mauritania
represents
Mauritania,
regardless
of
whether or not he is the Permanent Representative.

76. I wish to explain why I intend to vote against
the proposal that was put forward by the delegations
of Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
the United Republic of
Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania. That
proposal contemplates conferring on the PLO a right
to participate in the proceedings of the Council in
this debate going far beyond what has customarily
been accepted as appropriate
in such a case. The
granting to the PLO of this exceptional
status in
the Council’s proceedings would, in the view of my
Government, constitute an undesirable and an unnecessary departure from the established practice of the
Security Council. The provisional rules of procedure’
of the Council provide only for Member States of
the Organization to enjoy such treatment. We see no

71. Therefore,
speaking on behalf of Mauritania,
I wish to say that when Mr. El Hassen made his
proposal to the Council [ibid.], he did so not as
representative
of Mauritania
but as President of the
Security Council. I believe the records of the Council
are crystal-clear in this regard, and there is no need
to ask the representative of Mauritania to give his own
interpretation.
The question he put to the Security
Council was crystal-clear, as was the reply given to
that question.. I think we should avoid quoting the
representative
of Mauritania
as such, and that we
should rather speak of the President of the Security
8

~

81. As stated by some of the members of the Security Council who supported the proposal, the invitation
has been formulated so as to attribute to the PLO,
rightly, in their view, the quality of sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people. Because we
disagree with that qualification,
my delegation did not
support General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).
In my delegation’s
view, some kind of referendum
should have been held before attributing the capacity
of sole legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian
people to the PLO-a
referendum which, for obvious
reasons, it has not been possible to carry out. The
fact that such a referendum
has not been held
makes it impossible
for my delegation to support
any procedure which, without the expressed will of the
people, seeks to confer exclusive representation.

sufficient reason to depart from that position. We
certainly do not regard it as appropriate to accord
such exceptional treatment to a body which is not
merely not a Member State of the Organization,
but which does not, claim to be a State at all, nor
to be the Government of a State. The PLO has been
accorded a certain status by the General Assembly,
but it does not, in our view, have the same status as
those States which have been recognized as permanent
observers to the Organization.
77. There is the further consideration,
to which we
attach considerable weight, that the essence of the
complaint
which is now before the Council is that
of a complaint
concerning the infringement
of the
territorial sovereignty of a Member State, Lebanon,
which will itself be taking a full part in our proceedings. I should like to make it clear, however,
that the way in which I cast my vote today on behalf
of the United Kingdom is entirely without prejudice
to the decision which the United Kingdom Govemment will take when the Council deals with the
question of the participation
of the PLO in the other
debate which, as we recently agreed, will begin on
12 January 1976.

82. Although my delegation agrees that, in view of
the subject to be considered by the Council on this
occasion, it would be desirable to hear the Palestinian
views, we do not share the opinion which justifies
the presence of the PLO and qualifies it as the sole
legitimate representative of that community.
83. Furthermore,
my delegation holds the view that
the framework
for an invitation
such as the one
proposed is found in rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure of the Council.

78. Now speaking in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
in accordance with the procedures agreed upon
during our consultation,
we will proceed to a vote
on the proposal put forward by the representative
of Egypt in his letter, supported by the representatives of Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
the United
Republic of Cameroon and the United Republic of
Tanzania, that there should be accorded an invitation
to the PLO to participate
in this debate, and that
that invitation
will confer upon it the same rights
of participation
as are conferred when a Member
State is invited to participate under rule 37.

84. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the deei-’
sion just taken by the Security Council, I invite the
representative of the PLO to take a seat at the Council
table.
1
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aql (Palestine,
Liberation
Organization)
took a seat at the Council
table.
85. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the
representative of Lebanon, on whom I now call.
’

A vote wm taken by show of hands.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet, Socialist Republic,
China, Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of
Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United
Republic
of
Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania.
Against: Costa Rica, United
Britain
and Northern
Ireland,
America.
A bstaining:
The proposal
3 abste&ons.

Kingdom
United

86. Mr. GHORRA
(Lebanon):
Mr. President,
I
should like to extend to you and to the members
of the Security Council the appreciation of my delegation of the convening of this meeting at our request:
I also wish to take this opportunity to convey to you;
Sir, my compliments
on your assumption
of the
presidency of the Council and to wish you every suci
cess in the fulfilment
of your responsibilities
in the
service of international
peace and security.

of Great
States of

France, Italy , Japan.
was adopted

87. Before I proceed with my statement, I should
like at the outset to make one point clear. My delegation is very happy with the decision just taken by
the Council. This accords with our support of the
Egyptian proposal, which I personally conveyed to
you, Mr. President, yesterday. On that basis, my
delegation agreed to postpone the discussion of the
substance of this matter until today, pending the decision of the Council, which it has just taken, on the
important question of the...participation
of the PLO
in the discussion of the question before the Council.

by 9 yotes to 3, with

79. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Costa Rica, who has asked to speak in explanation
of vote after the vote.
80. Mr. SALAZAR (Costa
Rica) (intetmetatiorr
from
.
Spanish): My delegation wishes to’explain its negative
vote on the proposal.
9

.

88. Since the Council adopted resolution 347 (1974)
on 24 April 1974 the Lebanese Government
has
refrained from coming before the Council to deal
with the repeated attacks of Israel against Lebanon for
two principal
reasons: first, because of Israel’s
defiance of the Council’s resolutions and the Council’s reluctance to adopt measures that would deter
Israel from repeating its attacks; and, secondly,
because of our hopes that our behaviour would contribute to the peace efforts being undertaken to solve
the Middle East problem.

tion attacked refugee camps situated in southern
Lebanon at Nabatiyeh.
As a result of these massive
raids, many people were killed and others injured.
Heavy destruction to property was also inflicted.
93. According
to the latest official information,
8 Lebanese and 78 Palestinians
were killed in
northern Lebanon; 2 Lebanese and 106 Palestinians
were injured. Four Lebanese homes were destroyed
and 20 heavily damaged. In Nabatiyeh in the south,
4 Palestinians are known to have been killed, along
with 12 Lebanese. Nine Lebanese and 11 Palestinians
were injured. Four homes in the village of Kharbat
Toul were destroyed, and many others damaged.
Three motor vehicles were also destroyed. Many
structures in the camps and in the vicinity were equally
destroyed or damaged.

89. However, Israel has persisted completely undeterred in its attacks against Lebanon. Since April
1974 we have sent numerous letters of complaint
to the Council, warning it that unless it took effective
measures to restrain Israel from further acts of
aggression the cause of peace in the area and in
the world would remain constantly endangered. So
today we again come before the Council to bring
to its attention the latest massive and outrageous
air attacks against Lebanon, which cannot be ignored.
The Lebanese Government,
in its decision to bring
this case before the Council, also considers that the
Israeli attacks are of such gravity as seriously
to threaten the cause of peace.

94. It has not yet been possible to determine
the exact number of victims resulting from those
attacks, because many bodies are still lying under
the rubble. Some bombs scored direct hits on the
shelters where people were taking cover and their
bodies have not yet been recovered. Bombs weighing
250 kilograms each were dropped in the attacks, some
of which were time-bombs.
A large number of both
the Lebanese and Palestinian
victims were women
and children.

90. How ironical and hypocritical
events in international life can be. Let me repeat to the Council
some words that are still ringing in our ears: “We
want peace; we have stretched out our hand in an
offer of peace; we are prepared to move towards
peace...“‘.
Those words were pronounced
by
Mr. Herzog, the representative
of Israel, to the
General Assembly oniy two days ago, on 2 December,
during the consideration
of the situation in the Middle East. On that same day the arm of Israel was
indeed outstretched.
But it was the arm of a new
aggression against Lebanon-against
its sovereignty
and territorial integrity, against its civilian population
and against the Palestinian
refugee camps located
in our country.

95. Lebanon, as is well known, has gone through
severe ordeals during the last several months. The
Lebanese people and Government have been finding
their way back to normalcy, working to restore law
and order,
to promote
reconciliation,
and to
strengthen their national unity. It may seem strange
that while Lebanon is healing its wounds and heading
for stability, Israel should choose this very moment,
in a premeditated manner, to attack many areas of the
country with such severity and cold-bloodedness.
96. But when we remember
Israel’s established
policy of provoking and perpetuating a constant state
of turmoil in Lebanon, a policy that has been several
times condemned by the Council, there can be no
reason for wonder.

91. The hypocrisy of Israel and its Janus-like image,
which have already been exposed on several occasions,
were once more revealed. Its actions contradicted and
spoke louder than its words. For on that same
morning
of 2 December,
between the hours of
10.05 a.m. and 10.30 a.m., (Beirut local time), units
of the Israeli air force, composed of 30 planes,
Phantoms and Skyhawks, simultaneously
attacked
three major Palestinian
refugee camps in northern
and southern Lebanon. Two jet formations penetrated
Lebanon’s air space, sweeping eastwards from over
the sea. The attacking planes flew in at a low altitude,
while the supporting and protective planes flew at a
higher altitude.

97. It may also appear strange that Israel should
perpetrate this new act of aggression in the wake
of the decision of the Security Council of 30 November, which renewed the mandate of UNDOF
for
another period of six months [resolution 381 (1975)].
But it is precisely because of this fact that Israel,
believing that stability had once again been ensured
on the Golan Heights, reverted to its cowardly tactics
of attacking an exposed and defenceless country.
98. It is equally incongruous that those who profess
peace should lack the political courage to face up
to peace and should also lack the ,moral fortitude to
accept the reality in international
affairs. The majority
of the Council members made an important declaration through the medium of the President [1856th

92. One formation attacked the refugee camps of
Nahr Al-Bared and Al-Badawi,
situated near the
northern Lebanese frontier, more than 200 kilometres
from the Lebanese-Israeli
border. The second forma10

para. 231 last Sunday, according to which
representatives
of the PLO will participate
in the
debate of the Council scheduled to be held on
12 January 1976. This declaration has followed other
resolutions which ensured widespread and growing
recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people and of their right to participate
in all conferences and efforts affecting their future. The emergence of the Palestinian question in its true dimensions
must have played havoc in Israel, made its leaders
wild with anxiety, and led them to an unwarranted,
unprovoked,
and utterly insane act of political vengeance.

southern Lebanon. These Lebanese’ refugees have
been forced to abandon their homes and fields, their
normal way of life, and their means of livelihood,
and sought shelter in other areas of the country.
This upheaval of our population overtaxed Lebanon’s
meagre resources and added new strains to its social
and economic problems. If Israel is displeased with
the Security
Council’s
resolutions,
with United
Nations pronouncements,
regarding the question of the
Middle East, why should Lebanon be the victim of its
vengeance and suffer from its aggression?

meeting,

103. Since its creation, Israel has been a source of
instability
and violence in the. Middle East. It has
sought vindication throughjntemational
sanction. War
has been its maininstrument.
Brute military force has
indeed been all it offered. On the other hand, Lebanon
has always been a loyal Member of the United Nations,
and its dedication to international
peace has never
been questioned. Unusual pressures have been forced
upon my country, and the Lebanese people have
suffered tremendously
from problems not of their
own making.

99. We do not know of any apparent reason for
this attack. We do know that no action whatsoever
has been undertaken by the Palestinians from Lebanon
that could have been used as a pretext by Israel
to justify its actions. Moreover, Israel itself has confirmed this fact and has stated that the aggression it
undertook was not punitive but preventive in nature.
This is a dangerous course to follow in international
affairs. Are States to be allowed to determine on
their own what should be termed preventive acts?
If so, this will lead the world back to the law of the
jungle, and far away from the international
order
based on the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

104. Instead of trying to solve the problems of the
Middle East, Israel has deemed fit to fan its hatred
against Lebanon. It would have, had to face the
problem of bombarding Lebanon and the Palestinian
refugee camps therein, had it respected all United
Nations resolutions that deal with the Middle East
conflict and the Palestine
question. The present
malaise in Israel results from its isolation.

100. Lebanon
has suffered from the wars and
upheavals of the Middle East that originated in the
creation of Israel and the concomitant eviction of the
Palestinians from their homeland by Israel. As part of
its policy in the area, Israel has initiated an era of
violence directed against Lebanon with an air force
commando attack on Beirut Airport on 28 December 1968. Since then, many attacks, raids and invasions
of Lebanese territory,
air space, and waters have
been undertaken, acts which have led us to request
that the Council take measures against Israel to deter
it from either continuing
or repeating such acts
against Lebanon.

105. Recent
United
Nations
resolutions
have
attempted to redress injuries inflicted upon the Palestinians. Israel cannot afford the luxury of picking and
choosing only those United Nations resolutions which
suit its interests. It has failed with its suspicious
claims of offering the countries of the Middle East
an outstretched hand of peace. It must make its claims
credible.
106. Lebanon
has always maintained
and reaffirms now that the problem of the Palestinian people
constitutes the core of the problem of the Middle
East, and that no solution to this problem can be
effective and durable unless the Palestinian people
exercise its inalienable
rights, already recognized
by the United Nations and, chief among them, their
right to self-determination
and nationhood.
This
aspect of the Middle East problem has been sidetracked for many years. Even resolution 242 (1967)
speaks only of the Palestinian refugee problem. The
question is more than one of refugees for whom the
international
community should provide food, shelter
and essential services. The’question
is the restoration
to the Palestinians of their basic rights in. order that
they may live in dignity and build their own future
in a national homeland of their own and on their
national
soil. The international
community
must
face this question fairly and squarely and swiftly
and find the proper solution for it at the same time

101. On several occasions, the Council condemned
Israel and warned it not to repeat these attacks,
but to no avail. None of the Council’s resolutions has
deterred Israel. Instead, Israel has demonstrated
its
contempt for the Council’s decisions and for various
other resolutions of the United Nations. Only the other
day, we witnessed one such contemptuous
act,
unprecedented
in the annals of the United Nations,
when the Israeli representative
stood on the rostrum
of the General Assembly and tore to shreds the
resolution which had just been passed. Moreover, the
Council, the guardian of international
peace and security, failed to enforce its own resolutions despite our
many complaints and warnings.
102. The result of these attacks has been hundreds
of people killed or wounded, hundreds of homes
destroyed,
scores of villages levelled,
and the
uprooting of thousands upon thousands of people from
11

I

that it is seeking to find solutions to the other aspects
of the Middle East problem. To leave this aspect
unattended to is to invite the infliction of more tragedies on the peoples and countries of the Middle
East, and to allow the situation to fester indefinitely.

significantly
it is the first time that the victim of
aggression-namely,
the Palestinian people- has been
given the chance to take part in its deliberations.
Our deep thanks go to the representatives
of the
Byelorussian SSR, China, Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
the Soviet Union, Sweden, the United Republic of
Cameroon
and the United Republic of Tanzania.
They have today, by their positive vote, inaugurated
a new era based on justice and freedom.

107. Lebanon refuses to be an innocent victim in this
tragedy. Lebanon demands that attacks against its
sovereignty and territorial
integrity cease. Lebanon
urges the Security Council to stand by its obligations
under the Charter.

114. If the defenceless Palestinian
people. in the
refugee camps are continually
subjected to .barbaric
and ‘wanton Israeli air attacks, we believe that the
least the Security Council should do is to give their
representatives the chance to be heard; the more so,
since General Assembly resolution 3375 (XXX) of
10 November
1975 and resolution 381 (1975) of the
Security Council are conceived in the same spirit.

108. The United Nations is supposed to protect the
weak and small States from military bullies. It was
not intended to protect the Powers, which can take
care of their own defence.
109. Once again, we bring our case before the Council in the hope that the Council will rise to its task of
maintaining
international
peace and security in the
areas where they are most threatened and in the
interest of those who, again, are most threatened.
We should like to make our position clear on our
objectives in coming to the Council. We hope that the
Council will adopt the needed resolution which will
strongly condemn the Government
of Israel for its
premeditated
air attack against Lebanon, in violation
of its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and Security Council resolutions;
that the
Council will call upon Israel to desist forthwith from
all military attacks against Lebanon; and that the Council will issue once more a solemn warning to Israel
that, if such attacks are repeated, the Council will
have to consider steps and measures to give effect
to its decisions.

115. It has always been Egypt’s conviction that the
PLO, as the sole representative
of the Palestinian
people, should be invited to take part in all deliberations in the United Nations related to the Middle
East, since we consider them to be the principal
party in that problem, on an equal footing with the
other parties concerned.
116. The barbaric attack launched by the military
air forces of Israel on 2 December 1975 is a flagrant
violation of the territorial integrity and the sovereignty
of Lebanon, and a vicious act of State terrorism
against the Palestinian people.
117. Thirty
Israeli military
aircraft pounded the
Palestinian
refugee camps of Nabatiyeh,
Nahr AlBared and Al-Badawi
in northern
and southern
Lebanon for more than one our. The tragic toll,
according to the preliminary estimates, was 92 innocent
civilians killed, including 12 children and 18 women.
Also 160 innocent civilians were wounded, including
15 children and 30 women. Besides these human
losses, schools, nurseries and civilian installations
were completely
demolished,
among them buildings
belonging to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA)
in the refugee camps.

110. These are our demands of the Council; these
are our minimum demands of the Council. If the Council in its wisdom wishes to go further, my delegation will be happy, but my delegation will accept no less
than that.
111. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Egypt.

I now call on the represen-

112. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID
(Egypt): Mr. President,
may I be allowed to express my sincere appreciation
to you for having called this emergency meeting of the
Security Council at the request of Egypt and Lebanon,
and also to thank the members of the Council for
having acceded to our request. We trust that, under
your wise presidency and with the constructive participation of the members, the debate in the Council
will lead to positive and effective results, thereby
contributing to the strengthening of peace and security
in the region of the Middle East and ensuring greater
respect for the Charter of the United Nations.

118. One cannot but wonder what sort of victory
over defenceless refugees the .Israeli army claims;
what preventive reprisals the Israeli Government
is
taking against civilians, women and children in their
camps.
119. It has become an established
pattern and
practice that Israel resorts to a “show of strength”
each time it fails to dictate its position to the
international
community
and the United Nations.
Only two days ago the Security Council published,
the report of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization [S/11663/Add.18]
on the Israel-Lebanon
armistice line for the month of November
1975.
From that report it is clear that Israeli forces con-

113. It is certainly not the first time that the Security
Council has been seized of a question of Israeli
aggression against Lebanon and the Palestinian people,
as the record of the Council amply shows; but
12
”

-,

tinued to occupy daily, during daylight hours, five
positions on the Lebanese side and that this was
accompanied
by numerous crossings into Lebanon
by Israeli forces. This time Israel found no excuse
but what the Israeli army spokesman had to say,
namely:
“that Israeli planes bombed suspected guerilla
bases in Lebanon as a warning to the Palestinians
not to be encouraged by United Nations developments into staging further attacks on Israel.”
These wanton and barbaric Israeli acts of State
terrorism demonstrate
that Israel no longer bothers
even to formulate pretexts for its aggression.
120. The Security Council,
particularly
the permanent members, and the world community
cannot
remain indifferent spectators while the Israeli forces
carry out their acts of terror, murder and blackmail
against a State Member of the United Nations and
against defenceless women and children in refugee
camps.
121. Israeli attacks against Lebanon constitute a
campaign
of intimidation
and provocation
which
can only serve the revival of the cycle of violence
in the Middle East. This latest example of the escalation of Israeli attacks on Lebanon is detrimental
to
the efforts which are being made to reach a peaceful
and just settlement in the area, not to mention the
fact that the Israeli attacks on Lebanon constitute a
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
the resolutions of the Security Council and the principles of international
law and morality. Israel must
realize by now that its policy of aggression has been
futile and self-defeating and will lead only to more
violence. The only way to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East is through Israel’s recognition of the Palestinian people and their inalienable
rights and the implementation
of the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
122.

The Israeli action against Lebanon will have
repercussions on the entire structure of peace
in the Middle
East. By systematically
violating
Lebanon’s sovereignty, Israel is inflicting irreparable
damage on the fabric of peace in the area which has
been attained, even though tentatively and gradually,
as a result of most laborious
and painstaking
endeavours on the part of those who are dedicated
to replacing hostility
by peace, vindictiveness
by
justice and arrogance by the rule of law.
serious

123. Members of the Security Council will not fail
to discern the magnitude of the irresponsible behaviour
of the Israeli Government
which, unfortunately,
indicates blatant aggressiveness and pathetic shortsightedness. Israel, instead of coming to grips with
the basic elements of the conflict in the Middle East,
instead of grasping the opportunity
offered by the
momentum
which has built up recently in the area,

once again manifests its incompetence in heeding the
many lessons which have been earnestly preached
ever since October 1973.
124. The onus of lessening the chances of obtaining
peace in the area will not fall upon a dispossessed,
deprived, and a long-exiled Palestinian people. The
blame must remain with the short-sighted,
selfdefeating, intimidating
military machinery of Israel.
The Palestinians, on whom Israel would like to put
the blame, cannot forget the many untold injustices
inflicted upon their people, property, land and towns
and their sense of belonging. Israel must take the first
steps towards peace. However, the situation before the
Council today is a case of a premeditated
and largescale operation carried out by Israeli planes against
a sovereign Member State, directed entirely against
innocent civilians,
Lebanese and Palestinian
alike.
As such, it cannot but be branded an act of aggression which essentially threatens the Middle Eastern
and international
peace and security and deserves
absolute condemnation.
125. The Security Council, shouldering its responsibilities, has on many occasions condemned specific
acts of aggression perpetrated
by Israel against
Lebanon. Yet it seems that the Israeli military establishment is still clinging to the method of the brutal
use of force and threats against Lebanon,
thus
seriously damaging all chances of peace in the Middle
East.
126. Egypt expects the Security Council, the organ
responsible for international peace and security, to take
effective and strong measures against Israel in order to
stop Israel carrying out its barbaric acts of aggression and raids on Lebanon and the Palestinian camps.
127. In previous similar cases the Council clearly
upheld the sanctity and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
Further, the Council has repeatedly warned Israel
against infringments of Lebanese territory. I need not
recite the long list of resolutions starting with resolution 262 (1968) and resolution 280 (1970), and ending
with resolution 347 (1974).
128. What we witness today in the Israel-Lebanon
sector is but an abhorrent repetition of the shortsighted Israeli practices, in defiance of the authority
of the Security Council. The community
of nations
has not yet forgotten the implications
of previous
Israeli acts of terrorism committed
in violation of
international
law and in a challenge to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
129. In the long history of the customary Israeli
violations
of the principles
and purposes of the
Charter, some recent acts of State terrorism are
still alive in one’s memory. It is pertinent to ask who
really introduced terrorism into the Middle East and
who is practising terrorism as a governmental
policy.

130. Egypt has time and again publicly
warned
Israel a&St
attempting or committing
aggression in
any way against Lebanon and the Palestinians. That
is because Egypt considers these acts as a direct
aggression against it-I
repeat: as a direct aggression
against it-and
against the entire Arab world.
In fulfilment of that policy Egypt issued on 1 December
yet another strong warning to Israel against any
foreign interference or aggression against Lebanon.

sibility for escalating military operations remains with
Israel, with all that entails for the prospects for a
peaceful settlement of the Middle East problem.
136. Let me clearly repeat the following to the
Government of Israel. The persistence of Israeli aggressions against Lebanon and the Palestinian
people
will have direct adverse consequences on the chances
of achieving peace in the Middle East.

131. As far back as April 1974 Egypt warned Israel
against its blind policy of self-deception
and selfdelusion. On 15 April 1974 the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt, Ismaii Fahmy, stated at this very
table that

137. I should like to add, before the Council,
that this escalation will, regrettably, have far-reaching
consequences on the chances of peace in the. area
and on the prospects of a peaceful settlement. Israel,
before anyone else, must choose between war an
peace. If Israel chooses the latter, then it must stop
forthwith all irresponsible
actions, which, I repeat,
will no doubt stifle all efforts to achieve a durable
and just peace in the area.

“It would amount to naivete if one should
anticipate
the ushering of peace into the area
while.. . annexationist designs are not abandoned.

138. I should like to end with a timely reminder
and an urgent appeal. It is up to the Security Council to reverse the slide towards chaos and conflagration by living up to its responsibilities
under the
Charter. The Council, faced with Israel’s official policy
of State terrorism, wantonness and defiance, should
call Israel to order and make sure that Israel desists
forthwith from this policy of madness, a policy which
can only lead to more violence and to the evaporation
of all chances of peace.

“

If Israel has failed... to secure peaceful
conditions around it, it is because Israel insisted
on denying recognition and acknowledgement
of the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinians.‘.’
[!766th
. . .

meeting,

paras.

85 and 86.1

132. It is distressing that what we are witnessing
today is but a reverse situation, contrary to all the
expectations
of every responsible and peace-loving
country in the world. What we are witnessing today
through the repeated aggressions against Lebanon is a
malicious and repugnant policy conducive only to
the negation of all the constructive ‘initiatives carried
out in the area as well as to the impediment
of any
further
envisaged
steps towards
the ultimate
materialization
of peace and justice in the Middle East.

139. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, on whom
I now call.
140. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): I should
like to begin my state,ment by extending a hearty
welcome to the delegation of the PLO, that heroic
organization struggling for the liberation of its usurped
territory. With the participation
of that delegation for
the first time before the Security Council, the Council
has at last followed a path which is in conformity
with the path previously followed by the General
Assembly and by many other international
organizations-the
right path because it gives to the legitimate
representative of a heroic people the chance to participate in a matter of direct concern to that people.
This action, coming after the historic resolution which
was adopted by the Council a few days ago [resolution 381 (1975)] and which also recognized the right
of the PLO to participate
in the debate beginning
on 12 January 1976 on the Middle East and the
Palestine question, only confirms the decision and the
understanding
reflected in the statement
by the
President of the Security Council [1856th meeting,
para. 231 concerning the participation
of this directly
concerned party.

133. At the same time when Egypt puts these facts
before the Council and the entire world community,
it states that it now holds Israel completely responsible
for any deterioration
in the situation in the Middle
East. Egypt considers that this aggression is in flagrant
contradiction
with the spirit on which the disengagement agreements on the Syrian and Egyptian fronts
were concluded.
134. It is obvious that Israel, in this latest act of
aggression; showed its hypocrisy and deceit by waiting
until Syria had agreed to the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF),
‘and then committed
its aggression
immediately
after the renewal. In view of that hypocritical policy, I repeat here that Egypt, holds the
Israeli Government
fully responsible for the consequences of this aggression.
135. It is for Israel to decide-wisely,
I hope-its
future course. One thing, however, is certain. Should
Israel persist in applying its self-defeating and womout policies of the days before 6 October 1973, then
that will. surely have adverse consequences on the
chances ,of peace in the Middle East. The respon-

141. Less than 48 hours after the Security Council
has adopted the above-mentioned
resolution extending
the mandate of UNDOF,
Israel once again sent its
war planes in succesive waves to bombard Palestinian
14

refugee camps in southern and northern Lebanon-to
emphasize, as was reported by the Associated Press,
quoting the declaration of an Israeli military source in
Tel Aviv, that “Israel would meet the Palestinian
guerrillas only on the battlefield”.

expansionist dream of greater Israel as long as the
Palestinian people exist. Their design, therefore, is
simply to exterminate as many of those people as possible and to disperse those who remain all around
the world.

142. First reports indicate that more than 100 refugees, mostly children, women and elderly people, were
killed and nearly 200 wounded as a result of that
Israeli murderous act of aggression against the civilian
population. Later reports unfortunately point to a much
greater loss of human lives as well as to very extensive
material damage, as was reported to the Security
Council a moment ago by the representative
of
Lebanon.

146. The terrorist air attacks committed
bv Isra21
against Lebanon and the Palestinian people constitute
a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international
law. As a
matter of fact, after the end of the American aggression in South East Asia, with the victory of the
Viet-Namese and the Cambodian peoples, Israel is now
the only regime which practises,systematicaliy
and as
a declared policy, &rninal
and ba&nous
air, sea
and land raids against other countries and territories.
Furthermore,
as is evident from the work and the
discussions of the thirtieth session of the General
Assembly, Israel by far holds the record as the most
condemned Member of the United Nations. Looking at
its size, that may appear to be a very astonishing
record. Nevertheless, the crimes and aggressions continuously committed by Israel are far out of proportion
to its size and importance.

143. This is not, of course, the first crime committed
by Israel against the Palestinian refugees in Lebanon
or other Arab countries.
Israel has continuously
followed a poliey of terror and aggression right from
the beginning of its tragic implantation
in the region.
But what is significant and rather horrifying is that
the barbarous Israeli raids were committed this time not
under the false pretext of retaliation
or even the
mask of preventive action against liberation fighters,
but rather, according to the Israeli military source
quoted above, as an answer to the unanimously
adopted Security Council resolution 381 (1975), which
invited the PLO to participate in the general debate
on the Middle
East and the Palestinian
question
beginning on 12 January 1976.

147. Israel is blocking the way towards a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East, refusing to obey any
resolution of the United Nations and persisting in its
policy of expansion and settlement of the occupied
Arab territories. It not only refuses to withdraw from
those territories
which it usurped by force and
aggression, but it refuses as well to recognize the
very existence of the Palestinian people. The Palestinian people is not only a reality, but, what is more,
it is a reality recognized by everyone, it seems, except
Israel. As a matter. of faet, the existence of the
Palestinian
people and its right to have its own
State was recognized in the very United Nations
document which established the Israeli entity. For
Israel to ignore that document would only mean that
it rejects the United Nations document on which
its own existence is based.

144. Thus, in answer to the mere call for a debate
on the problem and to the obvious necessity that all
parties concerned should participate in that debate,
Israel carried out a large-scale aerial bombardment
against Lebanon and against the Palestinian people in
their camps, in those camps where the victims of
previous Israeli aggressions are gathered, awaiting
the restoration of their rights as human beings. Israel
was not able to prevent the Council from inviting
the Palestinians
to .come to the debate concerning
their own fate, so it has decided to wipe them out, to
continue the -policy of systematic genocide against
them. Unfortunately-for
Israel, that is-the people
of Palestine cannot be wiped out that easily, no matter
how intensive the Zionist attacks against them may be.
The people of Palestine is a fact and is a reality
which goes back much further than the date of the
conspiracy to establish a Zionist State in the region.

148. Israel has blocked all efforts for neace. claiming
that it does not recognize the PLO as the represen:
tative of the Palestinians.
What right has Israel to
decide who represents the other parties? It is only the
people of Palestine which is entitled to decide who is its
representative.
And here I can only comment on the
words of a member of the Security Council who, in
explaining
his negative vote against the invitation
of the PLO, said that this was because there had
been no referendum as a result of which ,the PLO was
chosen as the representative
of the Palestinian people. I do not know whether that member of the
Council is well acquainted with the fact that the PLO
is the chosen representative of the Palestinian people
outside and inside the occupied territories.
It is
by decision of all Arab countries, by all the countries of the Organization
of African Unity and by a
resolution of ‘the General Assembly adopted by an

145. The crimes repeatedly
committed
by Israel
against Lebanon under the false pretext of preventing
future acts of resistance by the Palestinians
are
increasingly condemned by the majority of nations and
by world public opinion. Everybody now realizes the
true nature of Israel as an expansionist,
aggressive
entity, which is trying to conquer and dominate the
region. Everybody is now convinced that the Zionists
do not really want peace. What they want in reality
is pure and simple annexation of the occupied Arab
territories. They know that they cannot achieve the
15

!%

overwhelming
majority.
So let us leave it to the
Palestinians to decide who represents them.

not, however, in any way diminish the sense of urgency
concerning the necessity of establishing that just and
lasting peace so long dreamed of, on the basis of
the implementation
of United Nations resoluticms,
including,
of course, those relating to recognition
of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinian
people and those relating to total withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories.

149. By evoking the issue of who represents the
Palestinian people, Israel is hoping the postpone the
moment of truth, the moment when its claim that it
wants peace is to be put to the test. For it is the
first to know that no real peace can be established
in the Middle East without the participation
of the
Palestinian
people, without recognition
and attainment of its national rights and without total Israeli
withdrawal from all the occupied Arab territories.

154. Condemnation
of this latest Israeli
crime
against Lebanon and the Palestinian
people and a
serious warning addressed to Israel to cease such acts
of aggression are duties of the Council. The Israeli
aggressors have committed their barbarous air attacks
against the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples as a sign
of their rejection of resolution 381 (1975), and in order
to block the debate decided upon in that resolution
for 12 January with the participation of the PLO. Their
cowardly crime only makes that debate more urgent,
and the participation
of the Palestinian people more
essential.

150. Israel began its long record of defiance of
‘United Nations resolutions and decisions by refusing
to implement them. With time, the Zionist representatives began to take the floor as soon as such resolutions were adopted in order formally to declare their
intention of not obeying them. Later on, that defiance
took the form of coupling
such declarations
of
non-obedience
with the solemn tearing-up of the
unwanted document on the rostrum.

155. The PRESIDENT:
I now call upon the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization.

151. Israel’s response today is even more tragic.
Israel’s response to the resolution
has been the
bombardment’and
killing of those people the resolution
sought to aid. We feel that at this rate of escalation
the next response to any resolution criticizing or condemning Israel will be to bombard the Headquarters
of the United Nations. There is a limit beyond which
no Member
of the Organization,
whether great
or small, can go without censure or punishment.
Israel has long gone far beyond that limit.

156. Mr. AQL (Palestine Liberation
Organization):
At the outset I should like, on behalf of the cPL0,
to express our deep appreciation to those members of
the Security Council who have welcomed the participation of my delegation in the Council’s debate. This
is an historic moment in the struggle of the people
of Palestine, since this is the first time their official
voice has been heard by this august body. In point of
fact, had it not been for the sad and tragic circumstances under which we are meeting, my delegation
would have further
elaborated
on the
significance of this step taken by the Council.

152. The Security Council, as the main organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and
security, cannot let the Israeli war criminals persist
in their policy of terror and aggression without punishment. Not only must the Council condemn the Israeli
murderous and cowardly raids against innocent civilian
men, women and children in Lebanon in the most
severe terms; it should also issue a very serious and
last-1 repeat last-warning,
making it plainly clear
to this professional aggressor that, unless it puts an
end to its criminal acts, the Council will impose on
Israel the most severe sanctions, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. If it is to deserve
its namei the Council must take the necessary measures in order to stop Israeli aggression and to ensure
the safety and security of the Lebanese and Palestinian
._ ~~pewles.
1

157. After the General Assembly had at its current
session in resolution 3376 (XXX) reaffirmed res6lution
3236 (XXIX) and even devised the means to implement that resolution, which has recognized the right
of the people of Palestine to self-determination
and
national independence
in its homeland;
while the
General Assembly
was still debating the Middle
East problem, which is the result of the Israeli occupation in 1967 of the remaining parts of Palestine, in
addition to territories belonging to Egypt and Syria;
while the deliberations
of the Special Political Committee were still proceeding
on Israel’s practices
in the occupied territories,
already exposed and
condemned by the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Population
of the Occupied Territories;
when the
Security Council has just resolved to debate the Middle
East problem
and the problem
of Palestine
on
12 January and the President of the Council had
issued a statement to the effect that a delegation from
the PLO would participate in the debate; while the
people of Palestine had been making these political
strides in its struggle and achieving political victories with increasing support from the international

153:’ -The Council
has already set the date of
12 January 1976 for the holding of a full debate on the
problem of the Middle
East and the Palestinian
question. The PLO will participate in that debate, the
aim of which is to ensure the establishment
of a just
and lasting peace on the basis of the implementation
of all ielevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. Israel has announced that it will boycott
that debate because it is afraid of a real and just
peace. The deliberate absence of the aggressor should
16

community, to the isolation and frustration of Israel,
a fact which was clearly pointed out as a headline
in yesterday’s edition of The New York Times-while
ail these major developments on the Palestine question
were taking place within the United Nations in an
effort to re-establish peace and security in the region.
Israel, the war maniac of the Middle East, arrogantly
refusing to understand the language of re-establishing
the peace and order which it had so long disrupted in
the Middle East, perpetrated in a typical racist Zionist

The Palestinian and Lebanese peoples, which for
years have been subjected to savage Israeli attacks,
will not bow and will not be shaken by Israel’s
policy of subjugation, even when a whole Lebanese
village like Kharbat Toul is completely demolished and
razed to the ground during the Israeli attack. The
unity of the Palestinian and Lebanese peoples is strong
and becomes even stronger in the face of Israeli
attacks.
165. For 28 years the people of Palestine have been

manner a massacre of unprecedented
magnitude
against innocent Palestinians, made refugees twice in
a lifetime, and against peaceful Lebanese villages.

living either in exile or under Israeli

and

Zionist enemy. Their Palestinian
homeland is now
totally under Israeli occupation. From Herzl to Weiz-

158. According to Israeli officials, this cruel and
ruthless massacre was neither an act of retaliation nor
a punitive action. It was simply premeditated
and
preventive.

mann and from Ben Gut-ion to Rabin, including of
course Dayan and Menahim

Begin,

we have had a

bitter experience with that racist Zionist movement.
166. Racist Zionism began the implementation of its
programme in Palestine by causing a demographic
upheaval whereby the major part of Palestine was

159. Let me briefly outline the details of this
barbarous attack according to the report that my delegation has received.

occupied by force of arms, while the majority of the
indigenous population was dispossessed and uprooted
at the point of the Zionist bayonet. Having achieved
that stage, Zionism turned to the next, which aimed at
the extinction of the people of Palestine as a political

160. The Israeli air force launched barbaric raids
against Nahr Al-Bared and Al-Badawi
Palestinian

camps, north of Tripoli. The air raids, which lasted

for 45 minutes,

occupation,

their very existence is still being denied by the

were carried out by three groups of

Phantoms and Skyhawks, each group consisting of

community. The name Palestine had to be obliterated.
The existence of the people of Palestine had to be

eight planes. The rockets used in the attack weighed

500, 2,000 and 3,650 pounds, and their length was
2.15 metres. They also employed round anti-personnel bombs of the type used in Viet-Nam, each of
which contains 3,000 pellets. The enemy also used

denied. The Arab character of occupied Palestinian
territory had to be systematically
destroyed. Further
Israeli settlements
had to be established.
Arab
Palestinians
under Israeli occupation
had to be
demoralized
by land and property
confiscation,
mass arrests, eviction of the local inhabitants and

timed explosive bombs, intended to explode one
hour after the attack. These bombs were, however,
all dismantled by our forces. They also fired their
machine-guns
at civilians who tried to escape the
bombs.

obstruction of the intellectual development of the
youth. United
Nations resolutions
acknowledging
our inalienable right to self-determination
had to be
flouted and trespassed, while the repeated condemnation of Israel by the United Nations had to be
neglected and decried.

161. The enemy also launched another attack against
the Nabatiyeh area, in the south of Lebanon, aiming
at the Nabatiyeh camp primary school, Kharbat Toul,
Duwair, Zo’Tar and Khar Tibnit. Other than the camp,
there is no Palestinian presence in those Lebanese
villages.

167. Having failed to achieve the political extinction
of the people of Palestine, Zionism has embarked upon
our physical destruction
and elimination.
We will
not succumb to Israeli Zionist policies and designs,
brutal and ruthless as they are. Zionism,
recently
condemned by the General Assembly as a form of
racism and racial discrimination,
is an ideology which
is at best mediaeval and at worst primitive.
It is
regressive and anti-historical,
and the proof is no
further than the Arab Palestinian response to Zi$st
challenges.

162. The air raid was carried out by three groups
of planes, each group consisting of four planes.
Casualties were as follows: in Nahr Al-Bared and
Al-Badawi-57
dead, 42 of them women and children;
147 injured, 92 of whom were women and children.
In Nabatiyeh,
casualties were as follows: 17 dead,
11 of whom were women and children; 23 injured,
15 of whom were women and children. Most of the
casualties in the Nabatiyeh area are Lebanese civilians.

168. In our exile and dispersion, we have created
the PLO, which is now hailed and recognized by the
international
community
as the sole legitimate
representative
of the people of Palestine.
In our
despair and destitution,
we have asserted a fighting
will which will relentlessly confront the enemy until
our inalienable rights are recognized and implemented.
From our grievances and the injusti.ces inflicted upon’

163. Those barbaric attacks were executed by
United States planes, rockets and bombs, and by
pilots trained on United States military bases.
164. Those facts and figures speak for themselves.
They need no further explanation
or elaboration.
17

,

.T;
”

\

us, we have.developed a just cause which advocates
as an ultimate goal a solution based on inclusion
rather than exclusion, on integration rather than racial
purity, and tolerance rather than a religious ghetto.
For the liberation of our people under Israeli occupation, our National Palestine Council has endorsed
a national liberation programme which aims, among
other things, at the establishment of a national ,and
sovereign Palestinian authority on any liberated part
oxfPalestine.

surprised by his vehement and rather vociferous
attack on the people of Palestine. The antagonistic
attitude of the Government of the United States
towards the Palestinians and their national aspirations
is chronic and almost incurable. We have become used
to this antagonistic American attitude and we can live
with it. What he said is reminiscent of the cold-war
language, and he must be an old cold-war warrior.
May I remind him that he is fighting the wrong
war, behind the wrong lines. He is fighting the homeless Palestinian victims of his Israeli allies who are
fighting us with his Government’s sophisticated
planes, missiles and rockets. Nevertheless, I would
like to assure thim that the so-called terrorists of
today will be tomorrow the rulers, with their Jewish
brothers, of liberated Palestine-a Palestine for
both Arabs and Jews, free of ethnic or religious
discrimination, a Palestine free of racist Zionism.

169. That is the answer of the people of Palestine
to Zionist challenges confronting it. The PLO, under
the leadership of Chairman Yasser A&at, will continue to intensify its armed struggle with the support
of all freedom-loving, anti-apartheid, anti-Zionist
peoples until we exercise our right to self-determination and national independence in our Palestinian
homeland.

The meeting

170. However, as I come to end of my statement,
I should not neglect to address my concluding words
to the representative of the United States-although
he chose not to listen to the Palestinian answer to
his vituperations. We were neither saddened nor

rose at 7.20 p.m.
Notes

’ See Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 2423rd meeting.

I ..

,

18

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

-

'

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
