United Nations

S/PV.6230

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6230th meeting
Friday, 4 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando/Mr. Tiendrébéogo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-63331 (E)

*0963331*

S/PV.6230

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Luis MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Moreno-Ocampo to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo: Mr. President, I thank you
for this opportunity to brief the Council on the judicial
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) on Darfur.
Since my last briefing in June 2009 (see
S/PV.6135), there have been positive developments.
First, judicial proceedings in relation to the Darfur
situation are progressing; secondly, cooperation with
the African Union, the League of Arab States and other
international bodies has been fruitful; and, thirdly,
States and international organizations have maintained
consistent support for the execution of the Court’s
arrests warrants. I shall begin by referring to these
three aspects.
First, I shall address the International Criminal
Court’s judicial proceedings. On 19 November, rebel
leader Bahr Abu Garda, President of the United
Resistance Front, was the first person to appear in
Court in relation to Darfur crimes. My Office alleges
that he is responsible for killing and injuring
peacekeepers from Botswana, Senegal, Mali, Nigeria
and the Gambia during the attack against the Haskanita
bases. Abu Garda appeared voluntarily before the

2

Court and presented his defence, arguing that he was
not part of the attack. However, we presented 552
incriminatory items of evidence and called three
witnesses to testify during the confirmation of charges.
Two of them were peacekeepers from Nigeria and the
Gambia who survived the attacks, and the other was a
senior Kenyan military expert.
For my Office, attacking peacekeepers is a
serious crime. It affects millions of civilians in need of
aid and security. Both this Council and the African
Union have emphasized the seriousness of the
Haskanita attack and the need to bring the perpetrators
to justice. We are grateful to a number of States —
including Senegal, Mali, Botswana, Nigeria, the
Gambia, Chad and the Netherlands — that contributed
to the investigation and surrender of the rebel leader.
On 20 November in The Hague, the
representative of Nigeria, which is an incoming
member of this Council, stated:
“The Court’s function of ensuring accountability
for grave crimes is vital for the maintenance of
lasting international peace … Cooperation is
critical in enhancing the effectiveness of the
ICC … Nigeria is presently assisting the Court in
the prosecution of those involved in […] the
Haskanita killings of peacekeepers in Darfur.”
We are grateful for that support.
The decision of the judges on the confirmation of
charges is expected within two months. In this and the
other cases, my Office is continuously taking measures
to protect our witnesses. As the Council is aware,
individuals falsely suspected of providing evidence to
the International Criminal Court have been arrested
and tortured in Khartoum. There have been public
threats from the Sudanese authorities against anybody
who cooperates with the Court’s investigation of the
crimes in Darfur. We are pleased, however, that no
witness has been harmed.
There have also been positive developments in
our cooperation with institutions that can complement
the intervention of the International Criminal Court and
promote additional proceedings for other perpetrators
as well as truth and reconciliation mechanisms. This is
the comprehensive approach defined by the Council in
resolution 1593 (2005), which encourages the Court to
support international cooperation with domestic efforts
to promote the rule of law, protect human rights and

09-63331

S/PV.6230

combat impunity in Darfur, and which emphasizes the
need to promote healing and reconciliation in order to
complement judicial processes. This is the approach
adopted by the Security Council and which the
prosecution is following.
The League of Arab States, which reported on the
commission of massive crimes in Darfur as early as
2004, is active in efforts to promote justice in Darfur.
At the initiative of Secretary-General Amr Moussa,
international crimes have been included in the
Sudanese penal code.
President Mbeki, as head of the African Union
High-level Panel, contacted me upon taking office and
requested information on our activities and on crimes
committed in Darfur. My Office submitted written
observations to the Mbeki panel. We noted that the
Government of the Sudan had created multiple judicial
instruments and courts, but never allowed these courts
to fulfil their mandates. The Mbeki panel shared this
analysis in its own report (S/2009/599, annex I), stating
that:
“As a result of the failings of the State in dealing
with the grave situation in Darfur, faith in the
criminal justice system has been severely eroded.
To restore confidence and prevent impunity, a
root and branch change will be required.”
On 7 July, I was received by the full panel at
African Union headquarters in Addis Ababa. We held a
half-day dialogue. It was then clarified that the cases
against President Al-Bashir, Ahmed Haroun and Ali
Kushayb, as well as Abu Garda and two other rebel
commanders, will be decided by the judges of the
International Criminal Court. Additionally, we had
exchanges on the complementary role that other courts
can play to investigate other perpetrators.
The Panel’s report respects the independent
judicial work of the International Criminal Court and
recognizes the need to do more, not less, justice efforts
for Darfur and to try more, not less, cases. As the Panel
rightly notes:
“The emphasis on the International Criminal
Court should not distract from the reality that,
even at full capacity, the Court can only deal with
a handful of individuals, thus leaving the burden
of justice to the national system.”
The Panel thus adopted a comprehensive solution,
combining the current International Criminal Court

09-63331

cases with the possibility of having other courts try
other perpetrators, if and when the conditions for such
courts to operate effectively are created.
This last point is key and I wish to highlight it.
As the Panel notes:
“To date … the perpetrators of the serious crimes
in Darfur have overwhelmingly remained
unpunished and the need for healing and
reconciliation has remained largely unmet. This
situation must be rectified urgently.”
The Panel proceeds to list a series of prerequisites
to be met before this situation can be rectified,
stressing that no genuine proceedings can take place
before the Sudan, first, removes official immunities;
secondly, adopts special measures for dealing with rape
and sexual crimes; and thirdly, ensures the protection of
witnesses. Thus, it is not just a matter of setting up new
courts. It is a matter of creating a framework allowing
these courts to operate effectively and independently.
As Council members know, on 29 October a
high-level meeting in Abuja of the African Union
Peace and Security Council endorsed the report and
recommendations. It established an implementation
panel comprising former Presidents Thabo Mbeki,
Pierre Buyoya and Abdulsalami Abubakar. The Office
of the Prosecutor is ready to assist the new panel in its
endeavours.
In past meetings, Council members have also
stressed the need to pursue an integrated approach in
Darfur integrating justice, security, political negotiations
and humanitarian aid. I am glad to report to this Council
that all the actors working on those different aspects are
respecting the judicial independence of the Court — in
particular, as I mentioned, the Mbeki panel but also the
Prime Minister of Qatar as chair of the Arab-African
ministerial committee, Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur Djibrill Bassolé,
and the Arab League Secretary-General. It is
remarkable, because they demonstrate that engagement
with the Government of the Sudan in political
negotiations is possible while recognizing President
Al-Bashir’s individual criminal responsibility for the
crimes committed and respecting the Court’s decisions.
Engagement while respecting legal limits is the
solution that they are pushing.
There are also positive developments to report
regarding the cooperation of States, including in the

3

S/PV.6230

execution of arrest warrants. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) is receiving decisive public
support. Efforts to get the arrests executed are going
forward. The warrants for arrest have been transmitted
to Sudan. In its resolution 1593 (2005) and its
presidential
statement
of
16
June
2008
(S/PRST/2008/21), the Security Council insisted on the
duty of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the Court.
Ending crimes and arresting individuals on Sudanese
territory is a primary responsibility of the Sudanese
Government. It has both the legal duty and the ability
to do so. All efforts during this month have converged
to encourage the Sudan to respect its responsibilities as
a United Nations Member State, to put an end to crimes
and to arrest the persons sought by the Court.
During the General Assembly debate in October,
56 States emphasized the importance of cooperation
with the Court, including in relation to the arrests. On
29 October, Kenya, on behalf of the African States
parties, reaffirmed their commitment to their legal
obligations with no reservations. African States parties
to the Rome Statute have affirmed both their position
as African Union members that the Security Council
should consider deferring the Darfur investigation and,
at the same time, their legal duty under the Statute to
execute arrest warrants should indictees be present on
their territory.
Over the past six months, Deputy Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda and I met with many African
Presidents, including President Zuma of South Africa,
President Museveni of Uganda, President Jammeh of
the Gambia, President Kibaki of Kenya and President
Deby Itno of Chad. All of them expressed their
commitment to justice and to ending impunity. I would
also like to note that, during the General Assembly
debate in October, Mexico referred to the refusal of the
Sudan to cooperate with the Court as “clear
non-compliance with a legally binding obligation”;
Peru and Bolivia indicated that, upon receipt of the
warrant, they had activated national procedures to
ensure the arrest of President Al-Bashir, should he set
foot in their countries. On 15 September, the European
Union’s
External
Relations
Council
adopted
conclusions calling upon the Sudan to cooperate fully
with the Court in accordance with its obligations under
international law.
As a consequence, President Al-Bashir, at risk of
being arrested, has not travelled to the territory of
States parties for high-level events that he had planned

4

to attend in South Africa, Uganda, Nigeria and
Venezuela. He cannot attend the Climate Conference in
Copenhagen. He has not attended the United Nations
General Assembly, nor a recent meeting of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference’s Committee
for Economic and Commercial Cooperation. This is the
way to ensure the arrest of President Al-Bashir. This
process of marginalization of indicted criminals, if
maintained steadfastly, is a way to ensure the ultimate
implementation of the arrest warrants issued by the
Court. Respect for the Court’s decision to issue a
warrant for President Al-Bashir’s arrest sends a clear
message: President Al-Bashir will face justice. Any
leader committing this type of crime will face justice.
Power does not provide immunity. There was no
immunity for President Milošević; there was no
immunity for Prime Minister Kambanda; there was no
immunity for President Taylor. There will be no
immunity for President Al-Bashir.
There are also negative developments in two
areas: the lack of cooperation of the Sudan, and the
continuation of crimes. Sudan has refused to cooperate
with the Court. In resolution 1593 (2005), the Council
decided that the “Government of Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully
with and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor” (para. 2).
As I said, the warrants were transmitted to the
Sudanese Government. However, President Al-Bashir
has refused to appear in court. He has refused to
appoint a lawyer to represent his position. He has
refused to arrest Ali Kushayb and Ahmad Harun.
Ahmad Harun is now the Governor of South Kordofan.
This all represents non-compliance with the Security
Council’s decisions. Instead, over the past six months,
President Al-Bashir has continued to use the Sudanese
State apparatus to conduct a diplomatic, political and
communications campaign against the Court; he has
endeavoured to shift the attention of the international
community to other pressing issues, such as the
conflict with the South. President Al-Bashir is willing
to exacerbate such conflict, if it can divert your
attention from the crimes committed in Darfur and his
responsibility for them.
As the Prosecutor, I will deal with any judicial
challenge brought by President Al-Bashir and other
suspects in court. But I will need the full support of the
Council to ensure that the focus remains on the need to
arrest President Al-Bashir and the other individuals

09-63331

S/PV.6230

sought by the Court, and on the need to end the crimes
in Darfur. The crimes are continuing. During the past
six months there have been indiscriminate bombings of
civilians resulting in casualties and forced
displacement; ongoing tactics aimed at exterminating
displaced persons in the camps, including hindering
humanitarian aid and expelling assistance providers
with the obvious consequence of reducing access in
camps to food, water and other services; ongoing rapes
and sexual violence resulting in mental and bodily
harm; and continuing use of child soldiers, though by
various parties. As recently as last week, on
25 November, there were reports of Janjaweed militia
attacks against Al-Harra and Jabel Issa, two villages in
North Darfur, in which civilians were captured,
villagers beaten and property looted.
I would like to inform the Council that, with a
view to increasing predictability, my Office is
reviewing information in four main areas. The first is
acts affecting displaced persons, committed in
particular by the Humanitarian Aid Commission
(HAC). On 10 November 2009, HAC Commissioner
Hassabo announced that the Sudanese Government
would close the camps for displaced persons by early
next year, without guarantees of access to food and water,
and without guarantees of security. Sheikhs in camps who
oppose returns to unsafe areas are targeted. They are
imprisoned and tortured. Let me clarify that any forced
return of displaced persons in these conditions can
constitute a new crime within our jurisdiction.
The second area is acts against civilians in the
camps, including rape, by the forces of President
Al-Bashir.
Thirdly, we are monitoring the use of child
soldiers. The recent report by Ms. Coomaraswamy
indicates that both the Sudanese Armed Forces and the
rebel groups recruit children. That is a crime under our
jurisdiction.
Fourthly, as our investigation into the case of
President Al-Bashir demonstrated that he used the State
apparatus not only to commit massive crimes but also
to conceal them, and thus to facilitate their
continuation, my Office is considering the criminal
responsibility of Sudanese officials who actively deny
and conceal crimes. They do not benefit from any
immunity under the Rome Statute. Since Nuremberg,
due obedience is no longer a legal excuse for the
commission of crimes.

09-63331

A few months ago, on 4 March 2009, the judges
of the International Criminal Court ruled that the
policy adopted by President Al-Bashir against
2.5 million Sudanese citizens in the camps constituted
extermination, as a crime against humanity. The
Appeals Chamber is considering whether the charge of
genocide should be added.
President Al-Bashir, instead of stopping the
crimes, is stopping information about the crimes. The
decision to expel humanitarian workers and silence
others by threats of expulsion, or the attempts at
restricting the freedom of movement of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) are part of this policy to reduce the
monitoring capacity of the international community.
In his 16 November report (S/2009/592), the
Secretary-General accused the Government of the
Sudan of breaching UNAMID’s Status of Forces
Agreement by placing impediments on the movement
of peacekeepers. UNAMID, which is the last
international presence able to keep a protective eye on
camps and rural areas and to report on rapes and sexual
violence, is now blocked.
As I have mentioned, my mandate as Prosecutor
is to investigate and prosecute those responsible for
such crimes, in order to contribute to the prevention of
future crimes. I am ready to answer any challenge —
about the evidence or about legal aspects — in court,
but I will need the full support of the Council to
contribute to ending the current crimes against victims
in Darfur.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to welcome the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) back to the Security
Council and to thank him for his report and his
comprehensive briefing on his investigation into the
situation in Darfur. I should also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Prosecutor and his team for
their efforts to bring justice to the victims of the
serious crimes that have been committed in Darfur.
My Government is encouraged by progress over
the past six months, which the Prosecutor has reported,
in relation to one of the cases which he has opened in

5

S/PV.6230

respect of Darfur. We welcome the voluntary
appearance at the ICC of Bahr Idriss Abu Garda to
answer charges of war crimes in relation to the June
2008 attack on African Union and United Nations
peacekeepers at Haskanita. It is encouraging that some
parties to the conflict in Darfur are now showing
willingness to cooperate with the ICC, and we call on
all the others to do likewise.
My Government remains deeply concerned,
however, by the continued lack of cooperation with the
ICC by the Government of Sudan. Once again, the
Prosecutor appears before us to report no movement on
this issue, in particular over the outstanding arrest
warrants. There are no relevant proceedings under way
in Sudan in relation to the indictees. Nor has the
Government of Sudan given any indication of an
intention to investigate or prosecute these cases. I
should like to underline that, as the Prosecutor stated,
Sudan is under a legal obligation to cooperate with the
ICC by virtue of resolution 1593 (2005), and we
reiterate once again our call on Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict to provide full cooperation to the
Court.
My Government is also very concerned to hear
the Prosecutor’s analysis that very serious crimes
continue to be committed in Darfur, in particular
attacks on civilians, including humanitarian workers,
sexual violence, forced returns and the use of child
soldiers.
The United Kingdom welcomes the steps the
Prosecutor is taking to monitor these unacceptable
attacks on the civil population of Darfur. We also
welcome the Prosecutor’s continued contacts with
other relevant international and regional actors, in
particular his engagement with the African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur and its preparation and
implementation of the recommendations in the Mbeki
report (S/2009/599, annex I) on combating impunity
and promoting peace and reconciliation in Darfur. We
consider the Mbeki Panel report, which we shall be
discussing later this month, to be thorough, detailed
and balanced, with much that offers scope for progress
on peace, justice and reconciliation.
In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
United Kingdom remains a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court and of its work to combat
impunity in Darfur. We commend Prosecutor MorenoOcampo’s continuing efforts to achieve this.

6

Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): I too
would like to welcome Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
back to the Security Council today and to thank him
for his briefing. We are very pleased to hear about the
progress that is being made — that is, that one case is
proceeding and that some States and organizations are
providing excellent cooperation.
But the Prosecutor’s briefing and report make
clear that the Government of Sudan has not fulfilled its
obligation to cooperate with the International Criminal
Court (ICC) under resolution 1593 (2005), a binding
Chapter VII resolution whose importance was
reiterated by the Council in our 16 June 2008
presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/21).
The United Sates believes that those responsible
for the atrocities in Darfur must be held accountable.
Actions in Darfur affect the stability of Sudan as a
whole. Despite the creation of a special court for
Darfur and numerous committees established in 2005
to pursue justice for Darfuri victims, the ICC arrest
warrants are still outstanding.
We continue to call on the Government of Sudan
to cooperate fully with the ICC, as required by
resolution 1593 (2005). Continued violence in Darfur
is undermining an already fragile humanitarian
situation. During the past six months, the conflict
continued to claim the lives of more civilians. The
United Nations Panel of Experts on the Sudan
confirmed that the Government of Sudan violated the
ban on military flights over Darfur.
Both the Prosecutor’s report and the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2009/592), describe Sudanese
armed forces and militia ground offences supported by
air bombardments in the Jebel Marra region and in
North Darfur. Those reports note that the Government
operations around Korma, Ain Siro and Melitt all
resulted in civilian casualties, the displacement of more
civilians and the destruction of public infrastructure.
The Government’s recent actions are the very type of
actions that led the Council to refer the conflict in
Darfur to the ICC in the first place.
On top of this continuing violence, the
Government of Sudan has contributed to the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Darfur.
We were able to temporarily narrow serious gaps in
life-saving sectors when the Government of Sudan
expelled humanitarian non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) on 5 March.

09-63331

S/PV.6230

But those efforts cannot necessarily be sustained
over the long term. The African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) reports that the
international NGO presence in Darfur has been cut in
half. That has dramatically reduced those groups’
ability to provide assistance to those in need. The
Council must be vigilant in holding the Government of
Sudan responsible for fully meeting the humanitarian
needs of its population.
Those responsible for these atrocities must be
held accountable. We urge all States, including those
not party to the Rome Statute, to refrain from
providing political or financial support to Sudanese
suspects indicted by the ICC.
Although the United States is not party to the
Rome Statute, it was pleased to participate last week
for the first time as an observer in the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute. That decision
reflected the United States commitment to engage with
the international community on issues that affect our
foreign policy interests. Ending impunity for crimes
against humanity, including crimes on the staggering
scale of those committed in Darfur, ranks high among
our commitments. The United States will therefore
continue to be supportive of the ICC’s prosecution of
these cases to the extent consistent with United States
domestic law.
Let me say a word on the African Union Highlevel Panel on Darfur, chaired by former South African
President Thabo Mbeki. On 29 October, the Panel made
several recommendations to combat impunity and
advance the cause of accountability, peace, healing and
reconciliation. We welcome efforts to strengthen
Sudan’s national legal system to let it deal appropriately
with those who committed atrocities in Darfur. But
efforts to strengthen Sudan’s legal system will not
succeed unless they are backed by the political will to
bring perpetuators to justice. The recommendations of
the Mbeki report (S/2009/599, annex I) about a hybrid
tribunal are worth further study, but we believe that the
ICC’s prosecution of the key architects of the conflict in
Darfur remains critical.
In conclusion, let me reiterate my Government’s
unequivocal support for the pursuit of justice and
accountability for those who have committed atrocities
in Darfur. We once again call upon the Government of
Sudan to fully implement resolution 1593 (2005).

09-63331

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico
thanks the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Luis Moreno-Ocampo, for presenting the
tenth report of the ICC to the Security Council on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1593 (2005).
Almost five years have passed since that
resolution was adopted, and the situation in Darfur
continues to be grave, because of the enormous
challenges that continue to be posed by violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law. And,
with every passing day, impunity for those violations
continues to prevail.
The conflict in Darfur constantly reveals murder,
violations, forced displacement and child recruitment
for participation in the hostilities, among other crimes
that result from attacks against civilian populations.
Those populations not only face a climate of violence
but also suffer from restrictions on access to
humanitarian relief and are under constant threat.
Among the three cases that the Prosecutor’s
Office has filed relating to the situation in Darfur, the
only positive element that we can take from the tenth
report is the voluntary appearance before the Court in
May and October 2009 of the rebel leader Bahr Idriss
Abu Garda, suspected of war crimes in the attack
against the African Union base in Haskanita.
As for the other two cases, once again, we see
that cooperation by the Government of the Sudan with
the International Criminal Court is non-existent,
especially on the execution of outstanding arrest
warrants. Nor have national procedures been
established in the Sudan to investigate and try the
perpetrators of crimes documented by the Prosecutor’s
Office.
The Government of the Sudan is obliged to
investigate and prosecute the perpetrators of
international crimes committed within its jurisdiction.
That is a basic principle of international criminal law
and a premise of the system created by the Rome
Statute. Events since the adoption of resolution 1593
(2005) show that, faced with the Government’s
inaction, the International Criminal Court should
exercise its jurisdiction; all the other parties to the
Darfur conflict should cooperate with it. Therefore, we
need to recall that the total lack of cooperation of the
Government of Sudan is a challenge not only to the

7

S/PV.6230

work of the Court, but also to the authority of the
Security Council.

international community and satisfactorily comply with
its international obligations.

The Prosecutor’s report provides us with a wideranging perspective on the nature of the conflict, the
pattern of violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and the role being played by relevant
international actors. Here, we acknowledge that one very
important aspect is the interaction between the
Prosecutor’s Office and the independent African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur. Several times in the Council,
Mexico has stressed the importance of the role of
regional actors in seeking a comprehensive solution to
the situation in Darfur and has pointed out that Africa
should be the main architect of a solution to the crisis.

The international community and the Security
Council cannot remain passive in the face of situations
such as that in Darfur, which to date has led to 300,000
deaths and at least 2.5 million displaced people.
Mexico therefore reiterates its call to the Security
Council to demand that the Government of the Sudan
fully comply with resolution 1593 (2005), that it
cooperate without delay with the International
Criminal Court, that it undertake concrete actions to
put an end to the escalation of violence and impunity in
Darfur, and that it adopt the necessary decisions to
guarantee the full protection of the civilian population.

The African Union Panel has identified deeprooted challenges to justice such as the lack of trust in
local institutions and the impunity that obviously
prevails in this part of the Sudan because of weak
institutional structures incapable of delivering justice,
assigning responsibility or guaranteeing basic rights
and providing redress to victims. We call for the
Panel’s course of action to be pursued and that the aims
of promoting peace and reconciliation and combating
impunity in Sudan be achieved. The Panel’s
recommendations, especially those related to justice
and impunity, have been well received by the
international community, in particular by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union and the ICC
Prosecutor’s Office. We hope for the same when, in a
few days, the Security Council considers the report
(S/2009/599, annex I). Even within the Sudan, they
have been well received by some sectors that see them
as a useful vehicle for combating impunity. We hope
that the Government of the Sudan will use these
reactions to build agreements favourable to achieving
the aforementioned objectives.

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his biannual report in
implementation of resolution 1593 (2005). Like previous
reports, this report confirms the lack of cooperation on the
part of the Government of the Sudan with the
International Criminal Court (ICC): arrest warrants have
not been executed, the Court’s jurisdiction is not
acknowledged, the authority of the Security Council and
its resolution 1593 (2005) are being questioned, and no
national judicial procedure has been undertaken.

In this context full and comprehensive
compliance with the recommendations is critical in the
short and medium term. In such a multifaceted conflict
as that in Darfur, there is a risk that by only
encouraging one of objectives we achieve neither
peace nor justice. For that reason, we would like to
stress the importance of dialogue and cooperation
between the African Union’s Panel of Experts and the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court. We hope that through joint work the
recommendations will be implemented and produce
results very shortly. It is therefore fundamental that the
Government of the Sudan genuinely cooperate with the

8

In 2005, when we adopted resolution 1593
(2005), despite differences among us regarding the
Court, the Council showed its will to not tolerate that
the terrible crimes committed in Darfur go unpunished.
The resolution was triggered by the recommendations
of the Commission of Inquiry, which we had requested
to investigate the situation in Darfur and which had
confirmed the commission of mass violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law and the
existence of crimes against humanity and war crimes.
France supported the adoption of the resolution,
because it considered that transferring the case to the
ICC was the best way to ensure that the perpetrators of
the crimes would be judged impartially and in an
efficient manner, and to send a strong message, beyond
Darfur
even,
about
the
Security
Council’s
determination to combat impunity for the most serious
crimes against the human conscience.
In the days prior to the adoption of resolution
1593 (2005), the Security Council had successively
adopted resolution 1590 (2005) in order to help the
African Union with its surveillance and protection
mechanism and resolution 1591 (2005) in order to
bring the conflict to an end. Resolution 1593 (2005)

09-63331

S/PV.6230

was aimed at ending impunity and was therefore part
of a wider-ranging and coherent policy aimed at
re-establishing peace and security in Darfur. The action
of the Court and the Security Council have been
complementary, therefore, although independent.
France is convinced that there is no contradiction
between justice and peace, and that combating
impunity is one of the conditions of lasting peace.
It is true that political timing and judicial timing
do not always coincide. The needs presented by a
peace process can at times differ from the requirements
of judicial process. That explains the presence in the
Rome Statute of a mechanism that allows the Security
Council to suspend investigations or proceedings
undertaken by the ICC for a year. This mechanism,
whose effects are temporary by definition, can only be
used when the interests of peace and security
absolutely requires such use. Its purpose can never be
to permit impunity for crimes before the Court. It is
clear that requirements for invoking this mechanism
have not been met in the case of Darfur.
Whatever the case, it is not up to the Security
Council to intervene in the independent judicial
decision-making by the ICC and its Prosecutor.
However, it should demand that everyone respect a
resolution adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter
that imposes on the Government of the Sudan and all
other parties to the Darfur conflict full cooperation
with the ICC and its Prosecutor and to provide all
necessary assistance, and which firmly demands that
all States and regional and international organizations
concerned cooperate fully.
I note the positive indications provided by
Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo on cooperation with the
Arab League, the African Union and the Government
of Qatar. I also note the recognition that he has
expressed here for the assistance provided by some
countries in the investigation on the attack against
Haskanita, which led to a first hearing in October.
I would like to reiterate that France believes
firmly both in the authority of the Security Council, as
the main United Nations body for maintaining peace
and security, and in that of the International Criminal
Court, as the judicial body responsible for punishing
the most serious crimes in violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights, to which the
Council has entrusted the mission of prosecuting the
atrocities committed in Darfur.

09-63331

Everything should be done to bring about an
urgent settlement to the conflict in Darfur and facilitate
mediation efforts. Fighting impunity is a prerequisite
that will contribute to restoring lasting peace and
stability in the region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, let me express our appreciation
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, for his tenth report on
measures taken to investigate the situation in Darfur
under Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) and for
today’s briefing. We note that, judging by the report,
the Office of the Prosecutor in its work on Darfur is
paying more and more attention to factors related to
achieving a comprehensive peace in Darfur and in the
Sudan overall, and also to national and regional efforts
to combat impunity. In spite of a few differences in the
assessments in today’s briefing, we believe that this
trend will continue to strengthen.
We welcome the report of the African Union
(AU) High Level Panel on Darfur, chaired by former
South African President Mbeki, containing a number of
interesting ideas on the use of national mechanisms to
bring about accountability. We look forward to a
continuation of contacts between the Prosecutor of the
ICC and the High Level Panel for the purposes of
achieving peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur, as
well as for dealing with the challenges of criminal justice.
We take note of the Prosecutor’s assessment of
the state of cooperation between Khartoum and the
ICC. However, we would call on him to carefully
weigh his steps in his work on Darfur and to calibrate
them with the challenges of achieving peace and
improving the humanitarian situation.
We have noted on a number of previous occasions
the need for an objective assessment of the actions of
all parties to the conflict. We are pleased that a number
of measures are being taken to investigate the attack on
AU peacekeepers in Haskanita in September 2007. An
important event in that area was the voluntary
appearance of the rebel leader, Abu Garda, in The
Hague and the start of the trial of his case. We call on
the Prosecutor not to slacken in his attention to the
work in that regard.
The Russian Federation registers its deep regret
and concern regarding information on the ongoing
violence in Darfur. It is clear that A comprehensive
political settlement, with the active assistance of the

9

S/PV.6230

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, is the only way to end it. We support the efforts of
the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator
on the political process in Darfur, Mr. Bassolé, to bring a
broad spectrum of Darfur rebel groups, as well as civil
society leaders, into the negotiating process.

1593 (2005). Japan believes that the international
community should be united in continuing to resolutely
seek a solution that reconciles peace and justice. In that
regard, we are closely following the development of
the political and humanitarian situation in order to
bring justice and peace to Darfur.

A critical challenge is for the parties to reach
agreement on the cessation of armed hostilities. We are
seriously concerned by the obstinate refusal of the
leaders of such groups as the Justice and Equality
Movement and the Sudan Liberation Movement to
participate in the talks. We consider such conduct on
the part of the rebels to be a major obstacle to a
settlement.

With regard to the three cases at the prosecutorial
stage, the first set of arrest warrants, which were issued
more than two years ago, and the second issue of an
arrest warrant in March are still outstanding. In the
third case, the voluntary appearance of Mr. Abu Garda
for the confirmation of charges hearing in October is
among the notable developments of the past six
months. However, those developments are neither
substantial nor expeditious enough. We urge the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur to take the necessary actions
expeditiously with regard to those cases and to address
the issues of justice and peace in a manner consistent
with resolution 1593 (2005) and the presidential
statement of 16 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21).

We believe that the Darfur problem should be the
subject of constructive dialogue and cooperation
among the United Nations, the African Union and other
mediators, on the one hand, and the Sudanese
Government on the other. Russia has consistently
helped to establish dialogue in such formats. We
believe that progress in all areas of the settlement
process will be made only on the basis of constructive
and equal dialogue between the international
community and the Government of the Sudan, with
respect for the sovereignty of that country.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency for the month of December. We are grateful
to Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his team for their
excellent presidency in November.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for his detailed report on recent activities
and for his good presentation this morning. As an
active member of the Court, Japan highly values the
Prosecutor’s efforts to implement resolution 1593
(2005), which Japan was honoured to vote in favour of
at the time of its adoption.
It is a fundamental principle that impunity must
not be condoned in respect of any crime, and
particularly the most serious crimes of international
concern, such as war crimes and crimes against
humanity. That principle must be applied. The pursuit
of justice is closely interlinked with durable peace, and
both must be pursued in parallel.
Japan respects the independence and decisions of
the ICC on the Darfur cases emanating from resolution

10

Resolution 1593 (2005) emphasizes the
promotion of the rule of law, the protection of human
rights and the fight against impunity, as well as the
need to promote healing and reconciliation. In that
respect, the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur
carried out a comprehensive analysis of the issues of
peace,
justice,
accountability,
impunity
and
reconciliation in Darfur. We acknowledge the
cooperation of the African Union and the tireless
efforts of former President Mbeki as Chairman of the
Panel. We hope that such efforts serve to facilitate the
ongoing peace process in Doha.
With regard to the specific recommendations of
the report, in-depth consideration and review will be
necessary. We look forward to the constructive
discussion of the report with the members of the Panel
later this month. Since the issue of Darfur relates to
complex historical, sociocultural, economic and
political concerns, the international community should
take a comprehensive approach to seeking an inclusive
and multilateral solution.
The Security Council needs to address
comprehensively the issue of impunity and justice, the
humanitarian and security situation, the deployment of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the peace process, including general
elections. At the same time, justice cannot be

09-63331

S/PV.6230

compromised. To promote durable peace, it is essential
to strengthen the justice system in the Sudan. We
would like to encourage the Government of the Sudan
to take steps to that end.
The Rome Statute represents a milestone in the
development of international criminal justice. The ICC
was established based on the strong will and firm belief
of the international community that the most serious
crimes of international concern should not go
unpunished. The ICC functions most effectively when
it is universally respected and when all States extend
their full cooperation to the Court. Japan urges all
States to cooperate with the ICC and to join hands in
the effort to universalize the Rome Statute.
The Security Council has the responsibility to
monitor the situation closely and to continue to make
efforts to ensure that the Government of the Sudan and
all other concerned parties fully cooperate with and
provide assistance to the ICC, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005). Japan is committed to seeking
a way forward in close consultation with the concerned
States and international and regional partners.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
once again welcome Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court, to the Security
Council to brief us on the progress in fighting impunity
in Darfur.
Over the past several years, the Security Council
has considered the question of Darfur in the Sudan
many times. During those considerations, the Chinese
delegation has always emphasized the viewpoint that
the Darfur issue involves a political process,
peacekeeping deployment, economic development,
humanitarian assistance and justice. It is very complex
and requires tremendous political wisdom to find a
comprehensive solution that ensures that peace and
justice are achieved.
Fostering early and substantive progress in the
political process in Darfur is a key precondition of and
important guarantee for progress in all areas. Earlier
this week, the Security Council heard briefings by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Joint
African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator for
Darfur on the latest developments in Darfur (see
S/PV.6227). Judging from their briefings, peacekeeping
deployment continues to progress and the Mission is
75 per cent deployed.

09-63331

A conference to launch the Darfur comprehensive
peace talks was held in Doha, Qatar. Many
representatives from all parties, including many
members of the Security Council, attended the
meeting. There is hope that the negotiations between
the Government and the rebel movements will be
relaunched
within
the
year.
Civil
society
representatives have also been invited to attend the
Doha process, further broadening the social basis for
the political process in Darfur.
Humanitarian work continues to progress steadily
and there has been a marked improvement in the
relations between the Sudan and Chad. Recently, there
has been an active effort by all parties to create
favourable conditions and an environment conducive to
the smooth participation of the people of Darfur in next
year’s January elections.
That represents hard-won progress. One important
reason is the political mutual trust and positive interaction
of all parties. The tripartite mechanism of the United
Nations, the African Union (AU) and the Sudanese
Government is operating smoothly, and that is a key
factor in ensuring progress in deployment.
The concern of the Sudanese Government and
civil society over their national future and destiny is
the inner drive for the political negotiations to forge
momentum. The African countries’ worry over peace
and security in the Sudan and its subregion is the
common impetus for the international community’s
promotion of a genuine solution to the Darfur issue. All
of this points to the fact that trust is the basis for
cooperation, and that cooperation is the important
precondition for resolving all questions and diffusing
all misunderstandings and differences. Similarly,
questions of impunity cannot be addressed without the
trust and cooperation of all parties concerned.
The AU is an important strategic partner for the
United Nations in settling the question of the Sudan.
Not long ago, the African Union high-level panel on
Darfur, led by former President Mbeki, submitted an
important report with recommendations on the format
of cooperation to achieve peace and reconciliation and
to address impunity. We note that the AU Peace and
Security Council has approved the Mbeki report. An
AU high-level delegation will come to New York later
this month to brief the Council on that report. We look
forward to the Security Council’s in-depth exchange of
views with the AU on certain questions. We also hope that

11

S/PV.6230

Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo will continue to follow the
latest developments in all areas connected with Darfur,
maintain close communications with all parties,
objectively review the latest developments and various
challenges on the Darfur question, and contribute to the
comprehensive and proper settlement of the Darfur issue.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by welcoming Prosecutor MorenoOcampo and thanking him for his work, for which
Costa Rica is always grateful.
The Prosecutor’s presentation of the tenth report
of the International Criminal Court to the Security
Council is an opportunity to advocate respect for the
United Nations Charter. This basic obligation cannot be
flouted by States without their suffering the
consequences of their anti-juridical conduct. It is well
known that any State that has joined this Organization
is committed to accepting its obligations under the
Charter. Therefore, when, on 12 November 1956, the
Republic of the Sudan became a Member of the United
Nations, it solemnly committed to respect the
obligations imposed by the Charter, including its
obligation under Article 25 to accept and comply with
Security Council decisions.
Five years ago, this Council decided that the
Government of the Sudan should cooperate fully with
the International Criminal Court regarding crimes
committed in Darfur. To date, the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan has been non-existent. In
June 2008, in a presidential statement initiated by
Costa Rica(S/PRST/2008/21), the Council once again
reiterated its demand for cooperation. That has been
the only action taken by the Council in this matter
since the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). However,
the Government of Sudan has ignored the decisions of
this Council and fails to honour its obligations under
the Charter, without any consequence whatever.
It is not true that the Government of the Sudan is
not required to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court because it is not party to the Rome
Statute. What obliges the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court is not
the Statute of Rome but its membership in the United
Nations and its obligation to comply with the decisions
of this Council, including resolution 1593 (2005).
Non-compliance with obligations under the Charter
should have consequences for any Member State, and
the Sudan should be no exception.

12

This Council should not fool itself. The damage
caused by the anti-juridical conduct of the Government
of the Sudan is neither negligible nor limited to merely
legal technicalities. This Council, by its tolerant
attitude towards that Government, has contributed to
eroding trust in international justice and has defended
impunity. Meanwhile in Darfur, indiscriminate attacks
against the civilian population continue, sexual
violence continues to be used as a weapon of war and a
means of intimidation, and the recruitment and
non-demobilization of child soldiers persist. All of
those crimes have their roots in impunity.
Referring the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court does not in itself
exonerate the international community from its
obligation to demand accountability for the genocide in
Darfur, nor has it been an effective instrument in
countering impunity for the crimes that have been and
continue to be committed in that region of the Sudan.
The intervention of the International Criminal Court is
only a sign of the need for greater commitment, as the
Prosecutor pointed out. The intervention of the Court is
must be a catalyst for decisive national and
international action in response to challenges to justice
in situations of conflict.
Instead of taking such decisive action, some time
ago the Government of the Sudan set up tribunals,
prosecutors, committees and administrative units in an
effort to show some will to carry out justice and
combat impunity. To date, the result is that the
Sudanese indicted by the Court have not been brought
to justice and continue to occupy important positions in
the apparatus of the Sudanese State. The exception is a
Sudanese opponent to the Government who has
appeared voluntarily before the Court.
The international community has been much
more consistent in promoting justice, combating
impunity and working towards sustainable peace. The
League of Arab States has made steps towards
accountability, and in mid-2008 the African Union set
up a high-level panel on Darfur, presided over by
former President Thabo Mbeki, to consider the
interlinked matters of combating impunity and
promoting peace and reconciliation. The panel’s report,
which will be discussed by this Council in the near
future, was unanimously adopted in October. Its
recommendations mark the way forward.

09-63331

S/PV.6230

Costa Rica welcomes the decisive stance of the
African States that have implemented the commitment
to comply with their obligations under the Rome Statute,
and regrets the inaction of this Council, which for
18 months has failed to achieve the necessary consensus
to secure the implementation of its own decisions.

situation. In a positive development, to which other
delegations have already referred, rebel leader Abu
Garda, who is suspected of responsibility for the
Haskanita attacks against African Union forces, once
again voluntarily appeared before the Court for a
confirmation-of-charges hearing, in October.

An analysis of the information provided by the
Prosecutor raises other concerns that should not be
ignored. The international community should take an
interest in the protection of witnesses. It should also
carefully consider the repercussions of the expulsion of
the humanitarian organizations that worked in Darfur
and the so-called Sudanization of assistance. Taken
together, those situations have had an enormous impact
on the lives of displaced persons living in camps,
including on their most basic rights. They have also
resulted in forced returns to unsafe areas, engendered
intimidation, provided cover for new crimes and
fostered impunity.

More than four years have passed since the
adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). We recall the
presidential statement of 16 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/21),
which urged the Government of the Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict in Darfur to cooperate fully with
the Court, consistent with resolution 1593 (2005). The
European Union has also issued a number of clear
statements in that regard. On 15 September, the
Council of the European Union underlined that
impunity for international crimes can never be
accepted, reiterated its support for the ICC and called
upon the Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully
with the Court, in accordance with its obligations under
international law.

Concerns about the harassment of, and attacks on,
humanitarian personnel, and the deaths of many of
them, cannot just mean figures on a page. They should
lead to a more decisive stance on the part of the
international community, in particular the Security
Council.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, I
would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for the
presentation of his tenth report pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005), by which the Security Council referred
the situation in Darfur to the ICC. Austria is a longstanding advocate of the rule of law and the fight
against impunity and is a strong supporter of the ICC.
In its resolution 1894 (2009), on the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict, which was
adopted last month, the Security Council once again
affirmed its strong opposition to impunity for serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights and drew attention to the full range of justice
and reconciliation mechanisms, including international
and mixed criminal courts and tribunals. The Council
also recalled the inclusion of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide in the statutes of ad hoc
tribunals and the Rome Statute of the ICC, and
emphasized in that regard the principle of
complementarity.
Since the last report of the Prosecutor, in June,
the Court has continued to work on the Darfur

09-63331

We remain deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation and the violence in the region.
Notwithstanding the efforts by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and others, we have still not been able to overcome the
negative consequences of the expulsion of
non-governmental organizations in March 2009. The
United Nations and other international actors,
including the European Union, have repeated their
calls on the Sudanese Government and all other parties
to the conflict to ensure, in accordance with their
international obligation, that humanitarian assistance
reaches the most vulnerable people in the Sudan.
In October, the High-Level Panel on Darfur, led
by former President Thabo Mbeki, first presented its
report on Darfur, entitled “The quest for peace, justice
and reconciliation” (S/2009/599, annex I), which was
endorsed by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. We commend the efforts of the HighLevel Panel. We welcome the wide consultations
undertaken by the Panel in the preparation of the
report. We also welcome its interaction with the
Prosecutor of the ICC.
The High-Level Panel’s report sets out a number
of recommendations to promote justice and
reconciliation in Darfur, including proposals to expand
and strengthen the system of the Sudan’s special courts
to deal with crimes committed in the conflict in Darfur,

13

S/PV.6230

to establish a hybrid court for the most serious crimes
and to establish a truth, justice and reconciliation
commission. Austria looks forward to the presentation
of the report by President Mbeki in the Security
Council later this month. That will give us a chance to
learn more about envisaged steps and measures to
implement the Panel’s recommendations and their
practical implications. We believe that measures to
ensure accountability will be fundamental to achieving
lasting peace and reconciliation in Darfur and in the
Sudan as a whole. We welcome and support all efforts
that contribute to that end.
Austria encourages continued dialogue and
diplomatic efforts among the Court, the African Union
and the League of Arab States in order to ensure broad
support for the Court in its aim to promote the rule of
law, protect human rights and combat impunity within
the framework provided by the Rome Statute. Austria
is convinced that peace and justice are in no way
contradictory goals, but rather mutually reinforcing
imperatives. It is our joint responsibility to address
both.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me first thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing. While not a
State party to the Rome Statute, Turkey fully shares the
ideals and principles that gave rise to the International
Criminal Court. The need to fight impunity and
promote justice, especially in countries emerging from
conflict, is as evident today as it ever was.
Turkey believes that in the years to come the ICC
will have an important and complementary role to play
in efforts to fight impunity with regard to the most
serious of crimes. On the other hand, it is a relatively
new feature of international law. In the light of recent
experiences, it is also clear that the Court will continue
to face some serious challenges.
Over the course of the past 12 months, the
process initiated by resolution 1593 (2005) reached
critical mass. Starting in January, we witnessed a series
of negative events based on causes that inadvertently
had an impact on the lives of countless innocent people
and further complicated an already difficult situation.
As we approach 2010, we are glad to see that the
turbulence of 2009 is behind us.
As we have stated before, Turkey continues to
believe that the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005) cannot, and must not, be decoupled or pursued

14

in isolation from the wider framework of the search for
lasting peace and stability in Darfur. The
implementation of that resolution is not an end in
itself. In order to have meaning, it must be part of a
broader framework that combines all the necessary
elements for peace to take root. In that context, finding
a sustainable political settlement that takes into
account the root causes of the conflict, addressing the
humanitarian situation in a forward-looking and
results-oriented manner and promoting broad-based
reconciliation and meaningful justice for Darfuris are
all vital and mutually reinforcing goals that need to be
pursued together in Darfur.
Turkey believes that progress in all those areas is
possible, given time and provided that the right
framework is in place. On the other hand, placing
undue emphasis on just one of those goals risks
undermining progress in others. As experiences
elsewhere in Africa have clearly shown, there can be
no real justice or reconciliation without peace and an
enabling political framework.
With regard to Darfur, Turkey also places
importance on building and maintaining a regional
approach that considers the many sensitive dynamics at
play. The African Union, the Arab League and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as
neighbouring countries, all have different yet crucial
roles to play, as does the Doha process, where tangible
progress in the near term is going to be absolutely
vital.
Turkey welcomes the report of the African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I), led
by His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki. The report
contains some important insights on and critical
analyses of the challenges not only in Darfur but in the
Sudan in general. It also has some stern warnings that
must be taken very seriously. Turkey also welcomes
the report’s concrete recommendations, which we
believe are well thought out and specifically tailored to
the problems at hand.
In moving forward, we call on all parties
involved to take those recommendations as a point of
reference and to make best use of this report. Turkey
continues to believe that a peaceful settlement in
Darfur through political dialogue is possible. The
alternative and its potential fallout carry enormous
risks, not only for the region but also for international
peace and security.

09-63331

S/PV.6230

While there can be no quick fixes, a just and
viable political settlement that addresses all of the
rational grievances and expectations of the legitimate
parties involved can also open a path to meaningful
reconciliation and justice for all Sudanese people,
including the people of Darfur. In working towards that
goal, it will be crucial to keep the bigger picture in
focus and refrain from steps that could further
aggravate the already complex situation.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Allow me to join others in
welcoming Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo to the
Chamber again. I also thank him for presenting his
tenth report submitted pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005), updating the Council on the judicial and
investigative activities of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) relating to the Darfur situation. It is a
situation of continuing instability, criminal activity and
lawlessness, where civilians and displaced persons
continue to suffer and where stress on humanitarian
operations has been compounded by the erosion of
humanitarian principles.
My delegation reiterates its serious concern about
the ongoing lack of cooperation by the Government of
the Sudan with the ICC Prosecutor. The arrest warrants
issued by the Court remain unfulfilled. The Sudanese
Government, led by President Al-Bashir, continues
with its policy of contempt towards the victims of the
conflict in Darfur and has invested no credible efforts
to end impunity for crimes committed.
The messages contained in resolution 1593
(2005) and the presidential statement of 16 June 2008
(S/PRST/2008/21) remain clear and relevant. The
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict should fully cooperate with the Court and
provide any necessary assistance to the ICC and the
Prosecutor.
In that context, we welcome the voluntary
appearance before the ICC of the indictee in the
Haskanita trial. We take note of the Juba declaration of
September and hope it will mobilize other parties to
cooperate with the Court.
My delegation welcomes the focus of regional
organizations, notably the Arab League and the African
Union, on efforts to close the impunity gap in Darfur
while addressing peace and justice, promoting
accountability and strengthening national capacities for
combating impunity. We especially welcome the report
of the African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur

09-63331

(S/2009/599, annex I) and its recommendations. We
hope that the measures it proposes will be met by
meaningful response from the Sudanese side in order to
put an end to impunity and enable healing and
reconciliation. We look forward to hearing more from
the Panel in the Council soon.
The principle of complementarity is of paramount
importance for the international criminal justice
system. Regrettably, the Sudan has yet to offer a
credible domestic alternative to the jurisdiction of the
ICC. As the Prosecutor’s report notes, there have been
no developments in that regard during the reporting
period.
My delegation welcomes the increasing
international and regional efforts to promote dialogue
and to reactivate the political process, focusing on both
peace in Darfur and implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in order to achieve
the overall objective of sustainable peace and stability
in the Sudan. Having said that, my delegation also
believes that it is vital to preserve respect for the
independent judicial mandate of the ICC and its
Prosecutor.
Last month, the Security Council reaffirmed its
resolve to strengthen the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and reaffirmed its strong opposition to
impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, emphasizing
the responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations and end impunity. It would be
misleading to see those goals as incompatible with the
wider objective of maintaining international peace and
security. The ICC has a clear complementary role in
that regard. Croatia will continue to fully and
unequivocally support the activities of the Prosecutor
in carrying out the mandate under resolution 1593
(2005), as well as the role of the ICC in general.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We thank Mr. MorenoOcampo, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for his report and for his comprehensive briefing.
The establishment of the African Union Panel of
eminent persons, headed by President Mbeki, and the
submission of their report of findings and
recommendations on 8 October in Abuja are major
developments since the Prosecutor gave his report and
briefing in June (see S/PV.6135). We commend the
cooperation of the Panel and the ICC while carrying
out their mandate.

15

S/PV.6230

President
Mbeki’s
panel
submitted
recommendations on how best the issues of
accountability and combating impunity, on the one
hand, and reconciliation and healing, on the other, could
effectively and comprehensively be achieved, thus
upholding justice by combating impunity while
contributing to ensuring peace, stability and security in
the Sudan.
Uganda warmly welcomes and supports the
recommendations in the Mbeki report calling for the
establishment of a hybrid court that should exercise
original and appellate jurisdiction over individuals who
bear responsibility for the gravest crimes committed
during the conflict in Darfur. We urge the Government
of the Sudan to establish the hybrid court.
The Panel further recommends that such courts
be constituted by Sudanese judges and those of other
nationalities. Such measures would respect the
independent judicial mandate of the ICC and would
allow independent domestic jurisdiction in the Sudan.
That would strengthen judicial institutions in the Sudan
to handle past, present and future violations that
constitute the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community. We believe that the Mbeki
report presents us with a good basis on which to
resolve the outstanding impasse between the Sudan and
the ICC.
Uganda believes that ending impunity is the only
credible deterrent against crimes of the most serious
concern to the international community. We attach
great important to the delivery of justice and the fight
against impunity. Nonetheless, it is important to take
into account the need to resolve conflicts in a manner
that would not drive us back to anarchy. It is therefore
important to take into account that the particular
circumstances of each individual situation. We are
convinced
that
the
Mbeki
findings
and
recommendations have taken into account the concrete
situation on the ground in Darfur, in the Sudan and in
Africa.
Uganda
remains
concerned
about
the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. There is not enough
food assistance. Health services and facilities remain
inadequate. Water supply and sanitation support remain
insufficient. We commend all the United Nations
agencies and other donors that have scaled up their
activities to alleviate the suffering of the people of
Darfur. We are also concerned about reports of sexual

16

violence, which continues in and around the camps in
Darfur, and about reports of continued recruitment of
child soldiers. We call on the Government of the Sudan
to take appropriate measures to ensure that those
incidents are stopped and that the perpetrators of those
crimes are brought to justice.
Finally, we call on the Security Council to
support the recommendations of the Mbeki report. The
Mbeki report and its recommendations provide a
practical and realistic way forward for accountability,
reconciliation and lasting peace in Darfur.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): My delegation
takes note of the tenth report of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). And I
thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo for his briefing to the
Council.
Viet Nam has always maintained that the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes — such as
genocide, war crimes, crimes of aggression and crimes
against humanity — must be brought to justice. In the
fight against such heinous crimes, we recognize and
support the role and contributions of the international
criminal tribunals. At the same time, we consider that,
as those tribunals are courts of last resort, it is essential
to respect the primary role of national jurisdictions and
to render capacity-building assistance to national
judiciaries, as necessary, in order to enable them to
take up their judicial responsibilities.
Viet Nam is concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian conditions in Darfur and the alleged
commission of serious crimes against civilians. We
support the efforts of the African Union (AU) to
engage with the Sudanese Government in deploying
the seven-track solution package to achieve peace,
security and reconciliation in Darfur. We welcome the
creation of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur, composed of independent African individuals,
whose mandate is to address the interlinked issues of
combating impunity and promoting peace and
reconciliation. The High-Level Panel’s report
(S/2009/599, annex I), adopted by the AU Peace and
Security Council, stresses the need to strengthen the
Sudan’s national legal system, to deal appropriately
with the perpetrators of crimes, and to make
reparations to the victims inside the Sudan. We note the
ICC Prosecutor’s efforts to cooperate with the AU
High-Level Panel, and we encourage his further

09-63331

S/PV.6230

cooperation with the AU high-level implementation
panel aimed at achieving the above-mentioned
objective.
While we reaffirm the need for all parties to the
armed conflict in Darfur to implement Security
Council resolution 1593 (2005), Viet Nam supports
responsible actions by the Council that take into
account the concern and positions of its very important
regional peace and security partners.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): We listened attentively to the briefing by
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). Libya follows with great
attention the situation in Darfur, based on its eagerness
to achieve peace and justice, and has participated
actively in efforts aimed at the achievement of peace,
stability and justice in Darfur. Libya coordinates its
efforts with the African Union-United Nations Chief
Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassolé, and with the
Government of Qatar, as well as with other regional
Arab and African efforts. We do this with a view to
bringing all parties together at the negotiating table in
order to achieve a permanent settlement of the conflict
and to put an end to the human suffering in Darfur.
Libya hopes that the members of this Council will
realize that there is no alternative to an active political
process that must take highest priority in order to foster
circumstances conducive to stability and security, and
to establish justice and national reconciliation in
Darfur.
The measures adopted by the Prosecutor come
under the framework of Security Council resolution
1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur to
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. The
resolution raised a great number of objections both
within and outside the Council. A significant number of
Council members abstained from voting on that
resolution, and there are still questions circulating
around the purpose of issuing a resolution on Darfur
while the Council remains silent on other areas where
civilians are being killed by the most ferocious
weapons and where, up to this very moment, systemic
impunity is condoned before the eyes of the world.
The Gaza Strip and Afghanistan are testament to
that. Those who today speak about the realization of
justice and ending impunity in the Sudan are the very
same who opposed even discussion in the Security
Council of the report of the United Nations Fact-

09-63331

Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/12/48),
known as the Goldstone report, concerning the war
crimes and crimes against humanity committed against
Palestinian civilians by the occupying Israeli forces.
That makes the International Criminal Court nothing
more than a tool manipulated by certain countries to
further their policies. Regrettably, the Prosecutor
appears to be the executor of the policies of those
countries.
As we all know, the Sudan is not party to the
Rome Statute and is therefore not bound by the
resolutions of the International Criminal Court. Even
resolution 1593 (2005), which Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
and others use as a fall-back, is not binding on the
Government of the Sudan because it clearly affirms in
paragraph 2 that “that States not party to the Rome
Statute have no obligation under the Statute”, although
it also “urges all States and concerned regional and
other international organizations to cooperate fully”.
As indicated in the advisory opinion that the
Secretariat’s Office of Legal Affairs circulated to the
press a few months ago, from a legal perspective the
term “urges” is not binding. I do not believe that Mr.
Moreno-Ocampo and certain delegations present are
better equipped to interpret United Nations resolutions
than the Office of Legal Affairs.
Paragraphs 62 and 63 of Mr. Moreno-Ocampo’s
report contain clear falsifications of the Security
Council’s pronouncements in a resolution and a
presidential statement. The Prosecutor is mandated to
work within the framework of a jurisdiction established
under professional principles and free of selectivity,
incitement and threats. He is expected to refrain from
making and repeating accusations and allegations
through press campaigns that go so far as to describe a
head of State as a fugitive from justice when that
individual is participating in summit meetings seeking
to resolve the conflict and to establish peace in his
country.
In that respect, the report before us, especially in
paragraph 66 — which is intended to indicate the
support enjoyed by the International Criminal Court —
clearly reveals how limited that support is. That
paragraph notes that “[d]uring the general debate in the
General Assembly in October, 56 States emphasized
the importance of cooperation with the Court including
in relation to arrests”. This statement plainly shows
that more than two thirds of Member States do not in

17

S/PV.6230

fact support the steps and measures taken by the
Prosecutor in his dealings with the Sudan.
Although the report of the Prosecutor clearly
indicates in paragraph 67 that “African States parties to
the Rome Statute” — totalling 37 States — “have
affirmed … their position as African Union members
that the Security Council should consider a deferral of
the Darfur investigation”, the Prosecutor has ignored
that request, as the report reveals in subsequent
paragraphs, particularly paragraph 69, which focuses
on the Prosecutor’s contacts with African States but
does not detail the outcomes of those contacts. That is
obviously because the States in question have rejected
his measures.
Also surprising is the absence of any objective
and practical vision behind the Prosecutor’s measures
and positions. He requested that an arrest warrant be
issued against President Omar Al-Bashir at a time
when efforts were being made to deploy the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
to advance the peace process. On 4 March, he urged
the issuance of arrest warrants against State officials,
provoking popular outrage and undermining hopes for
peace and stability.
Regrettably, he did so in utter disregard for the
realities of the Sudan and its current sensitive and
complex
circumstances.
For
instance,
the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement between the North and South is now at a
critical phase as elections, an important referendum
and deadlines for resolving other outstanding issues are
looming. At the same time, we hear reports of violent
tribal conflicts over sources of livelihood in the South.
In Darfur itself, the humanitarian and security situation
has been affected by the Prosecutor’s actions, and
incidents against humanitarian assistance and
peacekeeping operations are on the increase.
The Prosecutor has actively escalated his
accusations and marginalized the constructive efforts
and positions of the forces, parties and organizations
that have direct knowledge of the situation on the
ground and its repercussions in Darfur. He has ignored
several resolutions and statements that have been
reissued as official documents of the Security Council
after having been issued by important regional
organizations representing more than two thirds of the
States Members of the United Nations, including the
African Union — the Organization’s principal partner

18

in Darfur — the League of Arab States, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Security Council
operates on behalf of those States, while the United
Nations Charter recognizes the importance of regional
arrangements in achieving the pacific settlement of
disputes and specifically mandates the Council to
encourage their role in that respect.
In this regard, I recall the following African
Union resolution, in which the Peace and Security
Council expressed its conviction that,
“in view of the delicate nature of the processes
underway in the Sudan, approval by the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the application by the ICC
Prosecutor could seriously undermine the
ongoing efforts aimed at facilitating the early
resolution of the conflict in Darfur and the
promotion
of
long-lasting
peace
and
reconciliation in the Sudan” (S/2008/481, annex,
para. 9).
The Peace and Security Council reiterated its call on
the Security Council, “in accordance with the
provisions of Article 16 of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, to defer the process
initiated by the Court” (ibid., para. 11).
In addition to the statements issued by the
African Union, the United Nations principal partner in
the hybrid operation in Darfur, other regional
organizations — including the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, the League of Arab States and the
Non-Aligned Movement — have outlined similar
positions in a series of statements and resolutions on
this matter. In his briefing on 27 April, Mr. Rodolphe
Adada, Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur and head of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, told
the Council:
“The ICC issue has dominated and polarized
Sudanese political life. It has weakened the position
of those in the Sudan who have been working for
compromise and consensus and has encouraged
militant sentiment ...” (S/PV.6112, p. 2).
As members know, Mr. Adada’s views about the
improved situation in Darfur did not please certain
members of the Council and he was forced under
pressure to leave his post.

09-63331

S/PV.6230

It is unquestionable that peace and justice are
indivisible. But how can we achieve justice, especially
in a society exhausted by conflict and numerous
humanitarian tragedies? It can be done only through a
political process and by seriously and comprehensively
addressing both the conflict’s underlying causes and its
effects. That is the lesson we learn from history, and it
is the only way to achieve national reconciliation,
security and stability, and to ensure respect for the
sovereignty of a State Member of the United Nations.
These are the objective conditions for establishing
justice and reconciliation.
That has been the basis of the positions and
resolutions of the African Union on this matter, which
were not motivated by any desire to overlook or ignore
the conditions needed for establishing justice in Darfur,
but rather by the determination to create those conditions
by bringing about security and political stability. In that
regard, we recall the report of the African Union Highlevel Panel on Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I) chaired by
former President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, which
was adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 29 October. Libya highly appreciates
the Panel’s efforts, and we hope that the Council will
discuss its recommendations objectively and positively,
bearing in mind the requirements of simultaneously
ensuring peace, justice and reconciliation, including by
providing redress for the victims of the Darfur conflict
and helping meet the desire of the people of the Sudan to
live in lasting peace and stability so that they can dedicate
themselves to development, progress and prosperity.
It is time to undo the negative effects of the ICC’s
measures and return to the spirit of the Rome Statute
by activating its article 16, which gives us the authority
to defer investigations or prosecutions. That is what is
required to maintain peace and security, especially in
the light of the African Union High-level Panel’s
recommendations. The Security Council’s failure to
apply article 16 of the Rome Statute, despite a number
of requests that this be done, affects its credibility. The
negative ramifications of implementing article 13 (b)
require that we activate the other provisions and defer
pending legal steps.
That is necessary in order to create a climate
conducive to comprehensive solutions ensuring
stability and justice in the Sudan. That is the hope of
my country, whose Leader has the honour of Chairing
the African Union. It is also the hope of more than two
thirds of the Members of the United Nations, which are

09-63331

represented in the relevant international and regional
organizations. All of them are continuing their noble
efforts on all tracks; we have no doubt that those
efforts will be effective in achieving peace, stability
and justice in the Sudan.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Burkina Faso.
I thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing.
My delegation regrets that, in spite of the
significant efforts of the entire international
community, peace has not yet returned to Darfur.
Civilians, humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel,
refugees and displaced persons continue to face daily
violence. Since 1 June 2005, the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC has initiated three major cases
related to the conflict in Darfur. Burkina Faso reaffirms
its confidence in an independent international system
of criminal justice and acknowledges that the ICC
prosecutions were initiated pursuant to Council
resolution 1593 (2005).
Yet, like many other members of the international
community which belong to the African Union, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement, my
country is concerned by the impact of the arrest
warrant issued against President Al-Bashir. Indeed,
although it is true that combating impunity is a vital
element in the restoration of lasting peace to Darfur
and to the Sudan in general, it is also true that, in the
absence of a consensus political solution, attaining the
objective of justice cannot alone bring peace in such a
complex conflict. Hence, it is crucial to take advantage
of opportunities to bring about political normalization
and thus to make decisive strides towards peace, which
is a common objective of Security Council resolutions
and the relevant decisions of African Union bodies.
We therefore continue to believe that the issuance
of that arrest warrant can only further complicate the
peace process and the efforts of the Security Council
and the African Union. As we have always stressed,
that position implies no value judgement on the
substance of the issue; it is an firm invitation to give
both justice and the political process a chance. We
continue to believe that peace can return to Darfur,
especially in the light of the 30 November briefing by
the Joint African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator

19

S/PV.6230

for Darfur (see S/PV.6227), whom we fully support, on
the next stages of the political negotiations, and in the
light of the important report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur, chaired by President
Thabo Mbeki (S/2009/599, annex I). We shall have an
opportunity to consider that report later this month. We
also welcome the positive cooperation between those
two entities and between them and the ICC Prosecutor.
Finally, we appeal once again to the parties to
strictly respect the lives of civilians and humanitarian

20

and peacekeeping personnel and to provide unimpeded
humanitarian access to all populations.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

09-63331
