S/PV.8943

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8943rd meeting

Wednesday, 5 January 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 December 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2021/1103)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-41328 (E)
*2141328*

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Security Council
The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council this year, I should like to extend
my warm wishes on the occasion of the New Year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.
In presiding over this first formal meeting of
the Council in 2022, I am happy to welcome the
new members — Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana
and the United Arab Emirates. We look forward to
their participation in the work of the Council. Their
experience and wisdom will be of invaluable assistance
in the discharge of the Council’s responsibilities.
I also take this opportunity to express the Council’s
gratitude to the outgoing members — Estonia, the
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and
Viet Nam — for their important contributions to the
work of the Council during their terms.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Ambassador Abdou Abarry, Permanent
Representative of the Niger, for his service as President
of the Council for the month of December 2021.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Abarry
and his team for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 28 December 2021 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2021/1103)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
2/19

22/12/2021

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/1103, which contains the text of a letter
dated 28 December 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and to focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to 10 minutes or less.
Flashing lights on the collars of the microphones will
prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for the opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the new
non-permanent members of the Council — Albania,
Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the United Arab Emirates.
I look forward to working closely with all members on
this important issue.
Since my previous briefing, on 8 December 2021
(see S/PV.8921), the Office for Disarmament Affairs
has continued to maintain regular contact with
counterparts at the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related to
this matter. Per established practice, I held a monthly
call with the OPCW Director-General on 29 December
2021, to receive an update on developments and ascertain
his views. In addition, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs received a letter from the Permanent Mission
of the Syrian Arab Republic, dated 27 December 2021,
referring to a letter sent by the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates to the OPCW DirectorGeneral concerning the information contained in his
latest reports on the progress in the elimination of the
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian chemical weapons programme. That information
was studied carefully and forwarded to the OPCW
Technical Secretariat.
As I have previously informed the Council, the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has impacted the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s ability
to deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. Nevertheless,
the Technical Secretariat maintains its readiness to
deploy. Despite continued travel restrictions, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to undertake
its mandated activities related to the elimination
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme and
its engagement with the Syrian Arab Republic in
that regard.
Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT) are still ongoing to clarify all outstanding
issues related to the initial and subsequent declarations
submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention. I have been
informed that in order to assess the completeness and
accuracy of the Syrian Arab Republic’s declarations,
the DAT conducts an assessment of all incoming
information submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic, as
well as information generated through other activities.
Any gaps, inconsistencies or discrepancies are raised
and discussed with the Syrian National Authority and
reported to States parties as outstanding issues. Once
the Syrian National Authority has provided sufficient
information and explanations related to an outstanding
issue, the DAT considers the related outstanding issue
to be resolved and, if needed, assists the Syrian Arab
Republic in amending its initial declaration.
I understand that the Syrian Arab Republic has
submitted a total of 17 amendments and a number of
supplements to its initial declaration. However, out of
the 24 outstanding issues opened by the DAT in 2014,
20 remain unresolved. As noted by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat, the substance of these outstanding issues is
of concern and involves, inter alia, undeclared research,
production and/or weaponization of unknown quantities
of chemical weapons, and significant quantities of
chemical-warfare agents or precursors and chemical
munitions whose fate has not yet been fully verified by
the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has not yet received the requested declaration
from the Syrian Arab Republic on all undeclared
types and quantities of nerve agents produced and/or

S/PV. 8943

weaponized at the former chemical-weapons production
facility that was declared by the Syrian Arab Republic
as never having been used to produce and/or weaponize
chemical-warfare agents.
I have also been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has not yet received a response from the
Syrian Arab Republic on the requests for information
and documentation regarding the damage caused during
an attack on 8 June 2021 against a military facility that
housed a declared former chemical-weapons production
facility. Nor has it received a response to the request
for information regarding the unauthorized movement
and remains of two destroyed cylinders related to the
chemical-weapon incident that took place in Douma
on 7 April 2018. In that regard, I call on the Syrian
Arab Republic to respond to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat’s requests as soon as possible.
As I have previously informed the Council,
since April 2021 the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has attempted to schedule with the Syrian National
Authority the twenty-fifth round of consultations with
the DAT in Damascus.
However, I regret to inform Council members
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat has not been in
a position to conduct that deployment owing to the
continued refusal by the Syrian Arab Republic to issue
an entry visa for one member of the DAT. I also regret
to inform the Council that efforts by the Technical
Secretariat to convene a limited meeting with Syrian
experts at the OPCW’s headquarters in The Hague in
late October 2021 were unsuccessful.
I urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to facilitate arrangements for the deployment of
the DAT and to comply with resolution 2118 (2013),
including by allowing immediate and unfettered access
to the personnel designated by the OPCW Technical
Secretariat as soon as possible.
Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to
closing those outstanding issues. As has been stressed
on numerous occasions, owing to the identified
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain
unresolved, the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues
to assess that at this stage, the declaration submitted
by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

21-413283/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat conducted the eighth round of inspections
of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) from
10 to 17 December 2021. The outcome of that round
of inspections will be reported in due course. I am
also advised that the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to
provide sufficient technical information or explanations
that would enable the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
close the issue related to the detection of a Schedule
2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the SSRC in
November 2018.
With regard to the in-person meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic, I
note that the officials in charge of preparations continue
to discuss the date, location, agenda and composition of
the delegations.
Consistent with previous updates to the Council,
the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains
in the process of studying all available information
related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I have been informed
that the FFM deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic
between 28 November and 10 December 2021 to
collect information and conduct interviews regarding
the incidents that took place in Hama Governorate on
7 July 2017 and 4 August 2017 in Khirbat Masasinah;
on 9 August 2017 in Qalib Al-Thawr, Al-Salamiyah;
and on 8 November 2017 in Al-Balil, Suran. The
FFM continues to analyse the information collected
from recent activities and is preparing for upcoming
deployments, which, as I noted, remain subject to the
evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I take this
opportunity to once again reiterate my full support for
the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of the work of the OPCW.
With regard to the decision entitled “Addressing the
Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian
Arab Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April
2021, I have been advised that, unfortunately, the
Syrian Arab Republic has not yet completed any of the
4/19

22/12/2021

measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC-94/
DEC.2. I therefore reiterate my call on the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat in that regard.
It cannot be repeated often enough: there is no
justification for the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and under any circumstances. The use of such
weapons with impunity and without accountability is a
threat to international peace and security and a danger
to us all. It is therefore imperative to hold accountable
all those who have used chemical weapons. As we start
the new year, I state my sincere hope once again that
members of the Council will unite on this issue. The
Office for Disarmament Affairs stands ready to provide
whatever support and assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me start by congratulating you, Madam
President, on the start of your Security Council
presidency. I look forward to a productive month under
your leadership. I also want to extend a warm welcome
to our new Security Council members — Albania, my
next-door neighbour, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the
United Arab Emirates. Welcome to the fold. The United
States is excited to work with the new members as vital
partners over the next two years.
With regard to the discussion at hand, I would
like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for her
informative briefing and dedication to this issue.
The work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its investigative
bodies — the Investigation and Identification Team and
the Fact-Finding Mission, as well as the Declaration
Assessment Team — remains essential. I commend
the Fact-Finding Mission for pressing forward with
its impartial and independent investigations of alleged
chemical-weapons use in Syria, despite the Syrian
regime’s obstructionism, obstacles presented by the
coronavirus disease pandemic and persistent baseless
attacks by some in the international community
against this work. The Fact-Finding Mission’s most
recent trip to Syria, which concluded last month,
collected essential information on four incidents of
chemical-weapons use in 2017. Those facts help hold
the Syrian regime accountable for its chemical-weapons
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

use and uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention, to
which all of us on the Council are States parties. As
in previous investigations, the United States stands
firmly behind the Fact-Finding Mission’s thorough
and impartial evaluation and analysis of suspected
chemical-weapons use.
It is profoundly disappointing that in the ninety-ninth
report of the Technical Secretariat (see S/2021/1103),
we continue to witness Syria’s complete disregard for
its obligations and deliberate attempts to delay and
obstruct the OPCW’s work. The OPCW still assesses
that Syria’s declaration cannot be considered accurate
and complete in accordance with the obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013).
We should not be fooled by Syria’s veneer
of cooperation while it continues its obfuscating
narrative. The Al-Assad regime has not been candid or
forthcoming with the OPCW, despite the tireless efforts
by the OPCW to engage Syria to resolve these issues. For
nearly nine months, Syria has prevented the next round
of consultations with the Declaration Assessment Team
from occurring in Syria. It has also failed to accept
the alternative solution proposed by the OPCW — to
hold a limited set of meetings in The Hague. Let me be
clear — every amendment Syria makes to its original
declaration has been the result of the thorough work
of the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team to uncover
those inconsistencies. The Syrian regime did not
provide any of this information itself.
It is a matter of international peace and security
that Damascus fulfil its international obligations. That
includes granting OPCW personnel immediate and
unfettered access to undertake their mandated work.
Recently, an individual in France was arrested in
connection with the procurement of chemical-weaponsrelated equipment by the Syrian regime as late as 2018.
These are preliminary charges related to complicity in
crimes against humanity and war crimes. This arrest is
an important step in pursuing accountability for those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons.
The United States reaffirms its strong support for
the OPCW’s continued work on this matter and all efforts
to implement resolution 2118 (2013). It is time for the
Syrian regime to quit stalling, cease its obstructionism
and comply with its international obligations. It is time
for the Syrian people to have justice and peace.

S/PV. 8943

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the start of your presidency of the
Council. You and your team can count on our support.
I would also like to welcome our colleagues from
Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the United Arab
Emirates to the first briefing of the Security Council
this year. We look forward to constructive cooperation.
Our newcomers are very lucky today. On their very
first day, they have the opportunity to plunge headlong
into one of the most controversial and politicized
files on the Security Council’s agenda — the Syrian
chemical dossier. It is unique because no other plot is
so disconnected from reality, resembling instead a fairy
tale concocted by some science fiction writer. I will
explain what I mean.
The most paradoxical thing is that the
Syrian chemical dossier has no connection to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. That
has been the case for a long time. Its non-proliferation
aspects have been resolved. By joining the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC), Damascus has fulfilled in
good faith all the obligations it assumed in that regard,
as the Secretary-General reported to the Security
Council in June 2014 (see S/PV.7212). The elimination
of Syria’s military-chemical potential was confirmed in
2016 by the Executive Council of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
Conference of the States Parties.
No real, scientifically corroborated evidence
to the contrary has been presented to the Council in
all these years. True experts cannot in good faith
consider as evidence the demonstrably staged videos
provided by politically engaged non-governmental
organizations created specifically to fight the
Syrian Government — such as the notorious
White Helmets — videos in which people without
chemical protection equipment are working with
toxic substances and the alleged victims’ symptoms
are completely inconsistent with the use of chemical
weapons.
It would seem that the OPCW Director-General,
Mr. Arias, and the Technical Secretariat would have
the final say in that regard. Unfortunately, hopes of that
occurring are dwindling, as they are deeply mired in
the scandal surrounding the report of the Fact-Finding
Mission on the incident in Douma in April 2018, the
final version of which was revised, due to pressure on

21-413285/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

behalf of some delegations, to make it more anti-Syrian.
This is fraud, plain and simple. That continues to
be confirmed by various sources, including former
inspectors of the OPCW who were directly involved
in the investigation. Attempts by said inspectors to get
the OPCW leadership to investigate what happened
only led to them being persecuted for their search for
the truth. All attempts to set the record straight, or at
least to discuss the situation, including by engaging the
OPCW Scientific Advisory Board, have been rejected
by the Technical Secretariat.
Unfortunately, instead of admitting obvious
mistakes and correcting them, the Director-General
continues to openly violate, year after year, the
provisions of the CWC, the integrity of which he must
defend. I would even say that he is flaunting the use of
a flawed methodology that is violating the provisions of
the Convention and is based on data collected remotely
from politically engaged sources.
As a result, the situation is only getting worse, with
the appearance of increasingly dubious innovations.
For example, in today’s report (see S/2021/1103), the
Director-General indicates that, in November and
December 2021, the FFM collected information and
conducted interviews about incidents in a number
of towns in Syria that took place in 2017. Common
sense dictates that such investigations post facto are,
by definition, improper. How can a chain of events
be established four years after they occur, especially
given the evolving military situation in Syria? What
kind of eye witnesses can be found? What details can
they remember? This is especially regrettable bearing
in mind the colossal efforts made, together with the
Syrians, to drag the obstinate FFM inspectors to the
site of the alleged incident in Douma in 2018.
Our Western colleagues, on the other hand, did not
need an investigation at all. Not only did they immediately
blame the Al-Assad Government despite the fact that,
on the eve of the alleged incident, we had warned of the
impending provocation by Syrian insurgents, but they
actually conducted a missile strike against Government
targets supposedly connected to the use of chemical
weapons. Bearing in mind that we know in detail about
the under-handed dealings I have just mentioned, it
is impossible to call what happened anything other
than a carefully planned political provocation. By the
way, our American colleague just said that the facts
collected by the Fact-finding Mission in November
2021 demonstrate the criminal nature of the Al-Assad
6/19

22/12/2021

regime, but where do they get such information and
facts? These have not yet been circulated. Unless they
have written them themselves, that is.
To give the Council a full picture, it is important
to mention the illegitimate activity of the Investigation
and Identification Team, which is working remotely
to rubber-stamp the unconvincing anti-Syrian reports
based on videos and information from anti-Syrian
groups. Also worth mentioning is the campaign
launched by our Western colleagues on Syria’s initial
declaration. As a result, under a bogus pretext and in a
gross violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
Syria was stripped of a number of rights and privileges
at the OPCW.
Nevertheless, even after that, the Syrian
Government, showing significant restraint, continues
to be ready to engage in dialogue with the OPCW.
However, in reality, this cooperation is being held up
by the Technical Secretariat itself despite its efforts
to shift blame to Damascus in relation to the work of
the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT). Syria has
clearly stated its readiness to receive the DAT on its
territory and to conduct the twenty-fifth round of
consultations. However, as we have been told, this
round has once again been postponed by the leadership
of the Technical Secretariat on artificial and politicized
grounds, namely, that, supposedly, the entire mission
cannot visit the country because one of its members
was not granted a visa. The pretext chosen by the
Technical Secretariat last time was no less absurd: that
supposedly in the summer it was impossible to visit
Syria because of the heat.
It is crucial to understand that the dialogue with
the DAT is part of the voluntary, bilateral obligations
that Syria undertook. I stress the word “voluntary”. The
very nature of the DAT mandate does not provide for
any kind of investigative functions. Its role is simply to
help the Syrians prepare their initial declaration. It has
no authority to conduct retrospective investigations.
Furthermore, preparatory work is continuing
on meetings between Mr. Mekdad, Syria’s Minister
of Foreign Affairs and Expatriates, and Mr. Arias,
Director-General. Mr. Arias has been invited to visit
Damascus because it would be very important for him
to get a first-hand impression of the situation on the
ground. Would the Syrian authorities try to do this
if they wanted nothing to do with the OPCW or had
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

something to hide? And why is Mr. Arias himself
refusing to visit Syria?
I have to say, generally speaking, that there are more
and more questions for Mr. Arias. His last appearance
before the Security Council (see S/PV.8785) left us with
an unpleasant aftertaste. He attempted to cover up the
discrepancies in the aforementioned report on Douma
by any possible means, on the one hand, and to justify
the use of remote methods of work employed by the
Technical Secretariat when gathering evidence, on the
other hand. In addition to that, he tried with a straight
face to distort the content of the note verbale sent by the
Permanent Representation of the Russian Federation to
the OPCW in connection to that report. Nevertheless,
we deem it important to continue to demand from
Mr. Arias clear and logical explanations of the current
situation, which risks destroying the OPCW. We only
insist that Mr. Arias thoroughly execute the provisions
of the OPCW. We also intend to do this again in the
Security Council, by inviting Director General back to
one of our meetings.
There is one more very important aspect to mention
in order to understand the evolution of the chemical
dossier. By peddling the so-called violations by the
Syrian authorities, the United Nations Secretariat and
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW are, in essence,
turning a blind eye to the topic of the use of chemical
weapons by terrorists in Syria and neighbouring States.
I just want to mention the November report of United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, which contains a wealth of evidence
of the use by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) of chemical weapons in Iraq in 2014 and 2016.
Specifically, ISIL used the laboratory of the University
of Mosul to conduct chemical research and development.
These facts fall within the purview of paragraphs
18 and 19 of resolution 2118 (2013) and are subject to
the resolution’s paragraph 12, which stipulates that
such information should be shared with Member States.
Nevertheless, no information on this has been provided
either today or earlier. This is very important evidence
that clearly points to the fact that chemical weapons
could be spreading among terrorists and used by them
at any moment to make chemical provocations.
In sum, the so-called Syrian chemical dossier has
lately lost even the appearance of impartiality and the
objective establishment of facts that could confirm the

S/PV. 8943

use of chemical weapons in Syria. Today, it is no more
than simply another lever that Western colleagues may
use to criticize the country and try to prove what cannot
be proven, even in disregard of the laws of physics,
chemistry and basic logic.
This is the situation that my colleagues in the
Council will have to work with in the near future.
Of course, we must be ready to hear the most rabid
accusations against Russia for allegedly undermining
the authority of the OPCW. We would like to think that
this topic, which has become a pain in everyone’s neck,
will take a turn in an objective and fact-based direction
by the end of your term in the Council, Madam
President. If Norway, together with us and other clearminded delegations, can contribute to bringing that
about, then rank-and-file Syrians and their neighbours
will only be the more grateful for it.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I wish to congratulate
Norway on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January 2022.
I assure you, Madam President, of Kenya’s
cooperation and support. I also wish to thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
As this is our first meeting in 2022, we welcome
our colleagues from Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana
and the United Arab Emirates to the Security Council.
We look forward to working closely with each of them
this year.
Noting that there have been no significant
movements in this dossier since the Council’s last
meeting (see S/PV.8921), I will reiterate Kenya’s
already-known positions on this matter.
It is Kenya’s belief that expeditious closure of
the investigations into the use of chemical weapons
in Syria will allow the Council to support the Syrian
people more meaningfully in their quest for lasting
peace. We welcome the agreement on the extension
of the Tripartite Agreement between the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
the United Nations Office for Project Services and
the Syrian Arab Republic, which will cover the period
from 1 January 2022 up to and including 30 June 2022.
We encourage similar cooperation and engagement in
good faith between the Syrian Arab Republic and the
OPCW Technical Secretariat, particularly regarding

21-413287/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
that remain unresolved.
Kenya reaffirms its support for the mandate
of the OPCW, which bears great responsibility as
the implementing body of the Chemical Weapons
Convention. The OPCW must remain transparent, free
of politicization and capable of withstanding scrutiny.
We reaffirm Kenya’s principled position that the
use of chemical weapons anywhere and by anyone
constitutes a grave violation of international law. No
cause can ever justify the use of any weapon of mass
destruction by any actor under any circumstances.
Finally, we reiterate our firm conviction that the
long-term solution to the situation in Syria can be
achieved only through a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
inclusive political dialogue, and Kenya stands in
solidarity with the people of Syria in this endeavour.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, and since this
is the first time I take the floor in the Security Council
under your presidency, Madam President, permit me
to congratulate you and wish Norway a successful
presidency. As a new member of the Council, but a longtime collaborator of Norway on several multilateral
issues of mutual interest, I would like to assure you of
Ghana’ cooperation during this month.
I would also like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
for her participation in today’s meeting under rule
39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
and for her insightful briefing to the Council. My
delegation also welcomes the Secretary-General’s
letter contained in document S/2021/1103, conveying
the ninety-ninth monthly report of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
for the period from 24 November to 23 December
2021, on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013)
and the relevant decisions of the OPCW Executive
Council in relation to the elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons. I equally and warmly welcome the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Turkey to this meeting and look
forward to their participation.
In considering this agenda item, Ghana would
like to reiterate its conviction that the use of chemical
weapons is the most serious breach of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. We recall, in this context, the
international community’s strong condemnation of
8/19

22/12/2021

such use by anyone under any circumstances. We
therefore reaffirm that any use of chemical weapons is
unacceptable and constitutes a serious violation of the
norms and standards of the modern society of nations.
My delegation, in this regard, would like to
emphasize two points.
First, Ghana strongly encourages the Syrian Arab
Republic, a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and a State whose actions have been the
subject of decisions by the OPCW Executive Council
and the Council, to afford its full cooperation with
designated entities in accordance with its obligations.
Secondly, the use of chemical weapons has
consequences, and those who use them must be held
to account for their actions. In that regard, Ghana
supports all efforts to ensure accountability for the
violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention in
Syria. Accountability is crucial to compel compliance,
deter the use of chemical weapons globally and restore
the international community’s confidence in the norms
and standards that uphold the non-proliferation regime.
In conclusion, we encourage the Syrian Arab
Republic to provide the required data and clarity
necessary to resolve any outstanding gaps and
inconsistencies in the initial and subsequent submissions
concerning its chemical-weapons stockpiles. We hope
that its suspended rights and privileges under the
Chemical Weapons Convention can be restored as soon
as possible, once the issues that are pending have been
resolved and closed. As a State party to the Convention,
Ghana stands ready to be a helpful partner in the
elimination of the chemical weapons in Syria.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, we congratulate Norway on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. Today marks the first open meeting of the
Council for the new year. We take this opportunity to
welcome its new members: the United Arab Emirates
Albania, Brazil, Gabon and Ghana. We look forward to
stronger cooperation with them for greater unity within
the Council and the effective discharge by the Council
of its mandate. China also thanks Viet Nam, Tunisia, the
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Estonia
for their contributions to the work of the Council over
the past two years. I also thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

According to the latest monthly report by the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2021/1103),
the Technical Secretariat conducted the eighth round
of inspections of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre from 10 to 17 December 2021; the
Tripartite Agreement among the United Nations Office
for Project Services, the OPCW and Syria has been
extended to 30 June; and preparations are under way for
the in-person meeting between the Director-General of
the OPCW and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of Syria. China welcomes such progress
and encourages the Technical Secretariat to maintain
its engagement and cooperation with Syria.
We take note of the recent deployment of members
of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission to Syria for a twoweek investigation. We hope that they will work in
strict compliance with the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). With regard to the twentyfifth round of technical consultations, we hope that the
Technical Secretariat will heed the concerns of the
State party over the issue of visas and remain open and
flexible so as to avoid a stalemate in the discussions.
I would also like to raise a question on the issue.
Given Syria’s refusal to issue a visa for only one
member of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT),
would it be possible for the Technical Secretariat to
find a replacement or deploy the other DAT members to
Syria first for the consultations?
The CWC constitutes the basis and yardstick
for addressing chemical-weapons-related issues.
Regrettably, in recent years, in disregard of the
provisions of the Convention and the tradition of
seeking consensus, certain countries have forced
voting on pursuing accountability related to the Syrian
chemical-weapons issue, when consensus was far
from being reached among the parties, including on
establishing the extent of the mandate of CWC and the
Investigation and Identification Team and suspending
the rights of Syria as a State party, among others.
Such acts undermine the authority of the OPCW,
poison the atmosphere and erode mutual trust among
States parties. China urges the countries concerned to
change course and desist from politicizing the work of
the OPCW. We also hope that the Technical Secretariat
and the Director-General in particular will maintain
objectivity and impartiality in their work, listen broadly
to others’ views and facilitate the move from division

S/PV. 8943

and confrontation to unity and cooperation among
States parties.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your role as President of the Security Council for
the month of January. We wish you all the best in the
month ahead. You can count on Brazil’s cooperation.
My delegation thanks Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
her briefing.
As this is the first time that I am addressing the
Council on the matter, I would like to reiterate Brazil’s
firm commitment to the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Brazil condemns in the strongest possible terms
the use of weapons of mass destruction, including
chemical weapons, anywhere, by anyone and under
any circumstances. We therefore support a strong,
transparent and independent OPCW.
The Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is the
gold standard for multilateral regimes on weapons of
mass destruction. It has established a comprehensive,
legally binding and non-discriminatory prohibition
and is equipped with a fully fledged and effective
verification mechanism. It is unfortunate that, even
with that institutional apparatus, we continue to
observe the use of chemical weapons in different
regions of the world. This year we are celebrating the
thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the CWC by
the Conference on Disarmament. May that milestone
give rise to a recommitment by States parties to the
objectives of the Convention, as well as to strengthening
its verification mechanism in order to ensure its
unequivocal impartiality.
I would also like to reiterate Brazil’s strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. We are
convinced that there can be no military solution to the
Syrian conflict. We reaffirm our resolve to advance a
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned and United Nations-facilitated
political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Chemical weapons are utterly incompatible with
international humanitarian law and, therefore, must
have no place in the practices and doctrines of today’s
world. The use of such weapons violates international
agreements and poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Incidents must be addressed with
transparency and subject to thorough and impartial

21-413289/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

investigations in accordance with the CWC. It is our
view that the role of the Technical Secretariat of the
OPCW in clarifying such incidents is irreplaceable.
Its capacity to do so must be protected and, where
necessary, continuously improved.
The use of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic constitutes the first proven use of weapons
of mass destruction in the twenty-first century.
That dreadful reality represents a major setback in
the international commitment to the principles of
international humanitarian law. Over the past few years,
Brazil has thoroughly analysed the reports issued by
the Fact-Finding Mission, the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Investigation
and Identification Team on episodes related to the use
of chemical weapons in Syria. Given the gravity of the
facts, we reiterate that all investigations pertaining to
those incidents must be impartial, balanced, technical
and comprehensive.
It is also important to note that, while Brazil
supported the adoption of decision C-25/DEC.9 during
the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the States
Parties to the CWC, it did so with the expectation
that the application of the measures provided for
therein would contribute to reverting Syria’s state of
non-compliance with the Convention. We continue
to advocate for the need to restore trust between
the organization and the Syrian Arab Republic,
which would constitute a fundamental step towards
overcoming the regrettable politicization that has
undermined the culture of consensus within the OPCW
and its decision-making bodies.
Brazil welcomes the recent efforts made by
both the OPCW Director-General and the Syrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates to hold
an in-person meeting. That is the kind of constructive
approach that helps build confidence and paves the
way for the consolidation of a comprehensive and
effective dialogue. We also welcome the extension of
the Tripartite Agreement between the Syrian Arab
Republic, the OPCW and the United Nations Office for
Project Services, which facilitates the organization’s
mandated activities in Syria.
Finally, we encourage the Syrian Government to
provide full access to OPCW expert teams, including
by issuing the necessary visas. Once travel restrictions
worldwide begin to be lifted, we look forward to the
10/19

22/12/2021

deployment of further on-site inspections, which could
help advance a conclusion to the Syrian file.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, allow me to
extend my felicitations to you, Madam, and express our
full support for your presidency. I also welcome our
five new colleagues to the Council and thank our five
outgoing colleagues for their contribution.
We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her update.
We have taken note of the contents of the ninetyninth monthly report of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted to the Council pursuant to
resolution 2118 (2013) (see S/2021/1103).
We look forward to the report on the Technical
Secretariat’s latest round of inspections of Syrian
Scientific Studies and Research Centre facilities. We
have noted the submission by the Syrian Arab Republic
on 16 December of its ninety-seventh monthly report,
detailing activities undertaken to implement its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC). We have also noted that the Tripartite
Agreement between the Syrian Arab Republic, the
OPCW and the United Nations Office for Project
Services, which facilitates the Technical Secretariat’s
activities in Syria, has been extended for a further
period of six months.
We encourage continued engagement between
Syria and the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW
to address and resolve all relevant issues relating to
chemical weapons.
India’s position on issues related to Syria acceding
to the Chemical Weapons Convention is well known.
It is our principled stand that the CWC is a unique,
non-discriminatory disarmament instrument for the
elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass
destruction. India attaches high importance to the CWC
and stands for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. We support collective efforts by all
parties to ensure that the credibility and integrity of
that Convention is maintained to the fullest.
India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstances. India has consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons must
be impartial, credible and objective. It must scrupulously
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

follow the provisions and procedures embedded in the
Convention and be conducted in conformity with the
delicate balance of power and responsibility enshrined
under it to establish facts and reach evidence-based
conclusions. That should be adhered to.
India has also been repeatedly cautioning against the
possibility of terrorist entities and individuals gaining
access to chemical weapons, including in the region.
The reports of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) have
also referred to the repeated deployments of chemical
weapons by United Nations-proscribed terrorist
groups and those affiliated with ISIL against civilian
populations between 2014 and 2016. ISIL remains
active in wide swathes of Syria, where the group is
seeking to rebuild its combat capabilities. Therefore,
allegations of the use of chemical weapons need to be
afforded utmost attention.
India continues to believe that progress on other
tracks could help with potential forward movement with
regard to the political process in Syria, as advocated by
resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): We are delighted to
see you in the Chair, Madam, and I want to wish you
and your team an excellent month ahead. I also wish
to echo your remarks regarding your predecessor,
Ambassador Abarry, and his excellent presidency of
the Council for the month of December. I would like
to welcome our new colleagues and congratulate those
who are outgoing.
I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her contribution and her informative
briefing today, as always.
The ninety-ninth report of the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2021/1103) shows us once
again that, despite the best efforts of the OPCW’s
Technical Secretariat, there has been no progress on
the Syrian file. That is a matter of serious concern.
As the report makes clear, the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team to assess the completeness and
accuracy of Syria’s declarations is essential. That work
has been central to the 17 amendments and numerous
supplements made to the declaration.

S/PV. 8943

Those are substantial issues relating to the
undeclared research, production and weaponization
of unknown quantities of chemical weapons and
significant quantities of chemical warfare agents or
precursors and chemical munitions. They go to the
very heart of the serious concerns that Syria continues
to retain a chemical weapons capacity. That is what
makes the seven-month delay to the twenty-fifth round
of consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian authorities such a serious matter.
Syrian efforts to interfere in the selection of experts
by the OPCW, thereby preventing their deployment,
are unacceptable.
The Council must maintain a strong and clear
message upholding the requirements it set out in
resolution 2118 (2013). Syria must cooperate fully with
the OPCW, accept personnel designated by the OPCW
in the course of their work and provide them with
immediate and unfettered access. Syria cannot pick
and choose which of its legal obligations it is willing
to accept.
Equally, the OPCW must have our full backing in
its professional and impartial work to resolve the many
outstanding issues. We welcome the eighth round of
inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of
the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre and
await the results. We note that Syria is yet to adequately
explain the Schedule 2 chemical found at the Barzah
site in November 2018.
We also welcome the ongoing work of the FactFinding Mission and its inspections in December of four
sites connected with possible chemical weapons use in
2017. We await the results of that work in due course.
The Investigation and Identification Team’s work will
also continue in 2022.
It is only through Syria’s serious and meaningful
cooperation with the OPCW that we can be assured
that its entire stocks of chemical weapons are declared
and verifiably destroyed, in line with its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013).
We support, therefore, the proposed bilateral
meeting between Director-General Arias and Minister
Mekdad. It is important that this be a frank and
meaningful discussion aimed at resolving the impasse
and ensuring that real progress can be made on all
outstanding issues. We hope to see this take place as
soon as possible.

21-4132811/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

Ireland will continue to support all efforts by the
OPCW and the Security Council to resolve outstanding
issues on this file.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by congratulating you, Madam,
on your assumption of the presidency and to assure
you of France’s full support. I wish also to welcome
the presence among us of five new non-permanent
members and to very warmly say to them that France
will support them in the next two years. Finally, I would
like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Why are we meeting today? The reason is simple:
because on 30 August 2016, the Syrian regime used
chemical weapons against its own people, causing
more than 1,000 victims — women, children and older
persons — in Ghouta, on the outskirts of Damascus;
and because the Security Council subsequently
unanimously adopted resolution 2118 (2013) requiring
the full and verifiable disarmament of the Syrian
chemical-weapons stockpile. There was no denial of
the facts at the time, hence the unanimous adoption.
Indeed, for more than eight years, it has been impossible
for the Council and for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), as well as
the other relevant mechanisms, to achieve the desired
goal. Not only is the Syrian regime not cooperating;
since 2013 it has resorted to chemical weapons once
again. Unfortunately, this is not a fairy tale; these are
simply the facts — facts that should be termed crimes
against humanity.
Today, in January 2022, the Syrian regime continues
to refuse to cooperate. It is not issuing the necessary
visas. It continues to seek to interfere in the selection
of inspectors. The Declaration Assessment Team has
still not been able to be deployed. There is a very clear
determination to obstruct the proceedings. Clearly
the regime does not want light to be shed on its initial
declaration. That is unacceptable. Syria has obligations
to cooperate set out in the Chemical Weapons Convention
and in resolution 2118 (2013) — which, I reiterate, was
unanimously adopted by the Council — that it must
respect. If Syria wants to have its rights and privileges
restored within the OPCW, it must cooperate.
Once again, I would like to pay tribute to the
outstanding work of the Technical Secretariat of the
OPCW in the face of the regime’s obstructionism and
slanderous statements. The Technical Secretariat has
demonstrating tenacity and great professionalism. The
12/19

22/12/2021

disinformation campaigns against it must stop. They
are shameful.
We all are aware of the Syrian regime’s culpability
and the appalling acts for which it is responsible. That
is why France is firmly committed to fighting impunity.
Victims are now turning to national courts. I say this
in dead earnest: there will be no clemency for those
criminals. That is the message that we are sending along
with our partners within the international partnership
against impunity for the use of chemical weapons.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like at the outset to congratulate
you, Madam, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. You and your team can count on the
support of the delegation of Mexico. I wish to take this
opportunity also to congratulate Ambassador Abarry
and his team for their work at the helm of the Security
Council in December.
I would also like to welcome the delegations of
Albania, Brazil, the United Arab Emirates, Ghana
and Gabon, with which whom we hope to work very
closely throughout this year. I wish also to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Mexico takes note of the monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2021/1103) and
of the inspections that took place in December at
the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific
Studies and Research Centre. We await the outcome
of those inspections and welcome the appointment of
representatives of Syria and the OPCW to convene a
meeting between the Director-General of the OPCW
and the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs.
On the other hand, we regret the bureaucratic
obstacles that continue to affect the work of the OPCW,
as was the case with the failure to issue visas for all
members of the Declaration Assessment Team.
Mexico once again calls on Syria to constructively
cooperate with the OPCW to clear up the 20 pending
questions pertaining to its initial declaration.
We note with concern that the clarifications on the
chemical agents produced in an installation that was
not declared previously remain inconclusive. We are
also concerned about the explanation concerning the
unauthorized transfer of chlorine cylinders destroyed
in an attack that were related to the incident in Douma,
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

as well as the presence of traces of chemical substances
at the Barzah site.
We welcome the six-month extension of the
Tripartite Agreement between the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and Syria. We
would urge that such extensions cover longer periods so
that United Nations agencies can plan their work with
greater predictability.
Mexico reiterates its full trust in and support for
the OPCW and its investigative work. We reaffirm our
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by any
actor and under any circumstances.
Lastly, we would urge States to cooperate with the
work of the OPCW and to promote the implementation
of the relevant resolutions of the Council in order to put
an end to the conflict.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I should like
to congratulate you, Madam, on your presidency of the
Council and on the way in which you have been leading
our work. I assure you of my delegation’s support
throughout your presidency. I thank you, as well as
those colleagues who already spoke, for the warm
words of welcome to my country and to the other new
members of the Security Council. I also welcome among
us the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, and I thank her for her briefing.
The consideration of the ninety-ninth monthly
report of the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see
S/2021/1103), submitted pursuant to resolution 2118
(2013), provides a timely opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to the fight against chemical weapons
and our commitment to disarmament. My country is
clear on the fact that the use of chemical weapons,
regardless of the context, represents a serious threat to
international peace and security.
We take note of the declarations made by the
Syrian Arab Republic on the destruction of 27
chemical-weapons production facilities and of the
chemical weapons declared by the country that were
removed from its territory in 2014.
Nonetheless, we remain concerned that, eight years
after the establishment of the Fact-Finding Mission,
only a small fraction of the numerous pending issues
related to Syria’s initial declaration have been resolved.
It is also worrying to see the difficulties encountered
by the experts to gain access on the ground, not only

S/PV. 8943

because of the coronavirus disease pandemic, but also
the difficulties related to the issuance of entry visas by
the Syrian authorities.
We believe that it is crucial to support the OPCW’s
efforts and to encourage continued cooperation
between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the
Syrian National Authority in order to find solutions to
the outstanding issues.
Finally, we welcome the Tripartite Agreement
signed between the OPCW, the United Nations Office
for Project Services and the Syrian Government,
allowing the extension for a period of six more months
of a more constructive collaboration, we hope, and we
reiterate our support for the OPCW.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): Madam President, at the outset I sincerely
congratulate you on Norway’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month
of January. I wish you every success in managing
the business of the Council. I also thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing.
Since this is the first time that I speak as a member
of the Security Council, I am pleased to emphasize
that the United Arab Emirates will spare no effort
during its membership to shoulder its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
hoping that together we can meet the aspirations of
all the peoples of the world. I would also like to take
this opportunity to congratulate the Member States
that joined the Council. I wish every success to all
of us during the upcoming period. I would like as
well to thank all members of the Council for their
welcoming statements.
Regarding our topic today on the chemical dossier
in the Syrian Arab Republic, I would like to focus on
the following aspects.
First, it is important to stress that our fundamental
responsibility and ultimate goal is to protect humankind
from the horrible effects caused by the use of chemical
weapons. We recall that this responsibility is at the core
of the Chemical Weapons Convention, for the sake of
all humankind and with a view to completely excluding
the possibility of the use of chemical weapons. In this
regard, we stress the principled position of the United
Arab Emirates, which rejects and clearly condemns
the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances,

21-4132813/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

by anyone and anywhere, as it constitutes a flagrant
violation of the provisions of the Convention and
international law. It also constitutes a serious threat to
international peace and security.
Secondly, making tangible progress in this dossier
requires, in principle, non-politicization of this issue and
a willingness to engage in constructive dialogue. From
that standpoint, the United Arab Emirates stresses the
importance of communication and dialogue between
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and Syria in order to discuss and
identify ways to move forward on this dossier. In that
context, my country calls on the relevant parties to
work together on the basis of the principles establishing
the technical nature of the OPCW, including consensus
and non-politicization, and to facilitate the visit of
the Declaration Assessment Team of the organization
to Syria.
Thirdly, chemical weapons must be completely
eliminated, and no one can have access to them or use
them, inside or outside Syria. The risk of such weapons
falling into the wrong hands, such as the terrorist Da’esh
organization or other criminal groups, is extremely
worrying and could have grave repercussions on the
stability and security of Syria and the world at large.
Accordingly, we stress the need to continue working
with States parties and the OPCW to eliminate that
threat completely. We also stress the importance of
continuing to combat the terrorist Da’esh organization
and of further intensifying efforts to prevent it from
rebuilding its ranks and combat capabilities and
acquiring and using chemical weapons.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
the importance of making progress on the chemical
dossier, in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013), and
on all the issues related to resolving the Syrian crisis.
Dame Barbara Woodward: (United Kingdom): I
join others in welcoming you, Madam President, to the
presidency and assuring you of our full support. I would
also like to extend a warm welcome to our colleagues
from Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the United
Arab Emirates. We look forward to working with them.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu for her briefing and the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) for his monthly report (see
S/2021/1103). I agree that, as we enter a new year,
14/19

22/12/2021

this meeting is an opportunity to review the facts and
progress on this long-running agenda item.
Prior to the start of the conflict in 2011, Syria
had an extensive chemical-weapons programme. In
2013, following several chemical-weapons attacks,
including the large-scale attack in Ghouta in August
of that year, the Security Council adopted resolution
2118 (2013), requiring Syria to cooperate fully with
the OPCW on the expeditious destruction of its
chemical-weapons programme.
Yet, despite international cooperation on the
destruction of chemical-weapons stocks declared
by Syria in 2013, it subsequently became clear that
Syria had retained a chemical-weapons capability,
in contravention of resolution 2118 (2013) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Further chemical weapons attacks took place.
And thorough OPCW and joint United Nations-OPCW
expert investigations have confirmed that the Syrian
regime used chemical weapons, including chlorine and
sarin, on at least eight occasions through the conflict.
Those regime attacks have killed and injured hundreds
of innocent people. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant terrorist group was found to have used them on
three occasions.
Now over eight years since Syria joined the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the OPCW DirectorGeneral’s monthly reports, of which there are now
almost 100, confirm there remain 20 unresolved
issues with Syria’s initial declaration. Those are not
minor or technical issues but include the undeclared
production and weaponization of toxic chemicals and
the unknown whereabouts of significant quantities of
chemical-warfare agents and munitions.
Over the past 12 months, Syria’s failure to meet its
obligations has continued. Syria has repeatedly refused
to issue visas for OPCW personnel, made no serious
effort to meet Technical Secretariat experts and shown
a total disregard for decisions of the OPCW Executive
Council and the Conference of the States Parties.
Over the past eight years, accountability and
effective Council action to uphold resolution 2118
(2013) has been blocked by the use and threat of use of
the veto and by a concerted disinformation campaign
to malign and undermine the OPCW and its findings.
In 2022, therefore, let us put aside narrow political
motivations and unite behind the full implementation
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8943

of resolution 2118 (2013). That means ensuring
the complete and verified destruction of Syria’s
chemical-weapons programme and holding accountable
those who have used such weapons. Only then will we
be able to stop the proliferation of chemical weapons
and send a message that their use is unacceptable.

(2013) and thereby deny the OPCW’s noble mission
as guardian of the Convention whose goal is a world
without chemical weapons. The swift conclusion of
investigations into the use of chemical weapons in
Syria will allow the Council to more effectively support
the Syrian people in their quest for a peaceful future.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): Madam
President, as I take the floor for the first time in the
Security Council, I would like to congratulate you
for assuming the presidency of the Council during
the month of January and assure you of our full
support in the implementation of a rich and ambitious
work programme.

Albania reiterates the strong condemnation of
the use of chemical weapons by any actor under any
circumstances, considering it a serious violation of
international law and demands that all those who use
or have used chemical weapons be identified and held
accountable. To this end, the Security Council must
maintain its strong and clear message of respect for
the international ban on chemical weapons and ensure
that these weapons are never used again, not in Syria
or elsewhere. This is our way of assuming moral
responsibility for the victims of chemical warfare.

I thank all my colleagues for their warm messages
of welcome to my country and the other new members of
the Council. I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu
for the insights she provided.
We have just heard that the observation made in
this Chamber by several Council members less than
a month ago (see S/PV.8921) remains the same: the
Syrian authorities do not wish to cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013) on the complete and verifiable elimination of
Syria’s chemical weapons programme. We deplore
this attitude.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains of the
view that at this stage, due to identified shortcomings
and inconsistencies as well as unresolved discrepancies,
the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic
cannot be considered accurate and complete, in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
In April 2021, the Conference of States Parties to
the Chemical Weapons Convention decided to suspend
Syria. As a member of the OPCW Executive Council
since November 2021, Albania can only agree to consent
to the restoration of Syria’s rights and privileges once
the OPCW Director-General reports that Syria has
complied with all requests. We have just heard again
today that this is not at all the case.
In this regard, we reiterate the importance
and urgency of Syria fully cooperating with the
Technical Secretariat. Syria must respond in a clear
and unambiguous manner and can neither choose the
inspectors nor which obligations it must fulfil. Any
attempt to politicize the OPCW’s work would only
serve to delay Syria’s implementation of resolution 2118

Finally, Albania will continue to support the Syrian
people in the pursuit of their future in peace and justice
and hopes that the voice of the Syrians will be heard.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.
I would like to thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
briefing on the progress towards the full elimination of
the Syrian chemical weapons programme.
The international prohibition against the use of
chemical weapons must remain a top priority for the
Security Council. We reiterate our strong condemnation
of any use of chemical weapons at any time, by anyone.
As we usher in a new year, let us be clear in saying that
we owe it to the victims to ensure that there can be no
impunity for chemical-weapons attacks.
Moving to the recent report by the Director-General,
we are encouraged by two positive developments that
we would like to highlight. First, we welcome the
deployment of the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) between 28 November and 10 December
2021. The mission’s efforts to collect information and
conduct interviews in relation to several incidents that
took place in 2017 in the Hama governorate are crucial
for ensuring accountability. Similarly, we are pleased
to note that, also this past December, the Technical
Secretariat conducted the eighth round of inspections
of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific
Studies and Research Centre .

21-4132815/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

After many months without inspections or missions
to collect information, we hope this recent engagement
will foster a new spirit of progress on this dossier for
2022. We look forward to their reports to the Council.
Yet, in order to fully implement resolution 2118 (2013),
there remain numerous roadblocks to overcome and
issues that require immediate attention.
These include the persistent delays in the issuance
of visas to the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT),
which must be addressed. I would like to underline
Syria’s obligation to cooperate fully with the OPCW.
Resolution 2118 (2013) explicitly mentions Syria’s
obligation to accept personnel designated by the
OPCW and to provide these personnel with immediate
and unfettered access and the right to inspect any and
all sites.
That brings me to my next point. The OPCW has
requested further information about a reported attack
on a former chemical-weapons production facility
that apparently contained equipment of relevance to
an ongoing OPCW investigation. The OPCW has also
requested a declaration of all undeclared types and
quantities of nerve agents produced and/or weaponized
at a certain former chemical-weapons production
facility. It is vital that Syria comply with these requests.
Similarly, 20 outstanding issues from Syria’s initial
declaration remain unresolved. We urge Syria to provide
sufficient technical information and explanations to
close these outstanding issues.
Finally, it is critical that Syria completes the
necessary measures to lift the suspension of its
rights and privileges as a State Party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Let me conclude by underlining that cooperation is
essential for settling all unresolved issues and finally
achieving this eight-year-long effort to ensure the full
elimination of the Syrian chemical-weapons programme.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I wish again to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Madam President, at the outset I congratulate
16/19

22/12/2021

you on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month. Rest assured, Madam, that we stand ready
to work with you and provide you with updates on the
latest developments in the situation in Syria. I also
congratulate the members who joined the Council at the
beginning of this year.
The participation today of the five new members
for the first time in the Council meeting on the Syrian
chemical dossier prompts us to recall some of the main
elements of the issue.
First, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
condemns the use of chemical weapons anywhere,
anytime, by anyone and under any circumstances.
We stress that, despite the serious challenges faced
by the Syrian Arab Army and its allies as a result of
the crimes committed by terrorist organizations and
their sponsors, we have never used any type of these
prohibited weapons or any toxic chemicals.
Secondly, the Syrian State decided in 2013
to join the Chemical Weapons Convention. We
have cooperated with the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) to eliminate our stocks of chemical weapons
and production facilities. We completed that process in
record time and in unprecedented manner in mid-2014,
as confirmed by the reports of the relevant organization.
Thirdly, while the Syrian Government has
cooperated with the OPCW and fulfilled its obligations
under the Convention, some Western countries have
fabricated lies and waged a disinformation campaign
while applying pressure in order to adopt resolutions
and establish illegal mechanisms, such as the
Investigation and Identification Team, which is a clear
politicization and distortion of the technical work of
the OPCW and another example of the hostile policies
adopted against Syria by the same Western countries.
As a consequence of those practices, the reports of
the Technical Secretariat and its teams have become
part and parcel of the hostile campaign against Syria,
thereby undermining the work of the organization, the
credibility of its reports and the professionalism of
its teams.
Fourthly, on 10 December 2021, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria sent a letter to
the OPCW Director-General, explaining the position of
the Syrian Government with regard to the reports of the
Technical Secretariat and the inaccurate information
contained therein, which have become the foundation
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

and the pretext of the baseless accusations made within
the OPCW decision-making bodies against Syria. The
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs noted
the letter that I sent her explaining our concerns. In his
letter, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
emphasized that, despite our disappointment with the
OPCW’s mistaken and unbalanced approach, Syria
would continue to cooperate constructively with the
Technical Secretariat and its teams.
With regard to the latest developments pertaining
to the cooperation between Syria and the OPCW since
the previous discussion in the Council (see S/PV.8921),
the focal points on the two sides are continuing with
preparations for the meeting between the Foreign
Minister and the OPCW Director-General to agree
on an agenda to discuss all issues between the two
sides comprehensively and objectively. The Tripartite
Agreement has been extended for six months, to 30 June.
Syria presented its ninety-seventh monthly report on
16 December 2021. The Syrian Government facilitated
the eighth round of inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific Studies and Research
Centre during the period from 10 to 17 December 2021.
The Syrian Government also facilitated the visit of the
Fact-Finding Mission before the end of 2021 to complete
the investigations into the incidents that occurred in
Hama governorate in 2017. The investigations have yet
to be completed, although it has been five years since
terrorist organizations used chemical weapons there.
That raises the following questions.
Why are the investigations on the use of chemical
weapons by terrorist groups, such as the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front, lagging?
Why would some cover up those incidents, although
they were confirmed in United Nations reports? The
pre-conclusion contained in the statement of the
United States of America on those investigations, even
before any report about them has been issued, clearly
demonstrates the politicization of the issue and the
misinformation surrounding this dossier. It exposes
those who are trying to jump to conclusions and cast
false accusations.
Concerning the visit by the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) to hold the twenty-fifth round
of consultations, my delegation recalls that the Syrian
Government welcomed the announcement of the visit
by the DAT, and we have asked for one of its members
to be replaced. We also welcomed the proposal to hold
the meeting at The Hague. However, the meeting did

S/PV. 8943

not take place, as the Technical Secretariat did not
fund it. I therefore find it strange that my colleague
the representative of the United States said that Syria
refused to attend the meeting.
My delegation reiterates that the DAT was
established to assist the Syrian Government. It is not
an investigative team. It does not have the mandate
to evaluate any information. Syria did not impede
any of the 24 rounds of consultations held over eight
years. My delegation considers that the information
contained in the latest report of the Director-General
(see S/2021/1103) that corrects the information
contained in the previous report (see S/2021/989)
concerning the issuance of visas to members of the
DAT, and the clarification that the issue is related to
only one member and not the entire team, demonstrates
that the information provided by Syria is accurate and
credible. The two teams of the Technical Secretariat
to which I referred to earlier visited Syria within less
than one month. That is a conclusive evidence about the
significant cooperation between Syria and the OPCW.
It also undoubtedly refutes the accusations that Syria
is impeding the work of the Technical Secretariat,
especially by refusing to issue visas to its members.
With regard to references about two chlorine
cylinders related to the alleged Douma incident, my
country rejects all attempts to divert attention from
the Israeli aggression on one of the declared facilities
that led to the destruction of the two cylinders, which
provided physical evidence. Syria stresses that Israel’s
claim of responsibility for the attack, which was
confirmed by its Minister for Intelligence and multiple
media reports, must condemn Israel and subject it to
accountability, not only for that attack but for all other
attacks on Syria’s sovereignty, including the most
recent attack, on the commercial port of Latakia a few
days ago, and for its occupation of the Syrian Golan and
its continued illegal settlement activities.
In conclusion, Syria reiterates its rejection of
all attempts to question the Syrian initial declaration
or its cooperation with the OPCW and its Technical
Secretariat. We condemn all baseless accusations
based on erroneous information and attempts to
jump to conclusions based on misinterpretation and
probabilities in the absence of physical evidence. Syria
has reiterated that some of the technical issues that
have been discussed by the Syrian National Authority
and the Technical Secretariat are subject to multiple

21-4132817/19

S/PV.8943

The situation in the Middle East

22/12/2021

scientific interpretations. They must be discussed and
examined. They cannot be settled hastily or selectively.

credibility. Moreover, they further deepen the trust and
confidence deficit in the Security Council.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

We welcome the submission by Syria of its ninetyseventh monthly report on its activities related to the
destruction of chemical weapons and their production
facilities. We also note the recent finalization of a sixmonth extension of the Tripartite Agreement between
the United Nations Office for Project Services, the
OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic.

Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by congratulating you, Madam President,
for presiding over the Security Council this month. We
wish every success to the new members of the Council.
We reiterate our long-standing and principled
position in strongly condemning the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstances. The only absolute guarantee that
chemical weapons will never be used again is their
total destruction and elimination worldwide, as well as
taking all the necessary measures to ensure that such
weapons will not be produced and used in the future.
That indeed is the prime objective of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, which can be realized only through
its full, balanced, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation, as well as its universality. It is a source
of serious concern that, as a result of non-compliance
by the United States — as the only remaining possessor
State party — with its obligations concerning the final
extended deadline for the destruction of chemical
weapons, that objective has yet to materialize. Another
obstacle in that regard is the lack of the Convention’s
universality. In order achieve that noble objective, the
Israeli regime must be compelled to join the Convention
without any precondition or further delay.
We once again warn about the serious impacts of the
politicization of the implementation of the Convention
on its authority and credibility, and therefore call for
the depoliticization of the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
State Parties must avoid exploiting the organization to
further politically motivated national objectives.
In that context, while significant efforts have
been made by the Syrian Government to implement
its obligations under the Convention — including the
complete destruction, in the least possible time and
under severe conditions, of all its 27 chemical-weapon
production facilities, as verified by the OPCW — the
holding of monthly Council meetings to consider the
Syrian file has no justification. Instead of contributing
to the objectives of the Convention, such meetings
undermine the Convention’s authority and the OPCW’s
18/19

The Islamic Republic of Iran once again calls for
ensuring the independent, impartial and professional
work of the OPCW.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Keçeli (Turkey): At the outset, we wish to
congratulate you, Madam, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council. We also commend the new
members of the Council and wish them success.
We thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
There is one clear takeaway from the ninety-ninth
monthly report (see S/2021/1103) of the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), namely, that the Al-Assad
regime continues to violate its obligations. The OPCW
cannot confirm that the chemical weapons declaration
presented by the Syrian regime is accurate and complete.
Despite repeated calls, the Al-Assad regime fails to
provide information that would help to uncover the true
nature and scope of its chemical weapons programme.
The declaration is full of inconsistencies, identified
gaps and discrepancies. Indeed, there are at least 20
outstanding issues in the regime’s declaration.
In that context, the discovery of a chemical-weapon
production facility in Syria further deepens our
concern. The regime’s refusal to provide information on
that site is a flagrant violation of its obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013). Moreover, the Al-Assad regime must still
account for the unauthorized movement of two chlorine
cylinders related to the Douma chemical attack.
The non-issuance of visas for Technical Secretariat
officials is yet another concrete example of the
regime’s non-compliance. That pattern of behaviour
is unacceptable and requires a strong message from
the Council. Therefore, we once again call on the
21-41328

22/12/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Security Council to act in unity to achieve the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).
Turkey strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances. Throughout the Syrian conflict,
the Al-Assad regime has repeatedly used chemical
weapons against its own people. The audacity of the
Al-Assad regime demonstrates the grave consequences
of impunity, yet its track record continues to grow to
this day.
We once again remind those who embolden the
Al-Assad regime of their responsibility under the

S/PV. 8943

Charter of the United Nations. We cannot turn our
backs on the innocent civilians in Syria, who have
suffered unimaginable horrors, whose lungs have been
ravaged by chemical weapons and whose children
deserve a future free from fear. Turkey will continue to
support efforts to end impunity, as that is an essential
prerequisite for justice and lasting peace in Syria.
We repeat our support for the objective, impartial
and professional investigations conducted by the OPCW
Technical Secretariat.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

21-4132819/19
