II.

36/4.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Observer status for the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the African. Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States for co-operation between the United Nations
and that organization,
I. Decides to invite the African, Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
action to implement the present resolution.
35th plenary meeting
15 October /98/

36/5.

The situation in Kampuchea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/22 of 14 November 1979 and
35/6 of 22 October 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/6, 8
Welcoming the convening of the International Conference
on Kampuchea, held at United Nations Headquarters from
I 3 to 17 July 198 I, as a step forward towards a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean problem,
Noting the joint statement issued in Singapore on 4 September 1981 by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Mr. Son Sann
and Mr. Khieu Samphan concerning their agreement, in
principle, to form a coalition, 9
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Kampuchea and resolution 1 (I) adopted by the Conference on 17 July 1981.
as contained in the report of the Conference, 10
Deploring that foreign armed intervention continues and
that foreign forces have not been withdrawn from Kampuchea, thus causing continuing hostilities in that country
and seriously threatening international peace and security.
Greatly concerned that the continuing deployment of foreign forces in Kampuchea near the Thai-Kampuchean border has heightened tension in the region,
Gravely disturbed that the continued fighting and instability in Kampuchea have forced more Kampucheans to flee
to the Thai-Kampuchean border in search of food and safety,
Recognizing that the assistance extended by the international community has continued to reduce the widespread
food shortages and health problems of the Kampuchean
people,
Emphasizing that it is the inalienable right of the Kampuchean people who have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries to return safely to their homeland.
Emphasizing further that no effective solution to the humanitarian problems can be achieved without a just and
lasting political settlement of the Kampuchean conflict,
Convinced that, to bring about durable peace in SouthEast Asia, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive
political solution to the Kampuchean problem which will
provide for the withdrawal of all foreign forces and ensure
respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and neutral and non-aligned status of Kampuchea,
as well as the right of the Kampuchean people to selfdetermination free from outside interference,
N36/583.
A/36/498-S/14687, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the Security Council, Thirtv-sixth Year. Supplement for Julv, August
and September I 98 I.
·
0
'
A/CONF.109/5 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.81.1 20),
annexes I and II.
8
9

13

Com·incedfurther that, after the comprehensive political
settlement of the Kampuchean question through peaceful
means, the countries of the South-East Asian region can
pursue efforts to establish a zone of peace. freedom and
neutrality in South-East Asia so as to lessen international
tensions and to achieve lasting peace in the region,
Reaffirming the need for all States to adhere strictly to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
call for respect for the national independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, non-intervention and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, nonrecourse to the threat or use of force, and peaceful settlement
of disputes,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 34/22 and 35/6 and calls for
their full implementation:
2. Reiterates its conviction that the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from Kampuchea, the restoration and preservation of its independence. sovereignty and territorial integrity, the right of the Kampuchean people to determine
their own destiny and the commitment by all States to noninterference and non-intervention in the internal affairs of
Kampuchea are the principal components of any just and
lasting resolution to the Kampuchean problem:
.1. Approves the report of the International Conference
on Kampuchea and adopts:
(a) The Declaration on Kampuchea, which includes
four elements of negotiations for a comprehensive political
settlement of the Kampuchean problem;
(b) Resolution 1 (I) in which the Conference, inter alia,
established the Ad Hoe Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea:
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with. to
assist and to provide the Conference and the Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities to carry out their
functions;
5. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to convene during
regular sessions of the General Assembly in order to carry
out its tasks:
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to undertake
a preliminary study of the possible future role of the United
Nations, taking into account the mandate of the Ad Hoe
Com_mittee _a!1d the elements of negotiations for a comprehensive poht1cal settlement as set out in paragraph 10 of the
Declaration on Kampuchea:
7. _Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for takmg appropriate steps in convening the Conference:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the situation closely and to exercise his good offices in order to
contribute to a comprehensive political settlement;
_9. Deci~es to reconvene the Conference at an appropnate time m accordance with Conference resolution I (I):
10. Urges all States of South-East Asia and others concerned to attend future sessions of the Conference:
11. Requests the Conference to report to the General
Assembly on its future sessions:
12. Expresses its deep appreciation to donor countries,
the United Nations and its agencies and other national and
international humanitarian organizations which have rendered relief assistance to the Kampuchean people, and appeals to them to continue to assist Kampucheans who are
still in need, especially those along the Thai-Kampuchean
border and in the holding centres in Thailand:
13. Deeply appreciates the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in co-ordinating humanitarian relief assistance and
in monitoring its distribution, and requests him to continue
such efforts as are necessary to deal with the situation:
14. Urges the countries of South-East Asia, once a comprehensive political solution to the Kampuchean conflict is

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

14

achieved, to exert renewed efforts to establish a zone of
peace, freedom and neutrality in South-East Asia;
15. Expresses the hope that, following a comprehensive
political solution, an intergovernmental committee will be
established to consider a programme of assistance to Kampuchea for the reconstruction of its economy and for the
economic and social development of all States of the region;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the implementation of the present resolution;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled · 'The situation in
Kampuchea''.
40th plenary meeting
21 October I 98 I

'36/6. Draft World Charter for Nature
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the draft World Charter for Nature, 11
Recalling its resolution 35/7 of 30 October 1980,
Aware of the crucial importance attached by the international community to the promotion and development of
co-operation aimed at protecting and safeguarding the balance and quality of nature,
Also aware that life on earth is part of nature and depends
on the uninterrupted functioning of natural systems,
Noting resolution CM/Res.852 (XXXVII) adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirty-seventh ordinary session, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 June 1981 , 12
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,
which contains a revised version of the draft World Charter
for Nature prepared on the basis of views and observations
communicated by Member States in accordance with General Assembly resolution 35/7;
2. Invites Member States which have not yet done so
to communicate their views and observations to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the United Nations Environment Programme and the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, to complete if necessary, on the basis of observations
received from Member States, the revision of the draft
World Charter for Nature and to submit a supplementary
report ,o the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to transmit to Member
States the text of the report of the Ad Hoe Group of Experts
on the Draft World Charter for Nature, 1~ containing the
revised version of the draft Charter, as well as any further
observations by States, with a view to appropriate consideration at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly;
_5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled ''Consideration and
adoption of the revised draft World Charter for Nature:
report of the Secretary-General" .
41st plenary meeting
27 October /98/
'36/7. Historical responsibility of States for the preservation of nature for present and future
generations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/8 of 30 October 19!<0.
11

12
13

N36/539.
See N36/534, annex I.
N36/539, annex I.

Noting that the continuation and intensification of the
arms race are adversely affecting the human environment
and damaging the vegetable and animal world,
Attaching great importance to the development of planned
and constructive international co-operation in solving the
problems of preserving nature.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
historical responsibility of States for the preservation of
nature for present and future generations, 14
I. Requests the Secretary-General, with the co-operation of the United Nations Environment Programme and on
the basis of the studies now in progress and the views expressed by States on this subject, to complete the preparation
of a report containing recommendations for the adoption by
States of specific ohligations and measures relating to the
protection of nature from the pernicious effects of the arms
race, and to the limitation and prohibition of the types of
military activity which present the greatest danger for nature;
2. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit the
report referred to in paragraph I above to the General Assembly at its second special session devoted to disarmament.
41st plenary meeting
27 October /98/

36/23.

Co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the state of co-operation between the United Nations and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, 1'
Recalling its resolutions 3369 (XXX) of IO October 1975
and 35/36 of I 4 November 1980.
Noting with satisfaction the development of co-operation
hetween the United Nations and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Noting further the establishment of relations of cooperation hetween the specialized agencies and other bodies
of the United Nations system and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference.
Taking into account the desire of both organizations to
contribute to the search for solutions to global problems.
such as questions relating to international peace and security, disarmament. self-determination. decolonization. fundamental human rights and the establishment of a new
international economic order.
Noting the participation of the Secretary-General in the
work of the Third Islamic Summit Conference of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, held at Mecca-Taif
from 25 to 28 January 1981, 16
Noting the effective participation of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference in the work of the United Nations.
Convinced of the need to strengthen the co-operation hetween the United Nations. the specialized agencies and other
bodies of the United Nations system and the Organization
of the Islamic Conference,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on the state of co-operation between the
United Nations and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference;
2. Urges the two organizations to intensify co-operation
in their common search for solutions to global problems.
such as questions relating to international peace and security. disarmament. self-determination. decolonization. fun14
A/36/532 and Con
"A/36/384.
"' See An61138.
