TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 13 JUNE 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
.........................,....

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia,
Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria,
Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United
Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237
and Add.1)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1476)

S/PV. 1476

c
,I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-SIXTH

Held in New York on Friday,

MEETING

13 June 1969, at 3.30 p.m.

President: Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay),

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.

Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add.11

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l4761

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Dahomey,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia (S/9237 and Add.1)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and

Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/B954 and
S/9252)

4. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Council will now continue its discussion of the item before it,
5. Before giving the floor to the first speaker on my list, I
would announce that the Permanent Representative of
Cyprus has sent me a note informing me that he wishesto
be a co-sponsor of the letter, in document S/9237, from the
fifty-nine Afro-Asian countries requesting an urgent meeting of the Security Council.
6. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): The
French delegation fully understands the emotion which the
latest events in Rhodesia have aroused in the world and
especially in the countries whose delegations have taken the
initiative of calling for a meeting of the Council.

S/9252).
Adoption of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Before
submitting to the Council the agenda for this afternoon’s
meeting, I wish to apologize to all members for the long
delay in starting it. As you know, this has been caused by
the efforts made to reach agreement. I regret to say that, so
far, these efforts have been’unsuccessful.

7. France has never recognized the illegal Salisbury regime.
Consequently, it cannot condone any submission by a rebel
organization to referendum of a draft constitution whose
unjustifiable nature is made all the more obvious by the
fact that it sanctifies the maintenance of arbitrary and
discriminatory domination of a majority by a minority. It is
by reason of the principle of equality so dear to France that
it opposes the action in question. France has rigorously
applied the economic sanctions pronounced against Rhodesia, To be sure, those sanctions, limited at first but
general later, are of comparatively recent origin and some
may argue that they have yet to produce their full effect.
On the other hand, it must be recognized that the
difficulties they have brought to the economy of the rebel
rdgime scarcely seem to have shaken it and in any event it is

2. Document S/Agenda/1476, which has been circulated
to the Council members, contains the provisional agenda of
this meeting.
3. If there are no objections, I will consider the agenda
adopted.
The agenda was adopted.
1

13. However,it is disappointingfor meto have to saythat /
outsidethesehallsof the United Nations, in the worldpress
and public-information media, in capital cities atndthe I
chancelleriesof the world, one hardly notices any senseof1
real urgency about the danger to civilization whichthis
problemposes.

not preparing to yield, This is shown by the very holding of
the referendum scheduled for 20 June, and the complete
break it seems to imply with the administering Power.
8. My delegation has always regarded it as essentially the
latter’s responsibility to put an end to a rebellion which
took place on a territory under its authority. From the very
beginning it displayed its readiness to furnish the United
Kingdom with any aid or assistance it might need towards
that end. On the other hand, it has on various occasions
expressed doubts as to the results of any intervention by
our Organization in what, in its view, continues to be a
matter within the jurisdiction of a Member State. Similarly,
it has always believed that care should be taken not to grant
an illegal r&me the international standing it claims.

14. As a representativefrom Asia-a continent whichhas
become the most embattled portion of the world since:
1945-I would hardly feel comfortable wereI to minimize[
the dangersof wars such as those in Viet-Nam andthe
Middle East;but it appearsto me, from a general,long-term
view, that the danger posed to posterity and human
civilization by this so-calledAfrican questionis greater
in
magnitude than that posed by any other singlequestioni
with which we live today. For, involved in this question
is
not a matter of narrow political ideologies,nor oneof i
geographical frontiers, but a much more fundamentalj
matter, one on which the whole edifice of human civiliza.
tion is erectedand one without which a manis no longer
a
man. It is, to quote Senator Kennedy, the value of the
humanbeing: “God’s gift to life itself ‘.

9. Despite these considerations, France did not wish to
dissociate itself from the measures taken by the Council
against Rhodesia and, on 29 May 1968, participated in the
vote on resolution 253 (1968). It thereby wished to
demonstrate its awareness of the extent of the emotion
being aroused, particularly in Africa, by the prolongation of
the Rhodesian crisis,

15. It is a matter of common knowledgethat Southern
Rhodesia,South Africa and Portugal haveformed a triangle
of unholy allianceand that the purposeof that allianceisto
perpetuate colonialism, racism and discriminationin the
whole of southern Africa. The lowest common denomi.
nator of the unholy alliancelies in the hatred and fear,the
distrust and suspicionfelt by one human being towards
another.

10. That is why, without departing from the position of
principle it has always taken on the question of United
Nations competence, France is prepared to join in a
unanimous condemnation of the draft constitution drawn
up by the illegal Salisbury @me. It is also ready to
participate in any appeal recommendingStates not to
recognize in any way the authoritiesof that r&me. Lastly,
it will be prepared to considerany realistic and effective
proposalto remedy the presentsituation.

16. The policies and methods of apartheid, as preached
and practised in Southern Rhodesia and its ally South1
Africa are, in reality, an improvementon thosethat wereso
11. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): This morning we heard with
fashionableat one time in Nazi Germany. Thosein power,
much interest the statementsmadeby the ForeignMinister
of
of Zambia, the Secretary-Generalof the Ministry of Foreign in those countriesare feeding themselveson the fee’lings
fear
and
hatred
and
the
baser
animal
instincts
osf
their
Affairs of; Algeria and other representatives.Thosewere
very comprehensivestatements,very moving statements, fellow-beings,They are committing those crimes in the
nameof civilization and the supremacyof the white race.
and there is hardly anything that I could add to them. I
They call themselvesthe torchbearers of Westernciviliza. j
refer particularly to the statementby the ForeignMinister
tion and the doctrine of racial superiority. They are
whose country, Zambia, while bearingthe major brunt of
the sanctionsimposed by the Security Council,continues generallydisownedand their policiesdeplored;but thefact
none the lessto remain at the forefront of the fight against remainsthat they receive material and moral suppo;rtfrom
illegality, racialism and colonialismin SouthernRhodesia. certainMemberStatesof the United Nations.
The Foreign Minister hasdepictedthe situationof Southern
Rhodesiain its true perspective.My delegationisgratefulto
17. The present discussion in the Council has been
him for the clarity, objectivity and eloquencehe has actuated primarily by the introduction in SouthennRho.
brought to bear in his presentation,ofthe case,
desiaof a new draft constitution which, in the wordlsofits
author, Mr. Ian Smith, is designedto “entrench government
12. The African Member States of the Security Council in the handsof civilized”-meaning white-“people for all
time”. Whatever may be the object or nature of the draft
have, most naturally, taken the leadin the discussion
of the
present situation in Southern Rhodesia,which has been constitution, we are of the view, having condemnedthe
further aggravatedby the impendingconstitutionalreferen- unilateral declaration of independenceasillegal, that the
Smith regime has no authority at all to promulgatenny
dum proposed for next week by the illegalSmith r&me.
constitution.
We stand firmly with them in this noble endeavour.But let
me state here in this Council that, asfar asthe delegationof
Nepal is concerned,we supportthem not because
weregard
18. Having ursurped power illegally, the racist minority
the question of Southern Rhodesiaas an African question, r@me is obviously trying to consolidateits hold. Thisisa
but becausewe sincerely feel that this question,thanks to
seriousmatter meriting the urgent attention of the Council.
the administering Power, has assumedthe characterof an
In the face of this challenge,it is essentialthat the Council
ugly world problem, increasinglythreateninginternational pronounce itself on the question with one voice andone
peaceand security with the passage
of eachday,
mind.
2

,

19. But although the matter of the constitutional referendum is important, the Council, in our view, should not lose
sight of the fact that this is but an aspect of the broader
question of Southern Rhodesia, portending, as it does, the
risk of a prolonged and bitter racial conflict in the whole of
southern Africa.

25. The regime of Southern Rhodesia racists continues to
maintain by force and violence its hold over the country
and people of Zimbabwe and is planning new measures to
consolidate further its system of apartheid and racist
violence. That these plans exist is demonstrated with
particular clarity by the announcements that the Salisbury
racists Intend to legitimize their regime by holding a
so-called referendum on a new “constitution”.
The facts,
and the contents of this “constitution”
show that its
authors are pursuing only one aim-the perpetuation of the
domination of four million African people of Zimbabwe by
a tiny white exploiting minority, the consolidation of the
system of bloody racism, of apartheid, which has existed
since the very first days that this criminal group of racists
seized power in Southern Rhodesia.

20. For the situation is worsening day,by day. Sanctions
have apparently not been effective, because of the uncooperative attitude of certain States, particularly South
Africa and Portugal, which in violation of Article 25 of the
Charter, have openly provided cover for southern Rhodesian imports and exports, My delegation would strongly
urge immediate adoption of measures envisaged under
Article 41, and extension of the sanctions to cover South
Africa and Portugal as well.

26. In the draft constitution they have concocted, the
racists want four million Africans to be represented in the
new “Parliament” by only sixteen members, while the small
white minority, constituting onIy five per cent of the
population, would have fifty seats.

21. Our support for these actions by the Security Council
does not, however, preclude us from continuing to hold to
the firm and consistent view that it is the primary
responsibility of the administering Power to take all
necessary measures, including the use of force, to end the
rebel regime and to ensure self-determination and independence for the people of Southern Rhodesia,

27. In practical terms, this reflects the effort of the tiny
racist exploiting minority to consolidate its power and
supremacy. On 7 May of this year, Smith, the ringleader of
the Southern Rhodesia racists, declared with cynical frarilcness that the new constitution sounds the death knell for
majority rule. Speaking a week later in Sinoia (Southern
Rhodesia), he repeated that the new constitution excludes
majority rule forever.

22. Speaking of the administering Power, my delegation
cannot but regret that its handling of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia has been less than candid from the very
beginning. It resisted attempts by the United Nations even
to discuss the question; and, having thus encouraged the
rebel elements to issue the unilateral declaration of
independence, the administering Power, instead of dealing
with them decisively and at once in a manner to be
understood by them, shifted its responsibility onto the
shoulders of the United Nations. For the United Nations,
Southern Rhodesia is indeed a painful legacy.

28. The plans of the racists are not confined to making the
political inequality and serfdom of the indigenous African
population of Southern Rhodesia more rigid; they are also
aimed at legalizing the economic bondage and shameless
plundering of the people of Zimbabwe. Under the terms of
the new “constitution”, the European minority, consisting
of only five cent of the population, will receive the same
amount of land as the all indigenous inhabitants of the
territory, who constitute ninety-five per cent of the total
population.

23. Even today, after nearly four years of the unilateral
declaration of independence, the administering Power has
signally failed to take a correct position of principle with
regard to Southern Rhodesia. In this connexion, it is
interesting to note one of the professed principles of the
British position, which is “unimpeded progress towards
majority rule”. This means, in effect, that even if the
rebellion were to topple and fall, the administering Power
would not regard the people of Southern Rhodesia as fit to
be entrusted with immediate independence or majority
rule. Perhaps they are to be taught further in the art of
self-government. We should have expected the administering Power to have at least the strength of character and
the determination to put up a strong moral front vis-a-vis
the illegal regime.

29. Although now United Kingdom Government officials
and public figures in talking about this constitution even
say that it is designed to divide Rhodesia permanently on
racial lines and that it embodies the permanent dictatorship
and censorship of a police State, the very fact that such a
racist regime and such a shameful document directed
against the people could come into being is a logical
consequence of the colonialist policy pursued by the
imperialist Powers, and above all by the United Kingdom,
in the matter of Southern Rhodesia. Many facts could be
cited which clearly show how the United Kingdom has
actually promoted step by step the emergence and consolidation of racist minority rule in Southern Rhodesia. In
1961, the United Kingdom authorities endowed the white
minority of Southern Rhodesia with a racist, inhuman
constitution; when the Federation of Nyasaland and Rhodesia was dissolved, they handed over to this minority
aircraft, armoured vehicles and other armament which were
than used by the racists to suppress the Zimbabwe people’s
national liberation struggle; and then there is the benevolent attitude towards the racist regime shown by the United
Kingdom Government at the Commonwealth Conference

24. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The Security Council has met
today to consider urgently th.e extremely serious situation
which has developed in Southern Rhodesia. The nature of
the statements of members of the Council and the fact that
such high-ranking representatives of two African countries-the Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Algeria and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia-are taking part in this meeting, are a striking
indication of the seriousness of the question we are
considering today.
3

,

held in London in January 1969~those are only some of
the stages in the policy of tacit approval and connivance
that have led to the present extremely grave situation in
Southern Rhodesia, fraught with danger to peace and
security. And even now, in this critical situation, neither
the United Kingdom nor its closest allies in their military,
political and economic blocs want to take effective
measures to do away with the inhuman racist regime and
they limit themselves to feeble half-measures and verbal
reprimands.

with Southern Rhodesia. Actually, the United Kingdom
and some of its partners in the NATO military bloc have
done nothing to ensure effective implementation of the
Security Council resolution on the application of sanctions.
The meagre reduction in the trade of the United Kingdom
and some other Western countries with Southern Rhodesia
is amply compensated by the expansion of their trade with
South Africa and Portugal, through which they really
continue their trade with the Smith regime. It is an
established fact that the imperialist monopolies of the
Western countries continue to operate in Southern Rhodesia without any restrictions or changes whatever. They
sometimes resort to simple methods of concealment by
changing the place of a company’s registration, By these
operations which are directly opposed to the vital interests
of the Zimbabwe people, the imperialist monopolies of the
Western countries reduce to nought the efforts of those
States which are sincerely and honestly complying with the
Security Council’s decision on sanctions.

30. All of us listened attentively to the statement by Lord
Caradon. At the beginning of his speech he condemned the
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia, but at the end he
appealed for “slow” and “well-considered”
progress on the
problem of Southern Rhodesia and in this connexion, he
repreated his old advice about the cavalry and the sappers.
Now, the question naturally arises: who are these sappers
and where is their sap leading to? In what direction are
they trenching? Everyone knows that sappers’ work
includes undermining and camouflage. Apparently Lord
Caradon first gave his advice about the cavalry and the
sappers at a Security Council meeting more than a year
ago. However, as we all know, developments in Southern
Rhodesia since then create a distinct impression that, as
regards Southern Rhodesia, British sappers are engaged,not
in undermining the Smith regime so as to blow it up, but
rather in camouflaging its crimes against the people of
Zimbabwe.

35. The policy of connivance with the Smith regime and
the direct aid and comfort being given this racist regime,
not only by Portugal and South Africa, but also by other
Western countries, encourage the Southern Rhodesia racists
to ever new anti-African crimes, such as the sham an’d illegal
“referendum” planned by the racists for the adoption of
the anti-peoples constitution.
36. In the view of the Soviet delegation, neither this
referendum nor the racist “constitution”
can be regarded as
lawful. The holding of a referendum in order to iadopt a
“constitution”
is aimed at stabilizing racist rule and
consolidating the policy of apartheid in Southern Rhodesia.
It might only further complicate the situation in that
country and increase the threat to the peace and security of
the African peoples. That is why the Soviet delegation
strongly urges that the Security Council should decisively
reject the so-called “constitution”
of the Southern Rhodesia racists and reaffirm that until the Zimbabwe people
has exercised its right to self-determination and indepcndence, the situation in that country will remain explosive
and constitute a serious threat to universal peace.

31. In the letter addressed by representatives of AfroAsian States to the President of the Security Council, the
Missions of those countries-more than fifty of them-justly
observe that the sanctions against the racist regime of
Southern Rhodesia provided for in Security Council resolution 253 (1968) have not led to the desired results.
32. But who is violating this and other resolutions of the
Security Council and General Assembly
concerning
Southern Rhodesia, and who is continuing to maintain
commercial, economic and other relations with Smith’s
racist regime, thereby making ineffective the sanctions
ordered by the United Nations.

37, In his speech, Mr.Yost, the representative of the
United States of America, quoted the statement of Smith,
the ringleader of the Southern Rhodesia racists, to the
effect that his regime was the vehicle and defender of
Western civilization in Africa. If a bloody regime of
domination of the 95 per cent African population of the
country by the 5 per cent white population, a regime of
terror and violence towards Africans, is manifesmtion of
Western civilization, then God save the peoples of Africa
and the world from such a civilization!

33. Are such violations committed only by the racist
regime of South Africa and the colonialist-Fascist regime of
Portugal, which are abhorred by the African peoples and
are known to be in direct military and political alliance and
collusion with Smith’s racist regime? No, not only by
them.
34, The effective application of measures against the
minority racist regime at Salisbury is also being undermined
by other States Members of the United Nations which,
under the Charter, are bound to comply with and implement Security Council decisions. Foremost among these
countries is the United ,Kingdom, along with the Federal
Republic of Germany, the United States of America, and
some other States, mainly members of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO), whose representatives are not
averse on occasion to masking behind a smoke-screen of
bombastic phrases and legalistic quibbling, the anti-African
activities of the imperialist monopolies of their ,countries
which maintain close commercial and economic relations

38. The dreadful scenes of terror, torture and violence
exercised in Southern Rhodesia against the African fighters
for the freedom and independence of their homeland which
Ambassador Boye, the representative of Senegal, described
to the Council so convincingly in his speech today, are a
clear illustration of what kind of civilization the racists are
installing and defending in Zimbabwe.
39. The Soviet delegation fully shares the views expressed
here by the African and Asian representatives that the
4

L

deterioration of the situation in Southern Rhodesia calls for
urgent and energetic measures designed to restrain, finally,
the high-handed racists and enable the Zimbabwe people to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence. The Soviet delegation reserves the right to
revert later to the other aspects of this problem.
40. At the same time, I consider it very important to
emphasize that the situation in Southern Rhodesia cannot
be divorced from the general international situation. As the
head of the delegation of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Comrade L. I. Brezhnev, pointed out recently
at the International Conference of Communist and
Workers’ Parties held at Moscow: “Imperialism is actively
working to slow down the movement towards independence and social progress, to keep its former colonies
within the framework of the capitalist system and to
preserve them as objects of exploitation, although in new
and different forms.” The situation in Southern Rhodesia is
a striking manifestation and confirmation of this imperialist
policy, a policy whose object is to deny four million
Zimbabwe people their independence, to place all kinds of
obstacles on their road to freedom, sovereignty and social
progress. At this time, when the colonial peoples of
southern Africa are waging a heroic and, in most cases, an
armed struggle for their liberation, the Soviet people wholly
and completely supports this just struggle of the Africans
for their national freedom and independence.
41. This attitude of the Soviet people and of the Government of the Soviet Union stems from the teachings of
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, the founder and first head of the
Soviet State, the centenary of whose birth will be celebrated in April 1970. Lenin was a consistent champion and
an indefatigable fighter for the national and social liberation of oppressed peoples; he firmly believed in their
approaching victory over imperialism and bequeathed to
the peoples of the Soviet Union the duty of establishing
lasting brotherly friendship and co-operation with the
peoples fighting for their liberation. The Soviet Union is
strictly fulfilling these Leninist behests.
42. The basis of the Soviet Union’s foreign policy with
respect to such peoples has been clearly defined in the
decisions of the twenty-third Congress of our Party. In the
words of the documents of the Congress,
“ . . . The Soviet State will continue to render the
utmost support to the peoples fighting for their liberation
and work for the immediate granting of independence to
all colonial countries and peoples, promote all-sided
co-operation with countries that have won national
independence and help them to develop their economy,
train national cadres and oppose neo-colonialism,”
43. Today, in condemning most energetically the criminal
policy pursued by the Southern Rhodesia racists against the
Zimbabwe people and those imperialist forces which are
aiding and abetting them in that policy, the delegation of
the Soviet Union expresses its firm conviction that the just
cause of the Zimbabwe people will triumph, that it will win
its freedom and independence, and that the shameful and
criminal regime of the Southern Rhodesia racists-the
regime of exploiters and oppressors-will be.wiped from the
face of free Africa.

44. Mr. President, in view of the urgency of this question,
we are ready to support the views expressed by the
Afro-Asian delegations that at this juncture, i.e. before
concludmg the consideration of the Southern Rhodesia
question as a whole, the Security Council should take an
agreed decision concerning the inadmissibility of a so-called
referendum by a clique of Southern Rhodesia racists in
violation of the lawful rights of the Zimbabwe people.
45. It is regrettable that during our two meetings today
the Security Council did not succeed in putting those
intentions into effect and taking such a decision. The
methods of those who call upon us to adopt the tactics of
sappers in so far as the Rhodesian problem is concerned,
had a part in this.
46. The Soviet delegation considers that the Security
Council should reaffirm its appeal to all States, contained in
Security Council resolution 217 (1965) of 20 November
1965, not to recognize the racist regime of Southern
Rhodesia, whatever the guise that regime might assume, and
not to entertain any diplomatic or other relations with it.
47. The USSR delegation supports the proposals of a
number of Afro-Asian countries concerning the need to
take more energetic steps to enable the Zimbabwe people
to exercise its right of self-determination in accordance
with the United Nations Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.
48. It is necessary to put an end to the violations of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968). The Council must
in no uncertain terms require all Governments to sever their
economic trade, military and all other ties with the racist
regime at Salisbury.
49. The USSR supports the General Assembly recommendation that the scope of sanctions against the racist regime
in Southern Rhodesia should be extended to include all the
measures envisaged in Article 41 of the Charter, and that
sanctions should be applied against South Africa and
Portugal, whose Governments have openly refused to carry
out the mandatory decisions of the Security Council.
50. In their statements at this morning’s meeting of the
Council, the Secretary General of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Algeria, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia, the representative of Senegal and other representatives of Asian and African countries expressed specific
views on precisely what urgent and effective measures must
be taken by the United Kingdom against the criminal gang
of racists running amok in Southern Rhodesia. The United
Kingdom representative should pay greater heed to the
voice of Africa, to the fierce anger and justified admonitions heard in the statements of these representatives of the
peoples of Africa.
51. As to the United Kingdom, as the administering Power
it should take effective action against the racist minority Of
Southern Rhodesia to secure the unconditional implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, by holding general
elections in Southern Rhodesia on the basis of a “one
man-one vote” basis, and immediately handing over power
to a government of the majority.

52. The delegation of the Soviet Union will also be ready
to consider any other proposals for ensuring the speediest
possible solution of the question of Southern Rhodesia, and
for providing effective assistance to those who are fighting
for the national liberation of the Zimbabwe people.

,I

i

53. Mr. JGKOBSON (Finland): The Finnish delegation
welcomes the initiative taken by fifty-eight African and
Asian States in calling for this urgent meeting of the
Security Council as an opportunity to consider the situation in Southern Rhodesia in the light of the plan of the
illegal regime of Mr. Smith to hold a referendum on
proposals for a new constitution. The gravity of the
situation is underlined by the presence here of prominent
representatives of two African States, who have travelled to
New York to put before the Council the concern of Africa
about the threat to peace and order inherent in the
continued suppression of the black majority in Southern
Rhodesia. What they had to say this morning could not fail
to impress all of us around this table.
54. The constitutional proposals on which a small minority of the population of Southern Rhodesia will vote upon
20 June are clearly as illegal as the regime itself. They are
designed to provide a cloak of legality for the continued
suppression of the African majority and to perpetuate the
supremacy of the white minority. They hold no prospect
for any political advancement for the African people. In
fact, they would bar majority rule for all time. This is
stated with brutal frankness in the introduction to the
constitutional proposals, which saysthat the old constitution was objectionable chiefly because it provided for
eventual African rule and did not guarantee that the
Government would be retained in what is called “responsible hands”. The suppression of the African majority thus
enshrined as a basic principle of the proposed constitution
would be enforced by all the measures of a police state
including arbitrary arrest, preventive detention and censorship of newsmedia.
55. On another level the constitutional proposals claim to
establish an independent republic, and it is obviously the
hope of the illegal regime that this would lead to
international recognition of Southern Rhodesia as an
independent State. It is essential, therefore, that the
Security Council, as has already been suggestedby several
members, should speedily and unanimously condemn the
constitutional proposals and call on all States not to
recognize the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia. It must
be made clear to the white minority that the world
community will continue to refuse to have anything to do
with the illegal regime.
56. The constitutional proposals, if adopted, while they
would not change the actual conditions prevailing in
Southern Rhodesia, clearly reveal the refusal of Mr. Smith’s
regime to contemplate any settlement based on the
principle of majority rule which the British Government,
rightly, has upheld. In this sense the referendum has
political implications which the Security Council cannot
overlook.
57. The Finnish delegation agreeswith Ambassador Shahi
and others who have proposed that members of the

Security Council, having made clear their attitude to the
referendum and the constitutional proposals, should then
begin consultations on how to proceed. As it is obvious that
the sanctions established by resolution 253 (1968) h.avenot
yet brought about the results desired by the Security
Council, the Sanctions Committee suggests in its second
report [S/9252] that consideration should be given to more
effective measures to ensure full implementation of that
resolution. For this purpose the report of the Committee
[S/9252/,4dd.l] which we have just received, as wlall asits
annexes which have not yet been distributed, sh~ouldbe
thoroughly studied by our Governments.
58. The profound disappointment that all of us must feel
about the slow pace with which the policy of sanctions is
evolving and the obvious deficiencies of that policy shouid
not lead us to underestimate the historic significance of the
unanimous decision of the Security Council /‘14.&Q/r
meeting] to apply universal and total economic sanctions,
not to stop aggression in a classical sense of the world, an
aggression of one State against another, for which the
provisions of Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter
were originally intended, but to stop what might be called
aggression against human rights committed by one race
against another. The fact that such a decision could be
reached in this Council reflects a fundamental reassessment
of values in international life-the virtually universal acceptance of the truth that the world community, if it wishesto
promote an orderiy evolution of international relations, can
no longer tolerate the persistence of mass violations of
fundamental rights and freedoms, such as those practised
today in Southern Rhodesia. It is true that the illegal
regime continues to survive in an economic sense, but it
survives as an outcast with no hope of ever gaining
international recognition or establishing normal relations
with others. Thus, what has been achieved so far by the
United Nations in the question of Southern Rhodesia is
surely an impressive demonstration on behalf of the
equality of races and the rights of man. On this basis we
should be able to join our efforts in a search for agreement
on practicable and effective means by which we cart achieve
our common purpose.
59. Mr. MORALES SUAREZ (Colombia) (translaifedfrom
Spanish]: My delegation has studied, with due attention to
the background material made available to the me:mbers of
the Council and to the circumstances described in the
course of the debate, the situation we are examini.ng in the
territory of Southern Rhodesia.
60. Although, as is obvious, my delegation is acting on its
own behalf, it cannot but bear in mind the origin of the
principles on which it bases its international actionprinciples that are common to the nations of Latin
America, which find in them an immutable element of their
cohesion. Those principles lead us to repudiate and reject
anything which hinders the self-determination of peoples,
anything which denies the essential equality of men,
anything which interferes with the full and effective
exercise of basic human rights.
61. My delegation is greatly alarmed at the imminence of
an act of constitutional reform such as that planned ln
Southern Rhodesia, which is specifically aimed at making

.

9
more precarious the situation imposed on the majority
the population in a blatantly illegal fashion,

of

Rhodesia,but we do not considerthat the measuresit has
been taking have been in any way effective. Wesharethe
United Kingdomview that it is important to maintain the
unity Of the Security Councilandthat it shouldspeakwith
onevoice.

62. Since a detailed analysis of the situation before the
Council is not called for, my delegationwill limit itself to
emphasizingits view in favour of the Council’sproceeding
without delay to condemn the terms of the contemplated
constitutional reform, without prejudice to its right, at the
earliest possible moment, to examine and take further
measuresto restore the rule of law in all aspectsof
Rhodesianlife.

69. Accordingly, we believethat the consultationswhich
the United Kingdom saysit is going to hold with other
Governments,and particularly the African Governments,
shouldbeginimmediately,without waiting for the results
of a referendumwhich-in view of the very circumstances
under which it will be held-are a foregoneconclusionand
cannotbe takeninto considerationon any account.

63. Mr. DE PINIES (Spain) (translatedfrom Spanish):My
delegation takes part in this debate with specialinterest.
For the first time it has to speak on this questionin the
Security Council, although in the pastwe havehad occasion
in the Fourth Committee..of the, General Assembly to
define our position, which is clear and unequivocal: it
condemnsand repudiates a unilateral declaration of independence_which we have never recognized, since it is
designed to perpetuate some non-existent rights of an
imported white minority againstthe inalienablerights of
the indigenouspopulation of the territory.

70. As far as my delegation is concerned, what is
important is that we shouldrealizeexactly what arethe real
causesof the presentsituation.What we aredealingwith is
Purely and simply a confrontation betweenan indigenous
people, with natural roots in its territory, and the alien
presenceof a group of colonistsimported in the courseof
history, who are seekingdominationby force, That is the
real essenceof the problem-an aftermath of colonialism
which desiresto perpetuateitself and which involvesracial
confrontation.

64. It is the people of Zimbabwe who are entitled to
self-determination and independence.Hence, the adoption
of any new constitution reaffirming the supremacyof a
minority which is alien to the territory seemsto us to be
contrary to all the principles contained in the Charter of
the United Nations and in the decisionsof its main organs,
the General Assemblyand the Security Council.

71. My delegationcannotconcealits concernat the steady
deterioration of a situation which is not being combated
effectively enoughby the responsible
administeringPower.
We approveof the good intentionsvoiced by the United
Kingdomrepresentative,but we believethat the latenessof
the hour callsfor moreurgentaction,

65. Today we are resuming our consideration of the
situation which has arisen, but before going into the
subject,my delegationwishesto expressits appreciationfor
the interesting contribution made both by the SecretaryGeneralof the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Algeria and by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia.We extend our
welcome to both thosedistinguishedpersonalities.

72. Apart from the decisionswhich this Council may
decideto adopt once the debateis concluded,my delegation wishesto emphasizeat this stagethat, in its view, so
long as the situationremainsunchangedand the administering Power continuesto be legally responsiblefor the
territory, it is for that Power to continue to take all
possiblesteps to implement United Nations decisions.
Otherwise,it will incur a graveresponsibilitywhich we do
not think is at all the intention of the United Kingdom
Government.

66. To you, Mr. President, who are of Spanishstock and
belong to a community of peopleslinked in brotherhood
by a co,mmontradition, culture and language,I addressa
specialgreetingand wish you every success-similar
to those
which marked the terms of office of the Presidentsof this
important body in April and May.

73. I believe that today we are examiningtwo cardinal
aspectsof the many problemsafflicting the world. One is
the useof an imported population to displacean original
population,in order to perpetuatean odioussituation.The
other is the capacity of this Organization to ensurethe
observance
of its agreements
andresolutions.

67. In my delegation’sview, the referendumin Southern
Rhodesia constitutes an extremely seriousproblem, not
only becauseby its misapplicationit constitutesof itself an
action which is arbitrary, illegal and contrary to all the
norms of equity, but also becauseit seeksto legalizea
situation which will later tend to be consolidatedby the
mere fact of its having beenheld. We all have in mind the
recent rejection by the General Assembly of another
referendum, in which an imported population was also
asked to vote on the future of a territory. In that case,as
perhapsin this, an attem$ was madeaposteriori to have
recourse to the very device of a referendum in order to
maintain a typically colonial situation, Consequentb,we
do not agree with those who try to underestimateits
importance.

74. Rhodesiais the examplebefore us at present,but the
very gravity of this caseshouldremindusthat there exist in
other parts of the world, and for the samereasons,
situationsof similartensionor gravity, which will necessarily be affectedby our decisionstoday.
75. I am not seekingsolutionswhich cannot be impIemented. My delegationmerely wishesto point out that,
beyond Rhodesia,what is at stakeis the authority of this
very Organk&ion, and with it-let us not forget-the peace
of the world.
76. Either we imposerespectfor law and order on all, or
we shd have failed in an undertakingwhich affects every
one of us.

68. We respect the good intentions of the administering
Power to put an end to the rebellioussituation of Southern
7

I

77. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Security Council is
now discussing, at the initiative of sixty Member States of
the United Nations, the latest and, without doubt, the most
serious challenge that has been issued to world public
opinion by the illegal settler regime in Zimbabwe. DOCUment S/9237 states that “the Smith regime is contemplating new measures designed to formalize the system of
apartheid already in operation in the territory”. The reports
reaching us on developments from that unhappy land must
convince everyone that the racist Smith regime has now
committed itself to the legalized introduction of a fullfledged dictatorship over the overwhelming majority of that
country’s population.
78. In this comrexion, it is not out of place to state that
some of the features of the so-called “Republican Constitution” now to be submitted to the white racist minority for
its approval go even beyond the repressive measures
practised in the Republic of South Africa. All the apparatus
of a legalized fascist dictatorship, such as censorship,
preventive detention, restriction, abolition of the appeals
system after a trial on certain charges, compulsory powers
to search and seize property, the denial of bail, as
enumerated in the British %eral newspaper The Guardian,
are there in this so-called “constitution”. Ian Smith and his
cohorts have gone so far this time that even their most
hardened supporters in the West cannot find their usual
words to justify this latest challenge to elementary human
rights.
79. A mere reading of the introduction to the so-called
“constitution” explains the embarrassment of Ian Smith’s
apologists in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. The
introduction states:
“The Government of Rhodesia believes that the present
Constitution is no longer acceptable to the people of
Rhodesia because it contains a number of objectionable
features, the principal one being that it provides for
eventual African rule and, inevitably, the domination of
one race by another . . .“.
80. To avoid “domination” by 95 percent of the Rhodesian population, that is the Zimbabwe people, the new
text assuresthe continued domination by the 5 per cent,
that is the white settlers.
81. The only conclusion we can draw from all this is that
if it were true that colonialism meant to prepare the
colonialized peoples for self-determination, the British
colonial authorities have singularly failed in achieving their
stated aim in Zimbabwe.
82. Looking back to our earlier discussions and the
conclusions the Council has reached on this issue,there can
be no denial that the road charted by the administering
Power, the United Kingdom, to meet the challenge of the
Smith regime has failed completely. It is small comfort to
US that our conviction that the half-hearted measures
adopted in place of genuine, effective steps to eliminate the
racist rebellion in the heart of Africa would prove counterproductive has been fully vindicated. Nor can we feel much
pleasure at the fact that the repeated prophecies about the
successof the sanctions, applied in the well-known piece-

meal fashion, have been refuted in so resounding a manner.
It would of course be instructive to hear those representatives who never tired of counselling patience, realism and
unity in the Security Council-avoiding even harsh wordstell us what was gamed by having remained patient, by
having had unanimity in the Council. How did Mr. Smith
react to the repeated declarations that no force would be
used and so on? Answers to these questions are now, I am
sorry to say?largely academic, since we all know htow the
racists in Zimbabwe have used the time provided t.o them
by the denial of the use of the constitutional prerogatives
of the United Kingdom. The time thus obtalned by them
has been used to strengthen their domination, to reinforce
tile system of de facto apartheid prevailing in the tlerritory
and, finally, to prepare for the codification of these
practices in their so-called republican constitution. For that
reason, perhaps to say that the sanctions did not work
would not be correct. They did work.
83. The United Kingdom, instead of using force to subdue
the rebellion, has, through the policy of piecemeal sanctions, reduced the Security Council to the role of a.passive
on-looker and thus helped the Smith regime to gain
precious time. The racists in Salisbury now feel strong
enough to challenge world public opinion in the most
brutal manner. The responsibility for this intolerable
situation must be borne by those who have refused all along
to act in the only way that could have led to results, that is,
by putting down by the use of force the racist rebellion in
Zimbabwe. This responsibility is all the greater as the
present situation in the territory is bound to affect
international peace.
84. My delegation feels that the abandonment by the
United Kingdom of its responsibility for the people of
Zimbabwe is very difficult to explain. Were it not for the
fact that that Government has never hesitated to use its
armed forces against the national liberation movernents of
its colonies, it would be easier perhaps to appreciate its
strong opposition to the use of force in this case.However,
the well-known events in dozens of dependent Territories
entailing the widespread use of force, coupled with
hundreds and thousands of arrests, including those of some
of the most eminent national leaders of those lands, cannot
but reinforce the impression that the only reason for
refusing to act in this case in the usual manner lies in the
colour of the skin of Mr. Ian Smith and his accomplices. It
is evident that there is similarity and even parallelism in
approach and interest between the administering Power and
the racist usurpers of power to establish a clea.rly neocolonialist system, to strengthen the political, social,
economic and military grip over the indigenous African
population of Zimbabwe. The sending of troops to the
island of Anguilla and to other parts of the world and the
refusal to do so against the illegal Smith regime cannot be
explained in any other way.
85. However, when all is said and done, the problem
facing our Council now is this: what can be done after the
collapse of the policy of sanctions. The Council obviously
cannot remain idle when basic human rights are violated,
when the right of self-determination enshrined1 in our
Charter is trampled underfoot in the land under the misrule
of Ian Smith. In the view of my delegation, the Council has

to act urgently before the latest criminal attempt against
the people of Zimbabwe is proclaimed. The United Kingdom must finally face its responsibilities. To do so it will
not be sufficient to publish “white papers” and try to
explain away the role of the administering Power in
Zimbabwe. The time for quasi-solutions is now over.
Determined action is needed by the administering Power
and by the Security Council.

90. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Various
representatives have asked to speak in exercise of their right
of reply. I shall call upon them in the order in which their
requests were made. The first is the representative of the
United Kingdom.

91. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I do not wish to
keep the Council at this late hour, but I feel that I should
say a word or two of reply to the speech which was made
just now by the representative of the Soviet Union. I would
say that our debate today has been at a high level, and I was
sorry that at this late hour it should have been debased. The
speech of the representative of the Soviet Union was as
inaccurate as it was offensive, and his abuse was equalled
only by his ignorance. I shall not seek to take many
examples, thougl~ I could well do so; I shall take only one.
He referred, in his ignorance, to the-1 use his words“miserly reduction”1 of British trade with Rhodesia. The
trade of my country with Rhodesia prior to the illegal
declaration of independence was considerable. It has been
stopped. My country has honestly and thoroughly carried
out the obligations which we assumed. No country has
done more. The stop in trade between my country and
Rhodesia is complete. No country, as a result of the
sanctions imposed in this Council, has suffered sacrifice
greater than the sacrifice of my country. So when the
representative of the Soviet Union talks about a “miserly
reduction”, his remarks are certainly as inaccurate as they
are offensive.

86. Mr. LIU (China): From the time when the Council was
first seized of the problem of Southern Rhodesia to this
day there has been general agreement on the objectives to
be achieved. The Council has been unalterably opposed to
the illegal regime in Salisbury and has on various occasions
adopted resolutions aimed at bringing that regime to sanity
and reason. At first it was believed that the economic and
financial measures put into force by the United Kingdom
Government, with the support and co-operation of the
United Nations, would be sufficient to accomplish that.
When those measures proved futile the Council, at the
instance of the United Kingdom, took another step in
December 1966, namely, the imposition of selective economic sanctions for the purpose of inflicting damage on the
economy of Rhodesia to such an extent as to convince Ian
Smith and his associates that, unless they came to terms
with London, their regime would have no future to look
forward to. But that again failed. On 29 May 1968 the
Council unanimously adopted resolution 253 (1968), imposing comprehensive and mandatory economic sanctions.
87. More than a year has passed since the_n. There is no
doubt that Southern Rhodesia’s foreign trade has been hurt
in many areas. By and large, however, the impact has not
been as serious as might have been expected. The Ian Smith
regime still remains in firm control of the country. The
white minority in Southern Rhodesia now seeks the
perpetuation of its position of domination and supremacy
through an illegal referendum, scheduled to take place on 20
June.

92. It is not surprising that the representative of the Soviet
Union should be the advocate of force in this Council, as
his country has shown itself the employer of repressiveand
ruthless force in recent circumstances of which the whole
world is only too well aware.
93. I would say respectfully to the representative of the
Soviet Union that he has the same obligation as the
obligation of the representative of the smallest country
represented in the United Nations. He has the obligation tc
keep a civil tongue in debate.

88. It seems to my delegation that the first order of
business before this Council must be to condemn the
projected referendum and constitution in the strongest
terms and with no equivocation. The mere act of condemning the referendum would, of course, not prevent the Ian
Smith regime from doing what it had set out to do. The
world community cannot be satisfied until that regime is
overthrown. The United Nations cannot shirk its responsibility for the protection of the rights and interests of the
indigenous inhabitants of the Territory. Indeed, the responsibility of the United Nations does not end with the
overthrow of the Ian Smith regime; it will continue until
the indigenous inhabitants are enabled to exercise freely the
right of self-determination.

94. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I now
call upon the representative of the United States whc
wishesto speak in exerciseof his right of reply.
95, Mr. BUFFUM (United States of America): I too regret
that it is necessaryto detain the Council at this late hour to
correct what I fear may be some erroneous impressions, to
say the least, that were given by the Soviet Ambassador’s
statement, However, I shall detain the Cound for but one
moment.
96. First, Ambassador M&k commented on trade between
the United States and Southern Rhodesia. I wish to assure
this Council that my Government scrupulously applies the
economic sanctions which the Council has imposed on
Southern Rhodesia. Indeed, our trade with that country has
been reduced by 90 per cent since 1965; and of the
remaining 10 per cent, none-and I repeat, none-to the
best of our &wledge is in ViOhtiOn
of any
of
he
mandatory
provisions
of the Council’s reSOhtiOnS.

89. On this basic objective there has been no disagreement. There are, however, differences of opinion as to the
most effective measures to be applied to bring this objective
about. It is now clear that the mandatory sanctions
embodied in resolution 253 (1968) have produced no
decisive impact. This being so, the question remains as to
how resolution 253 (1968) may be supplemented by more
effective means. My delegation is prepared to support any
appropriate action the Council may find it possible to take
in this regard,
1

1 Cited from the interpretation.
9

Development Company. The Anglo-American Company
derives a considerable part of its income from the mining of
minerals in Southern Rhodesia and also controls copper.
mining in Southern Rhodesia through M.T.D. (Manguma)
Limited, Those are facts.

97. The second point relates to the manner in which the
Soviet representative referred to Ambassador Yost’s quotation of Ian Smith’s statement that the new constitution was
designed “to retain Western civilization” [1475rh meeting,
para. 1211. I should like to be quite sure that the Council
was aware that Ambassador Yost was not endorsing that
statement. No, quite the contrary; what he said was: “It is a
curious view indeed which sees nothing in common
between Western civilization and the concept of majority
rule” [ibid., para. 1221. And elsewhere, if I might recall, in
commenting on Mr, Smith’s high-sounding phrases, Ambassador Yost said: “Never were noble words borrowed to
camouflage a more sordid enterprise” [ibid., para. 1341.

106. Does that show my ignorance, my lord? I ,wonder
which of us is more ignorant when it comes to real facts?
107. Do the millions invested in Southern Rhodesia
constitute sanctions? Is this the way to help the Zimbabwe
people to free themselves from the domination and tyranny
of a tiny group of racists? There you have them-the
sapper methods you are using against Southern Rhodesia.
No slander of the Soviet Union and its policy will avail or
will convince the Africans. Facts are stronger than slander-have always been and always will be.

98. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): 1 now
call upon the representative of the Soviet Union, who has
also asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
99. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): In his reply, the noble lord gave
us an example of courtesy and of how not to insult
speakers. I shall not follow his example and shall not
indulge in personal insults.

108. I do not quite understand Ambassador Buffum’s
reply. I never accused Ambassador Yost of anything. I
merely mentioned something he had said. Consequently, I
do not quite understand your need to reply. I only wanted
to put it more strongly that if Smith, the leader of the
Southern Rhodesia racists, says that he is defending
Western civilization by the methods he is using in Southern
Rhodesia, then God save the peoples of Africa, and the
world from such a civilization! I do not see that that
contains anything offensive to Ambassador Yost, and I see
no need for Ambassador Buffum to come to his defence.

100. The experience of history shows that when United
Kingdom representatives have no facts with which to refute
the real situation under discussion in the Council, they
invariably resort to slander against the Soviet Union.
101. But anti-Sovietism has not helped the United Kingdom representatives or their country. They have engaged in
anti-Soviet propaganda for more than 50 years but the
results are clear to all: they have reaped neither advantage
nor glory, nor honour from their anti-Communist and
anti-Soviet policy.

109. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I give
the floor to the representative of the United Kingdom, who
wishes to exercise his right of reply.
110. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
certainly have no wish, and I am sure you have no wish,
that we should prolong our proceedings. But I would like to
tell the representative of the Soviet Union that the
obligations that we undertook in this Council in regard to
sanctions have been fully carried out and that our obligations in regard to the investment of capital have been fully
carried out, our obligations in regard to trade with
Rhodesia have been fully carried out, and he will not be
able to show, by any figures of previous investment or of
any other figures which may be produced, that my country
has failed to carry out its obligations to the full and
faithfully.

102. As to the United Kingdom’s economic relations with
Southern Rhodesia, suffice it to refer to United Kingdom
sources, For instance, the United Kingdom reference work
Who Owrzs Whom states that nearly 400 British companies
have affiliates in South Africa and more than 190~in
Southern Rhodesia. The list includes, as I said, the largest
British and imperialist monopolies: Unilever, Shell, British
Petroleum, Associated Electrical Industries, Courtaulds,
etc., etc.
103. According to The Financial Times, which is another
organ of British big capital-British investments in Southern
Rhodesia amount to &200 million sterling, or more than US
$500,000 million, of which 2150 million sterling is invested
in the mining industry. The same United Kingdom sources
also provide other data. In 1968, the monopolies invested
more than 21 million Rhodesian pounds (more than US
$50 million) in Southern Rhodesia.

111. The PRESIDENT (translated from Sparksh): As I
have no other names on my list of speakers, I pr’opose, in
accordance with Council practice, to make a brief statement as representative of PARAGUAY.

104. British and American capital dominate The AngloAmerican Corporation of South Africa, an ore-mining
concern, Since 1967, the Corporation has been expanding
and speeding up its nickel-mining in Southern Rhodesia,
investing $10 million sterling for that purpose,

112. At this stage in our debate, I have little to add to
what has been said with so much eloquence and feeling at
our two meetings today on the subject of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia. The statements we have heard recall to
my mind the words of a distinguished United States author
and jurist: in certain circumstances, he said, it is better to
repeat the obvious than try to elucidate the obscure.

10.5. According to a recent report, in The Times of 11
April 1969, another firm, The Anglo-American Company, is
purchasing one million shares of The Messina (Transvaal)

113. The position of the Republic of Paraguay on the
question of Southern Rhodesia is patently clear. It has been
set forth on numerous occasions in this Council, in the
IO

General Assembly, in the Special Committee Established in
Pursuance of Resolution 253 (1968) and in notes sent to
the Secretary-General. I can sum it up in a few words.
114. The Republic of Paraguay has not recognized and it
does not recognize the validity of the unilateral declaration
of independence allegedly proclaimed by Southern Rhodesia. It does not recognize the regime in control of that
territory and considers it illegal. Nor does it maintain with
it any kind of relations and it rejects, vehemently and
energetically, any policy based on racial discrimination.
115, In the case of Southern Rhodesia, this abhorrent and
abhorred policy is assuming fresh manifestations of the
utmost gravity, as pointed out in the letter from the
fifty-nine Members of the United Nations which we are
discussing. Those manifestations and designs, and the acts
which the illegal regime in question intends to carry out
shortly, in fact within a few days, deserve our unreserved
condemnation; we already consider them illegal and hence
devoid of all legal effect, even though they take the form of
an alleged new constitution which has no rother purpose
than to perpetuate an inhuman and immoral system of
oppression exercised by a white minority over the vast
majority of the indigenous population.

necessaryin order to give expression to what constitutes
the opinion of the Council and above all of the international community which is deeply disturbed by the course
of these events.
117. Finally, and even at this late hour, we trust that the
action of the international community will hasten the time,
so long delayed, when the Zimbabwe people can exercise
freely and without restriction its genuine and legitimate
right of self-determination and of controlling by itself its
own national destiny.
118. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, there are no other
speakers on my list and I therefore propose to adjourn the
meeting. Before doing so, I should like to thank the
members of the Council for the infinite patience they have
shown and to remind them, evenif that is unnec.cssary,that
by virtue of this office and his function, the President will
as usual remain at their disposal to serveboth them and the
Council.
119. In accordance with the informal consultations that
have taken place, the next meeting of the Council to
consider the question of Southern Rhodesia will be held on
Tuesday, 17 June, at 3 p.m.

116. In these circumstances, my delegation is prepared to
hold with other delegations whatever consultations are

The meeting rose at 9.45 p.m.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

Nations

UNITED

NATIONS

publications

the world.
or Geneva.

Consult

your

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may

Nations

des venter,

KAK flOnYYHTb

or

Unies
sont
Informez-vous
New York

M3AAHMFl

Il:l~a1lllil,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

from
to:

IhO-1lOl~K

in United

Nations,

New York

and

Nations,

DES NATIONS

distributors
Sales

throughout

Section,

New

York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libroiries
aupr&s
de votre llbroirie
ou

et les ogsnces
odresssz-vous
bz

ou GenBve.

06bEflHHEHHblX

HAublfl

~kll~ll~
5101110 KVlIIIT~ n iillll~tilll~lS
Jl~rLl:lllllaX'II
IhnO~llTC
UlpMUill
Ck ll:l~allllllS
ll IIZIIIIPY lillllilillOl
: OgrallnaaqrlJi
oihc~rlllelllll,lX
IItIl~rlii.
CCKIIIIH

uo

n.in KKOllCBa.

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicacianes
de Ias Naciones
Unidas
estdn
en todas porter
del mundo. Cons&e
a su librero
Ventos,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

bookstores

United

OPTAHMSA~MH

~h,lUllll
O~~r~~llll:ltll~il~
06'L~~IIllClllllJX
:ll'CIITI'TIIIS
II0 IWL'S IUlilOllM
Mllp.
uara:muc
ILlI UIIUIIITC 110 n,qwcy
Il~O~llXC

write

LES PUBLICATIONS

Nations
entier.

Section

be obtained

bookstore

Les publications
des
deporitoires
du monde
Unies,

PUBLICATIONS

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerios
o dirijase
a: Nociones

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

y cosos distribuidoros
Unidos,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

82065-Navember

1972-PBS43
