S/2021/867

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2021
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2552 (2020), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2021 and request ed the SecretaryGeneral to report on its implementation every four months. The present report
provides an update on major developments in the Central African Republic since the
previous report of the Secretary-General of 16 June 2021 (S/2021/571) and on the
reinforcement of MINUSCA authorized in resolution 2566 (2021).

II. Political situation
2.
The establishment of the new Government generated some momentum in the
process leading to the organization of a “republican dialogue”. At the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, a joint road map for peace in the Central
African Republic was adopted, in which participants called for an inclusive dialogue
in support of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic and urged the Government to declare a ceasefire. The peace process
continued to progress incrementally in the context of persisting political tensions and
continued military operations that contributed to a deepening humanitarian crisis and
serious human rights violations.
Political developments
3.
The President, Faustin Archange Touadéra, established a new Government on
23 June, comprising 32 ministers, including 3 ministers of State, 28 ministers and
1 minister delegate, at least 20 of whom were members of or closely associated with
the ruling Mouvement des coeurs unis party. Seven governme nt ministers were
women, representing 21.9 per cent, above the 14.7 per cent in the previous
government, but still below the 35 per cent quota established by the gender parity law.
Six ministers originated from armed groups that were signatories to the Pol itical
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation that had renounced violence, two were from
civil society and two were former presidential candidates.
4.
On 30 June, President Touadéra established an organizing committee for a
republican dialogue, which was inaugurated on 1 September. The political opposition,

21-14115 (E)

141021

*2114115*

S/2021/867

armed groups and civil society criticized the committee’s composition owing to the
large representation of public authorities and those affiliated with the ruling party. On
22 July, the President amended the committee’s composition, increasing it from 24 to
29 members, including 3 women, with additional seats for political parties and civil
society. The Coalition des patriotes pour le changement-affiliated armed groups
remained excluded from the organizing committee.
5.
On 29 June, the Constitutional Court proclaimed the final results of the 23 May
legislative elections. Residual legislative elections were held in seven constituencies
on 25 July, with a voter turnout of some 60 per cent. The Court announ ced the final
results on 30 August, concluding the legislative electoral cycle held in all
constituencies, which saw all 140 seats of the National Assembly filled, including 18
women, up from 12 in the prior legislature. The ruling Mouvement des coeurs uni s
obtained a relative majority (41), followed by independents (35) many of whom were
allied with the Mouvement des coeurs unis, the Kwa Na Kwa party (10) and
representatives of 22 other parties (54). On 1 October, the National Assembly
commenced its second ordinary session of the seventh legislature.
6.
On 12 August, the Constitutional Court revoked the parliamentarian status of
the elected member of the opposition party Chemin de l’espérance and former
President of the National Assembly, Abdou Karim Mecka ssoua, and proclaimed the
election of the runner-up, Ibrahim Ould Alhissene Algoni of the ruling Mouvement
des coeurs uni. The Court found Meckassoua ineligible to contest the election owing
to his involvement in the Coalition des patriotes pour le changem ent, as imputed in
the notice of prosecution against him issued in January 2021. On 15 August,
Meckassoua left the country. Members of the political opposition denounced the
Court’s decision, claiming the Government had used the Court in an attempt to sile nce
political dissent. On 20 September, the Court of Auditors issued a judgment
dismissing the allegations against Meckassoua for corruption, which had formed the
basis for his removal as President of the National Assembly in September 2018.
7.
On 16 September, the Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, including President Touadéra, met in Luanda
for a mini-summit on the situation in the Central African Republic. The Heads of State
and Government adopted a joint road map to revitalize the peace process, notably
calling for the declaration of a ceasefire by the Government and reaffirming the
continued consultations of the Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region with leaders of the armed groups for a total
renunciation of violence.
Implementation of the Political Agreement
8.
Progress on the implementation of the Political Agreement remained limited,
with attention focused on preparations for the republican dialogue and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region initiative. The Government
appointed a Minister of State for Demobilization, Disarmament, Reintegration and
Repatriation and the Monitoring of the Implementation of the Agreement, one of the
recommendations from the February evaluation of the Political Agreement by the
Government. The Executive Monitoring Committee of the Political Agreement held
its eleventh session on 2 August. At that session, its first since 16 April, it validated
the recommendations from the evaluation.
9.
The Coalition des patriotes pour le changement was weakened during the
reporting period by financial challenges and military operations by the national armed
forces, as well as bilaterally deployed and other security pe rsonnel.
10. The armed group Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique remains internally divided
over the implementation of the Political Agreement. On 11 September, the leader of
2/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

the group, Ali Darassa, reaffirmed its commitment to the Political Agreement,
declaring his intention to withdraw from the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement. Following this declaration, the coordinator of the “dissident” faction of
the group, “Général” Hamadou Tanga, addressed a letter to the Minister of State for
Demobilization, Disarmament, Reintegration and Repatriation and Monitoring of the
Implementation of the Agreement, announcing the formation of the “dissident”
faction of the group dissociated from Ali Darassa and requesting the integration of
300 “dissident” elements of the group in the demobilization, disarmament,
reintegration and repatriation process.
11. From 27 to 29 September, the international faith-based organization Sant’Egidio
community brought together political parties, civil society and religious confessi ons
to discuss and make recommendations for the republican dialogue. The meeting
resulted in the “Rome declaration”, which advocates for inclusiveness of the dialogue,
a declaration of ceasefire and the creation of conducive conditions for the dialogue to
take place.
12. Efforts to operationalize the special mixed security units continued. Living
conditions for elements of these units in the Bouar and Paoua camps were improved
through a European Union-funded project. At the time of writing, there were 269
elements in Bouar and 206 in Paoua, including former members of armed groups, as
well as national defence and internal security forces. Challenges related to delayed
payment of salaries by the Government and weak command and control persisted.
13. Regarding the socioeconomic provisions of the Agreement, the Joint Executive
Committee of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan continued to reinforce
linkages between the national development plan and the Political Agreement by
developing a comprehensive approach by the Ministry of Planning and Economy, in
collaboration with the United Nations country team and the World Bank to enhance
synergies, identify criteria to prioritize and prepare for the strategic deployment of
peace dividends. The KoBo toolbox, developed with World Bank support and fully
operational since April 2021, allowed real-time monitoring of the implementation of
projects related to the National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, including
the delivery of peace dividends.
Electoral preparations
14. On 14 September, the Prime Minister chaired the strategic committee meeting
on elections. A new electoral calendar was adopted for the municipal, regional and
senatorial elections, the first since 1988, with local elections sch eduled for
11 September 2022. Voter registration was scheduled from 2 January to 30 April 2022
to allow internally displaced persons, refugee returnees and new adults to participate.
15. The organization of local elections would require the mobilization of some
$10 million. On 2 September, the Government announced it would disburse
$0.4 million for the electoral mapping scheduled from October to December 2021.
The Government committed to providing the National Elections Authority with
$2.7 million from the 2022 State budget. Efforts were ongoing with partners of the
Central African Republic to mobilize the remaining resources.
16. The joint efforts of MINUSCA and the United Nations country team to support
women’s participation in all stages of the elections, as voters and candidates, helped
to increase the representation of women in the new Parliament. The electoral process,
however, confirmed that sociocultural barriers continued to impede women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in political life, i ncluding gender bias, a lack of
political will and the deteriorating security situation.

21-14115

3/20

S/2021/867

Local dialogue and reconciliation
17. On 16 July, MINUSCA chaired a consultative meeting with stakeholders to
evaluate local peace and reconciliation committees. Women comprised 30 per cent of
committee members by end of June 2021, an increase from 21.4 per cent in 2020. As
at 1 October, the Ministry of Humanitarian Action and National Reconciliation had
established 52 local peace and reconciliation committees, 14 of which received
financial support from MINUSCA.
18. MINUSCA, in collaboration with the United Nations country team, continued
to support local conflict prevention and resolution. In June, through a transhumance
management system established in collaboration with MINUSCA and the
International Organization of Migration, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations reported a 19 per cent decrease in farmer-herder conflicts in
comparison with the previous year and a 30 per cent improvement in community
perceptions of transhumance dynamics, which was seen as the direct result of
increased dialogue between farmers and herders.
19. Following the 17 May attacks by ex-Séléka fighters in Grevai, Nana-Gribizi
Prefecture, on 20 to 23 June, a local mediation team was deployed in the area with
MINUSCA support to prevent intercommunal violence between Banda and Mandja
communities. An integrated action plan for the promotion of peaceful coexistence
between the communities was implemented through MINUSCA programmatic funds.

III. Security situation
20. The security situation remained precarious, especially in the west and centre of
the country. National defence forces, as well as bilaterally deployed and other security
personnel, continued their offensive against armed groups, who in turn attacked
national security forces and civilians, causing population displacement and t ensions
among communities. In addition, some armed groups attempted to recapture their
former strongholds in the north-west and south-east that had been lost during the
military offensive, and in the process committed violence against civilians. The state
of emergency expired on 5 August after being in place for six months.
21. As at 1 October, there had been 559 recorded security violations of the Political
Agreement, an increase from the 495 recorded during the previous reporting period.
Civilians were the target of 380 violations, followed by violations related to illegal
military activities (74), restrictions of movement (64) and obstruction of State
institutions, humanitarian organizations or the United Nations (41). National defence
and internal security forces allegedly perpetrated most of these reported violations
(244), up from 78 in the previous reporting period, followed by Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique (110), Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation (90), anti -balaka (49), Front
populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (36) and Mouvement patriotique pour
la Centrafrique (17) and Révolution justice-Sayo (3).
22. Since February, the national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other
security personnel increased their presence on two of the three main trade corridors
(west and north) to control migration during the transhumance season in October.
However, they had a limited presence on the northeast trade corridor, which had
allowed for an increased presence of foreign armed elements in the area since August.
23. In the west, confrontations between Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation and the
national defence forces, bilaterally deployed and other security personnel resulted in
abuses against civilians and considerable displacement. The group maintained
strongholds and a mobile presence near the border with Cameroon, using hit -and-run
tactics to avoid confrontation, especially in Nana Mambéré and Ouham -Pende
4/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

Prefectures. It began attacking national defence forces’ positions mostly in areas
where bilaterally deployed and other security personnel were not present, such as in
Mann, Ouham-Péndé Prefecture, allegedly planting explosive devices that resulted in
civilian casualties. On 25 August, two motorcyclists were killed in two separate
incidents involving explosive devices near Ndim and in Bowara. Retour, réclamation
et réhabilitation continued hostile acts on the main supply route from Cameroon,
including attacks against commercial convoys escorted by national defence forces
and bilaterally deployed and other security personnel, such as on 1 September near
Douala Elevage, Nana Mambéré Prefecture.
24. Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique became more active compared with the
previous reporting period, as the rainy season affected the Missi on’s mobility, as well
as that of national defence forces, bilaterally deployed and other security personnel.
In the centre, fighting between Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique and national
defence forces supported by bilaterally deployed and other securit y personnel
resumed in June in Basse-Kotto and Ouaka Prefectures. On 28 June, an estimated 300
Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique combatants attacked the national defence forces’
position in Alindao, Basse-Kotto Prefecture, resulting in the withdrawal of the
national defence forces from their camp and triggering population displacement.
Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique withdrew from its base in Alindao on 29 June
following an exchange of fire with MINUSCA and the subsequent arrival of national
armed forces and other security personnel; three gendarmes and two civilians were
reportedly killed during the clashes.
25. In the east, on 26 June, a group of unidentified armed individuals attacked
multiple locations in Obo town, Haut-Mbomou Prefecture, including the gendarmerie
site, national defence forces’ camp, and MINUSCA base. A heavy exchange of fire
ensued resulting in the killing of one child and one national defence force soldier, as
well as the injuring of one peacekeeper.
26. In June, the Minister of the Interior and Public Security launched initiatives on
the themes “security for all” and “voluntary disarmament”, aimed at improving the
security situation in Bangui. However, insecurity increased in the third and fifth
districts of Bangui as compared to the previous reporting period; incidents of
population harassment increased from 693 incidents to 714.
27. On 5 July in Bria, Haute-Kotto Prefecture, a local national defence forces
detachment commander sought refuge inside the MINUSCA base. A convoy of
national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other security personnel
requested his handover, threatening to forcibly enter the base, blocking the entrance
and attempting to search MINUSCA vehicles. MINUSCA handed over the
commander to national authorities once a formal government request was received.
28. On 6 July, at the Garoua-Boulaï border post, Nana-Mambéré Prefecture,
Cameroonian authorities handed over to the Government 61 Central African soldiers
who had reportedly fled to Cameroon during the electoral crisis. The Cameroonian
authorities also returned 52 AK-47 rifles, four rocket propelled grenades and
ammunition retrieved from the soldiers.

IV. Regional engagement
29. President Touadéra actively engaged with regional organizations, i ncluding the
Economic Community of Central African States and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, to mobilize regional support for the peace process and
strengthen bilateral cooperation between neighbouring countries. On 12 July,
President Touadéra engaged with the President of Angola, João Lourenço, in Luanda

21-14115

5/20

S/2021/867

and discussed the lifting of the arms embargo. On 27 August, the Government signed
several bilateral cooperation agreements with Rwanda in the areas of agriculture,
natural resources and energy.

V. Humanitarian situation
30. Increased armed violence and conflict, displacement, widespread human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian law continued to have a negative
impact on the humanitarian situation and access to populations in need. In total,
63 per cent of the population, some 3.1 million people, needed humanitarian
assistance and protection, among whom 2.2 million were in dire need.
31. In the first nine months of 2021, 342 security incidents against humanitarian
actors were recorded, compared with 304 in the same period in 2020. Three
humanitarian workers were killed while on duty, including one by an explosive device
while on a field mission, and 23 others were injured during the report ing period.
Robberies, burglaries, threats and assaults accounted for 55 per cent of the incidents,
while the remaining 45 per cent were obstructions to aid delivery.
32. As at 1 October, 60.4 per cent of the funding for the $444.8 million required to
provide life-saving assistance to 1.84 million people as per the 2021 humanitarian
response plan had been mobilized, leaving a funding gap of $176.3 million. The
humanitarian community provided multisectoral assistance and services to 1.4 million
people.
33. According to data provided by national authorities, of more than 65,000 people
tested for the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) as at 1 October, 11,432 had tested
positive, of whom 100 had died. Official figures did not fully reflect the impact of the
pandemic owing to limited testing. As at 1 October, more than 140,492 Central
Africans had been vaccinated against COVID-19. The second phase of the
Government’s vaccination campaign is ongoing, supported by United Nations
agencies and partners, with over 372,000 new doses received via the COVID-19
Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) initiative and bilateral cooperation in July.

VI. Protection of civilians
34. Protection concerns continued to be exacerbated by military operations by
national defence and internal security forces, assisted by bilaterally deployed and
other security personnel. MINUSCA responded to protection challenges across the
country by intensifying patrols and engaging in dialogue with the Government.
Pursuant to resolution 2566 (2021), MINUSCA continued to adjust its footprint in the
main hotspots while enhancing its ability to respond robustly to protect civilians.
35. From 20 to 26 August, MINUSCA deployed a joint protection team to Alind ao,
Basse-Kotto Prefecture, to assess the Mission’s early warning mechanisms, engage local
stakeholders and identify ways to improve coordination between the Mission and national
and security forces. With the deployment of additional personnel for the MINU SCA
formed police unit in Kaga Bandoro, further to resolution 2566 (2021), the Mission
increased its presence in Batangafo to protect civilians in camps for displaced persons.
36. MINUSCA enhanced the effectiveness of community alert networks, providing
71 refresher training sessions for 1,886 volunteers, including 834 women. By the end
of June 2021, community alert networks comprising at least 30 per cent women had
increased by 6 per cent since June 2020. Invigorating these networks, along with
proactive preventive action by the Force, had been critical to the Mission’s ability to
mitigate protection threats.
6/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

VII. Extension of State authority and the rule of law
37. As at 1 October, 134 out of 174 local officials (prefects, sub-prefects,
secretaries-general of prefectures and secretaries of sub-prefectures) were present
outside of the capital, representing 77 per cent of all appointed local personnel.
Deployment of the appointed local personnel continued to rise. The lack of
Government measures to sustain their presence in the regions remained a cause of
persistent absenteeism. The Prime Minister’s Office, with MINUSCA support, was
developing an accountability mechanism to address absenteeism, with a particular
focus on redeployment of the justice system.
Security sector reform
38. On 18 August, the strategic committee on demobilization, disarmament,
reintegration and repatriation, security sector reform and national reconciliation,
chaired by the Head of State, endorsed the recommendations of the national security
sector reform strategy review to focus on governance, democratic control and
coordination of the security sector. The committee also approved the development of
the new national security sector reform road map by the end of 2021, including to
update the national security policy and revise the national security sector reform
strategy by January 2022.
39. On 23 and 24 September, national authorities, with MINUSCA support,
organized for the first time a retreat with the central and general inspectorates of the
Ministries of Water and Forests, Customs, National Police, National Gendarmerie,
Defence and Justice, as well as key national oversight bodies. The meeting aimed to
identify ways to improve governance of the security sector.
National armed and internal security forces
40. As at 1 October, 6,199 internal security forces, including 2,902 police officers
(779 women) and 3,297 gendarmes (515 women), were deployed across the country,
except in Basse-Kotto owing to access challenges. MINUSCA and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) supported the training of 203 police and
gendarmes (42 women) on community policing and 72 police and gendarmes (17
women) as certified judicial police officers. On 25 and 31 August, 657 police (187
women) and 651 gendarmes (165 women) graduated from their respective academies.
41. As at 1 October, the European Union training mission completed the training
and education of 2,965 students, of whom 1,635 were new recruits. Main efforts
focused on the newly created Bataillon d’infanterie territoriale 7 and Bataillon des
forces spéciales.
42. MINUSCA conducted eight quality assurance visits of weapons and
ammunitions storage facilities in Bangui with national authorities. As at 1 October,
the Mission had conducted awareness training on explosive ordnance for 389
personnel of the United Nations and humanitarian community and explosive ordnance
risk awareness sessions to 1,437 members of the population, including 523 women
and 726 children, in Bouar and Bouali.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
43. National authorities resumed strategic discussions on demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and repatriation, including with the holding of the
12 August consultative monitoring committee on the subject. During the 18 August
meeting of the strategic committee on demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
repatriation, security sector reform and national reconciliation, President Touadéra

21-14115

7/20

S/2021/867

said that armed group elements that officially dissociated from the Coalition des
patriotes pour le changement would be eligible for the national programme.
44. As part of the working group established by the Minister of State for
Demobilization, Disarmament, Reintegration and Repatriation and Monitoring of the
Implementation of the Agreement, MINUSCA supported a mapping exercise to
update information on armed groups’ active in the country and facilitate planning of
upcoming demobilization, disarmament and reintegration activities. From 23 to
25 September, the national demobilization, disarmament and reintegration
programme, with support of MINUSCA in Bangui, disarmed and demobilized 50
combatants, including 6 women, in Bangui.
45. Community violence reduction activities continued countrywide to mitigate the
risks of young people being recruited into armed groups and contribute to loc al
reconciliation and cohesion efforts. As at 1 October, a total of 3,872 beneficiaries had
been registered (including 1,551 women), and 1,393 artisanal weapons, 63 weapons
of war, 143 rounds of ammunition and 20 unexploded ordnance had been collected.
In the PK5 neighbourhood in Bangui, the 2020–2021 community violence reduction
project concluded by the end of June, after benefiting 1,100 people, mainly former
members of self-proclaimed defence groups.
Justice and the rule of law
46. The number of first instance and appellate courts operating in the country
increased from 57 to 67 per cent since the previous reporting period. The Mission, in
collaboration with UNDP, supported outreach efforts of the Ecole nationale
d’administration et de magistrature for the recruitment of 100 new judicial personnel.
This outreach focused on encouraging the participation of candidates from outside
Bangui, in particular women, in the selection process.
47. From 26 to 30 July, the Bangui military tribunal held its secon d hearing.
Fourteen cases were heard, with six defendants acquitted and 20 defendants found
guilty of violations of the Code of Military Justice with a penalty of less than 10 years.
From 22 September to 1 October, the court martial held its first criminal session in
Bangui. Seven defendants were found guilty of violations of the Code of Military
Justice with a penalty of more than 10 years, although three defendants had this
penalty reduced to three to five years owing to extenuating circumstances.
48. Between 1 June and 1 October, MINUSCA transferred to national authorities in
Bangui 36 individuals who had been arrested, including using urgent temporary
measures, on suspicion of having committed various criminal offences. A total of 28
investigations into attacks against peacekeepers were ongoing.
49. Between 1 June and 1 October, 10 out of 13 prisons were open in the country,
with the remaining three closed due to the security situation in those areas. On
30 June, 146 recruits graduated from the Ecole nationale d’administration et de
magistrature as civilian prison personnel. They had yet to be integrated by the national
authorities into the public service so as to reinforce national corrections capacity and
improve prison security. On 27 August, 150 new civilian prison trainees completed
their initial training.
50. The Special Prosecutor’s Office of the Special Criminal Court opened three
additional preliminary investigations. On 25 August, President Touadéra appointed two
International Appeals Chamber judges to the Court. On 10 September, the Special
Criminal Court held the first hearing for anti-balaka leader Eugène Barret Ngaïkosset,
charging him with crimes against humanity committed in Bossembélé from 2009 to 2010.
He was remanded in custody on 22 September. He is on the Security Council individual
sanctions list and was arrested by the gendarmerie forces on 4 September in Bangui.
8/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

VIII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
51. Between 1 June and 1 October, MINUSCA documented 409 alleged and
confirmed incidents of human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law that affected 938 victims (511 men, 174 civilians, 87
women, 34 girls, 71 groups of collective victims, 47 boys and 14 unidentified
children) and caused 228 conflict-related civilian deaths. This represents an 18.89 per
cent increase in the number of incidents and 49.36 per cent increase in the number of
victims since the previous reporting period. The most serious violations documented
by the Mission included extrajudicial killings in the region of Bossangoa, Ouham
Prefecture, allegedly by bilaterally deployed and other security personnel. In
Bambari, Ouaka prefecture, targeted arrests for alleged collaboration with armed
groups by national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other security
personnel disproportionately affected religious and ethnic minorities, such as
Muslims and Fulanis, as well as vulnerable communities, such as internally displaced
persons. In August, at least 17 members of Muslim and Fulani communities were
arrested by national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other security
personnel for allegedly collaborating with armed groups in Haute -Kotto, MambéréKadéï, Mbomou, Nana-Mambéré, and Ouham-Pendé prefectures and transferred to
Bangui, where they were currently being detained.
52. Armed groups signatory to the Political Agreement allegedly perpetrated 42.54 per
cent of documented human rights abuses, including killing of civilians. They were
involved in 174 incidents that affected 418 victims (51.55 per cent women), of which at
least 146 incidents, affecting 377 victims, were attributed to armed groups.
53. MINUSCA documented 233 incidents of human rights violations and abuse,
allegedly perpetrated by national forces and bilaterally deployed and other security
personnel, affecting 518 victims, representing an increase of 66.42 per cent and
108.03 per cent, respectively, compared with the previous reporting period.
Bilaterally deployed and other security personnel were allegedly responsible for 78
incidents of human rights and international humanitarian law violations, affecting 229
victims.
54. Clashes between armed groups and national defence forces, assisted by
bilaterally deployed and other security personnel, resulted in 176 civilian deaths, as
compared with 82 in the previous period, representing a 46.59 per cent increase.
MINUSCA investigations revealed that most civilian deaths continued to result from
indiscriminate, disproportionate and excessive use of force by national defence forces
and bilaterally deployed and other security personnel.
55. Detention conditions remained extremely poor, especially in the camps of
national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other security personnel.
MINUSCA documented instances whereby arrested detainees had been temporarily
held in a pit until their transfer to detention centres in Bangui.
56. On 4 August, MINUSCA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights published a joint report on human rights violations
linked to the presidential and legislative elections. The report, covering the period
from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021, detailed 526 incidents of abuses and violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law that affected at least 1,221 victims
across the country, including 144 civilians (16 women). On 1 October, the Minister
for Justice announced that the special investigation commission established on 4 May
to investigate the allegations of human rights violations by the national security forces
and bilaterally deployed and other security personnel had submitted its report to the
Government. Furthermore, on 2 September, the Minister established an information sharing forum to work with MINUSCA on prevention and re sponse to cases of
21-14115

9/20

S/2021/867

violations of human rights. Amid growing concerns regarding the use of mercenaries
in the country, the Government indicated its intention to ratify the International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Merc enaries and
other relevant instruments.
57. MINUSCA continued to implement the United Nations human rights due
diligence policy. In the light of the reports of human rights violations by elements of
national security forces, the Mission took measures to further mitigate risks, including
temporarily suspending the provision of fuel to national security forces on 22 June,
in response to the violations committed by these forces.
Transitional justice
58. The 11 members, including 5 women, of the Commission on Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Reconciliation were sworn in by national authorities on 2 July, and
the Commission’s board members, a woman president assisted by two vice presidents, were elected on 16 July. UNDP and MINUSCA supported the Commission
with a series of strategic planning and training retreats in August and September, as
well as with equipment.
Conflict-related sexual violence
59. Between 1 June and 1 October, MINUSCA received allegations concerning 118
incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, mostly rape, against at least 154
survivors (87 women, 67 girls). While 15 incidents were verified, the challenging
security situation and lack of access to remote locations remained obstacles to
conducting comprehensive investigations. Members of armed groups were allegedly
responsible for 94 incidents; 7 incidents were attributed to the national defence and
internal security forces; and 9 incidents were attributed to bilaterally deployed and
other security personnel.
60. MINUSCA continued to support the informal national protection network for
victims and witnesses of sexual violence in the prefectures. In Bangui, MINUSCA
supported a safe house operated by a national non-governmental organization that
offered temporary protection to victims of sexual violence. MINUSCA and the United
Nations country team established an integrated working group with a survivor/victim centred approach in July to assist survivors in the areas of health, justice and
psychosocial and socioeconomic support.
Children and armed conflict
61. Between 1 June and 1 October, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting verified 282 grave human rights violations committed against 241 children
(80 girls and 161 boys). These violations and abuses were committed by armed groups
(207), bilaterally deployed and other security personnel (24), national defence forces
(19), jointly deployed national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other
security personnel (13) and unidentified armed individuals (19). Violations and
abuses included sexual violence (52), killing and maiming (24) and attacks against
schools (6) and hospitals (7). Ten schools were newly used for military purposes.
62. Dialogue with armed groups resulted in 131 children (116 boys and 15 girls)
being separated from the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique (89)
and Unité pour la paix en Centrafrique (42) in Haute Kotto Pref ecture, and three
children (one boy, two girls) separated from the Front populaire pour la renaissance
de la Centrafrique in Vakaga Prefecture.

10/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

IX. Economic situation
63. In its Central African Republic Economic Update published on 4 August, the
World Bank projected that the country would enter recession in 2021, with an
expected negative growth rate in gross domestic product of negative 0.6 per cent,
attributed to the impact of COVID-19 and the security situation. The update further
included that 3.4 million Central Africans were expected to live in extreme poverty
in the period 2021–2024 owing to the volatile security situation, food insecurity and
limited access to basic public services. The revised 2021 Finance Act projected a
9.1 per cent decrease in total State resources, including a 60.5 per cent decrease in
external budget support. The financial situation was expected to further deteriorate
with the suspension of over 10 million Euros in bilateral budget support. The
International Monetary Fund had put in place a seven-month staff monitored
programme to address socioeconomic challenges and contribute to the resumption of
the extended credit facility in 2022.
64. The National Assembly held an extraordinary session from 12 to 26 August,
during which it adopted the Government’s programme and the revised 2021 budget.
The programme has three pillars: promoting an inclusive society, building an open
and competitive economy and improving public services and social development. The
blockage of the Douala-Bangui corridor significantly affected tax revenues, leading
to a shortfall of $8.8 million in expected revenues and a potential liquidity crisis.

X. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
65. As at 1 October, the military component of MINUSCA had deployed 11,711
personnel (5.73 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 14,400, including
355 staff officers (74 women) and 147 military observers (41 women).
66. Pursuant to resolution 2566 (2021), in which the Security Council authorized an
increase of up to 2,750 military personnel, a total of 413 troops were deployed by
1 October, specifically: (a) advance party (300) of an infantry battalion, 63 troops for
an engineering company and 15 force military police; and (b) 52 staff officers.
67. Planning and preparations were under way for the second phase of
reinforcement, specifically: (a) the remainder of the infantry battalion (450) to secure
the main supply road; (b) three quick-reaction forces (540) in Bangassou, Bouar and
Ndélé; (c) an additional infantry company (150) in Carnot and a light battalion in
Mbaiki (450); (d) additional engineering capability (250 personnel) and medical
(level 2 hospital) capabilities; and (e) 48 staff officers. In total, 75 per cent of the
military reinforcement was expected to be on the ground before the end of the year.
68. Assets for air-to-ground targeting and mobile unmanned vehicles to enhance
operations and intelligence surveillance and reconnaissance capacity were not
presently available in the peacekeeping capability readiness system. Generation
efforts would continue, while keeping under review the continued requirement to
deploy such assets in the light of the security situation in the country and
implementation of the Mission’s priority mandated tasks.
69. The Force would adjust its layout for improved coherence with the national
defence plan and to better address security dynamics in the country. While
augmenting its footprint in, around or near main hotspots or key areas, the Force

21-14115

11/20

S/2021/867

would maintain the ability to rapidly reach remote areas with sufficient
manoeuvrability through various options provided by its air and ground capabilities.
Police component
70. As at 1 October, the MINUSCA police component had deployed 2,263 personnel
(13.65 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 3,020, including 466
individual police officers (112 women) and 1,797 personnel (197 women) in 11
formed police units and 1 protection support unit.
71. Pursuant to resolution 2566 (2021), the first phase of the authorized increase of
940 police personnel was implemented. A total of 129 police were deployed thus far:
(a) 120 additional personnel for three formed police units deployed in Bambari, Bouar
and Kaga Bandoro; and (b) 70 individual police officers deployed throughout the
country. The second phase aims to deploy by the end of the year: (a) 40 personnel
each to reinforce the formed police units in Bouar, Berberati and Bria; (b) 3 formed
police units (540) for Bangassou, Batangafo and Ndélé; and (c) 71 individual police
officers, deployed throughout the country.
72. The additional capacities would extend the police component’s footprint to
Batangafo, Mbaiki, Mobaye, Nola and Sibut. The deployment of the new formed
police units in Bangassou, Batangafo and Ndélé, as well as the reinforcement of the
existing units in the regions, would allow the police component to adjust its layout in
coordination with the MINUSCA force and other components to improve early
warning and mandate implementation.
Civilian personnel
73. As at 1 October, 1,480 civilian personnel (26 per cent women), including 265
United Nations Volunteers and 110 government-provided correctional personnel,
were serving with MINUSCA. This represents 90 per cent of the 1,648 approved
positions.
Status-of-forces agreement
74. From 1 June to 1 October, MINUSCA recorded 41 violations of the status -offorces agreement between the United Nations and the Government, involving
members of national defence forces and bilaterally deployed and other security
personnel. Serious breaches continued during the reporting period, including
obstruction to the freedom of movement of MINUSCA patrols, the arrest or detention
of staff members, threats against United Nations personnel and attempts to search
MINUSCA vehicles and residences of United Nations personnel. MINUSCA has
brought these violations to the attention of President Touadéra and senior government
officials and continued its advocacy and engagement with the Government. On
12 August, MINUSCA sent a letter to the Prime Minister regarding 52 incidents that
had occurred between February and 6 August 2021, as well as 4 unresolved older
cases. The Government-led status-of-forces-agreement meetings between the
Government and the Mission resumed as of 25 August.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
75. Between 1 June and 1 October, 181 security incidents involving United Nations
personnel were recorded. Four personnel died: two from illness, one from an armed
attack at his residence and one in a road traffic accident. There were 51 road traffic
accidents in which 9 personnel sustained injuries; 7 hostile attacks; 18 cases of road
harassment by national defence forces; and 9 cases of arrest by internal security
forces, including some United Nations personnel tempo rarily detained by bilaterally
deployed forces and other security personnel. The residences of four staff members
12/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

in Bangui and one in Bossangoa were searched by national defence and internal
security forces in connection with the state of emergency and without prior
notification to the Mission. There were 11 cases of medical evacuations of United
Nations personnel. The movement of MINUSCA personnel continued to be restricted
owing to security risks, including with regard to increased explosive ordnance thr eats
and COVID-19 prevention measures.
76. Coordinated disinformation campaigns on social media against the United
Nations and MINUSCA, members of the international community and civil society
and opposition continued to spread hate speech and incite viole nce, largely from
platforms and individuals supportive of the ruling party. MINUSCA military
contingents from majority Muslim countries were particularly targeted by
disinformation and incitement campaigns, including allegations of collusion with
armed groups.
77. As at 1 October, MINUSCA had recorded 858 confirmed cases of COVID -19,
823 recoveries, 39 evacuations and 9 deaths since the beginning of the pandemic.
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes had registered a total of 187 cases,
including 185 recoveries, 7 evacuations and 2 deaths. MINUSCA continued to support
the vaccination of United Nations personnel and eligible personnel of international
non-governmental organizations against COVID-19, in line with the voluntary United
Nations COVID-19 vaccination programme. The second United Nations vaccination
campaign was launched on 27 September until 8 October. As at 1 October, 7,350
MINUSCA personnel had been fully vaccinated through this programme. Contingent
uniformed personnel represented the highest proportion of fully vaccinated
MINUSCA personnel (80 per cent). The Mission continues to make use of its
polymerase chain reaction and rapid antigen testing for United Nations personnel to
quickly identify and isolate cases. The increased access to t esting, continued
adherence to preventive measures and vaccinations led to a significant decrease in the
number of COVID-19 cases in the Mission.
78. MINUSCA continued to implement the action plan for improving the security
of United Nations peacekeepers. This included revising and enhancing contingency
planning, increasing security planning, using intelligence surveillance reconnaissance
to monitor road access and improving compound security measures.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
79. Between 1 June and 31 August, 10 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
were reported implicating uniformed personnel, 3 of which related to an incident
alleged to have occurred in 2021, while the remainder were from previous years.
Newly identified victims were referred to service providers for assistance and
support, although the security situation and limited services continued to hinder
victims’ assistance. The presence of a full-time senior victims’ rights officer, deployed
in June 2021, has helped to improve the quality and timeliness of support and
assistance to victims.
80. On 14 September, the United Nations decided to repatriate a military contingent
from MINUSCA over serious allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, which
reportedly occurred in Alindao in 2020 and 2021, as well as a lack of action by the
troop-contributing country with respect to current and past allegations. The concerned
authorities deployed a national investigation team on 19 September in order to
investigate jointly with the Office of Internal Oversight Services. MINUSCA
dispatched an immediate response team to the location to assess the situation,
establish risk management measures and raise awareness among communities on how
to report instances of sexual exploitation and abuse. The Mission referred the victims
to humanitarian partners for medical, psychosocial and protection assistance, in line
21-14115

13/20

S/2021/867

with the United Nations’ policy on support to victims of sexual exploitation and
abuse. In total, 410 troops were repatriated on 24 September 2021; a residual party of
40 would support the repatriation of the contingent’s equipment, which is planned
before the end of the year.
81. MINUSCA continued its outreach campaign against sexual exploitation and
abuse, engaging women in rural areas, youth groups and internally displaced persons,
through radio and text messages. The Mission also worked to expand its awareness raising activities on sexual exploitation and abuse prevention and reporting
mechanisms, conducted jointly with community-based complaint mechanisms and
two military contingents deployed in the central and western regions.
Support considerations
82. MINUSCA continued to improve its environmental practices and reduce its
environmental footprint. Remediation of the Kolongo landfill continued, and the
Mission received 15 incinerators for regular solid waste management on 7 September.
The installation of biomedical incinerators was ongoing in Bangui, Bira o and Paoua.
MINUSCA also began the installation of a photovoltaic system at its PK11 site in
addition to the ongoing installation of a full solar energy system in two Bangui bases.
In addition, as at 1 October, 90 per cent of security lights had been repl aced with LED
lights at MINUSCA premises in Bangui.
Action for peacekeeping and performance optimization
83. MINUSCA increased its early warning and information-sharing capacity,
despite COVID-19-related challenges. The Mission also conducted tabletop exercises
in 11 field offices to strengthen crisis preparedness and improve communication flow.
84. Since June, 15 performance assessment and evaluation sessions were conducted
in 12 formed police units. Eleven units were deemed satisfactory, including in terms
of mandate, command and control, protection of civilians, training, welfare and
health. One unit was rated below satisfactory, with shortfalls in equipment, which is
being addressed by the contributing country concerned. MINUSCA police reviewed
and corrected identified security lapses and developed exercises on base defence, fire
and evacuation plans for formed police unit personnel.
85. The Mission used the Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment
System to conduct a performance assessment and evaluate the impact of the Mission
during the period from April to September 2021. The exercise developed
recommendations to enhance impact in key areas, including to support in advancing
the Political Agreement, information sharing, coordination and s trategic guidance.

XI. Financial considerations
86. The General Assembly, by its resolution 75/298 of 30 June 2021, appropriated
the amount of $1,036.6 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from
1 July 2021 to 30 June 2022. As at 27 September 2021, unpaid assessed contributions
to the special account for MINUSCA amounted to $329.9 m illion. The total
outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date
amounted to $3,264.0 million. Reimbursement of the costs of troop and formed police
personnel, as well as for contingent-owned equipment had been made for the period
up to 30 June 2021, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

14/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

XII. Observations
87. The conclusion of the legislative electoral cycle in August marked an important
milestone for the Central African Republic’s fragile democracy. I salute the citizens
who exercised their right to vote, thereby contributing to upholding constitutional
order. It is now time for the Central African Government and institutions, and
especially elected officials, to redouble their efforts to meet the expe ctations of the
population they serve to end persisting conflict, displacement, abuses targeting
religious and ethnic minorities, and sexual violence, as well as their expectations to
participate actively in the process of building peace, as promised at th e 2015 Bangui
Forum. No military solution can sustain peace. Further to the 2019 Political
Agreement, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region called on the
Government to declare a ceasefire. I reiterate this call and encourage the Government
to maintain its commitment to a political resolution of the crisis, while redoubling
efforts to address root causes of the conflict.
88. I welcome the adoption of the International Conference on the Great Lakes road
map, providing a way forward with the support of the region to reinvigorate the peace
process, particularly the implementation of the 2019 Political Agreement. I call for a
coordinated approach of regional partners to ensure that all efforts are fully aligned
in support of the Political Agreement. I urge the Government and the armed groups
to take prompt and tangible actions towards its effective implementation, in the first
instance by declaring a ceasefire and for all actors to stop hostilities immediately. All
actors should continue to use the Agreement as a framework to address the conflict in
the country.
89. I welcome the President’s invitation to combatants from the Coalition des
patriotes pour le changement to disarm and re-join the Agreement’s implementation
mechanisms, which provided space for genuine dialogue, in particular at the local
level, for minority communities, women and young people. I encourage the
Government to continue efforts to implement comprehensive demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and repatriation process that leads to the dissolution of
armed groups.
90. While preparations for a republican dialogue continue are encouraging, I
reiterate that dialogue can only succeed when genuinely inclusive, when grievances
are heard and acted upon and when all stakeholders, in particular women and young
people, are given a voice, including those who reside outside of Bangui. I hope that
the preparations will be concluded quickly so that a truly inclusive dialogue can take
place. I condemn the targeting of members of the political opposition, which fuels
mistrust.
91. I welcome efforts to advance preparations for the holding of local elections in
September 2022 which will, if inclusive, provide an invaluable opportunity to
advance the peace process, in particular through the ex pansion of the political space
and decentralization, while also addressing barriers to women’s participation.
National authorities’ plan to update the voter registration list represents a positive
development, which would allow internally displaced persons, refugee returnees and
other newly eligible citizens to participate. Creating the security and political
environment conducive to the safe, dignified and sustainable return of refugees
remains crucial. It will also be important that the Government mobiliz e adequate
resources not only for the holding of these elections, but also for the new local
administrations that will emerge. I encourage partners to provide the necessary
financial and technical support, in coordination with electoral assistance from
MINUSCA.

21-14115

15/20

S/2021/867

92. I commend the adoption of the Government programme, which outlines the
commitment to work towards an inclusive society and a more open economy, with the
meaningful participation of women and young people. Translating this commitment
into reality requires the creation of a conducive economic environment, with
improved financial governance. I welcome the Government’s efforts to improve
financial management in coordination with international partners and call upon the
Government to undertake further progress in collecting revenue, controlling
expenditures and addressing corruption.
93. I call upon the Government to continue to prioritize a security sector reform
process focused on strengthening governance and democratic oversight of security
institutions. This would allow the progressive build-up of professional, responsible
and accountable national security forces that are able to provide effective protection
for civilians and support the State in consolidating its authority. I encourage the
national authorities to strengthen the coordination of international assistance
supporting the security sector reform process for better coherence and
complementarity of efforts and resources.
94. I remain deeply concerned about continued human rights violations and abuses,
including conflict-related sexual violence committed by all parties to the conflict. I
deplore the stigmatization and targeting of particular ethnic and religious
communities on suspicion of alleged collusion with armed groups. I call on all pa rties
to the conflict in the Central African Republic to adhere to international humanitarian
and human rights law. I welcome the Government’s decision to establish an
information-sharing forum to address human rights violations and call for this entity
to be provided with the necessary political support. I reiterate that the primary
responsibility to protect civilians rests with the national authorities and call upon
them to effectively coordinate all security actors operating in the country to ensure
that the human rights of all residents are respected. I welcome the Government’s
decision to establish a special investigation commission on human rights violations
and hope that its findings will help end impunity, hold perpetrators accountable and
contribute to peace and stability.
95. I am particularly concerned about the increase in incidents involving explosive
ordnance devices. Their toll in terms of civilian casualties and compromised
humanitarian and peacekeeping activities is unacceptable. I call upon all parties to
cooperate with the United Nations to locate and neutralize such devices.
96. The population of the Central African Republic demands justice and an end to
impunity. It is therefore important to continue to build impartial and independent la w
enforcement and justice systems and address chronic incarceration issues, with the
coordinated support of partners. I am particularly encouraged by the progress made
by the Special Criminal Court and stress the importance of continued international
support. I commend the representation of women (45 per cent) in the Commission on
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation and the appointment of a woman as the
President of the Commission and call on the Commission to swiftly commence its
work.
97. The people of the Central African Republic, and especially its most vulnerable –
children, women, the elderly and minority communities – continue to rely on
lifesaving humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian actors will continue to respond to
the dire needs of the population, despite the increasingly hostile operating
environment. I invite all donors to contribute generously to the full funding of the
humanitarian response plan.
98. I remain concerned about the unacceptable level of hostile incidents involving
national defence and internal security forces as well as bilaterally deployed and other
security personnel targeting MINUSCA, as well as persisting disinformation
16/20

21-14115

S/2021/867

campaigns. Such actions obstruct mandate delivery and put at risk the lives of
peacekeepers and contravene the commitments of President Touadéra and the
Government, including as part of the status-of-forces agreement with MINUSCA. I
urge the President to continue to take concrete steps to end actions that pose grave
risks to the safety and security of peacekeepers and to create an environment
conducive to enabling MINUSCA to implement its mandate.
99. My decision to repatriate a military contingent in September 2021 is an
expression of my zero-tolerance policy and meant to communicate the seriousness
with which the United Nations takes all allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse.
I deeply regret the harm caused to victims and reiterate the commitment of the United
Nations to work with partners to ensure that every victim receives assistance.
Furthermore, the United Nations will continue to ensure that every allegation is
thoroughly investigated, and I call upon Member States to work jointly with us to that
end. I further urge all troop- and police-contributing countries to enact active
measures to prevent and combat such violations. I reiterate my commitment to
eradicate sexual exploitation and abuse and reaffirm my instructions to all United
Nations personnel and those working under the United Nations flag to do the same.
100. The presence of MINUSCA in the Central African Republic and its robust
security, protection of civilians and independent political roles remain particularly
essential. I therefore recommend that the Security Council extend the mandate of
MINUSCA for one year, until 15 November 2022, at its current authorized military
and police strength, reinforced through Security Council resolution 2566 (2021),
while maintaining the Mission’s mandate and priorities, including for electora l
assistance.
101. I welcome pledges from troop- and police-contributing countries, and appeal to
them to expedite deployment of the required military and police personnel to support
the Mission’s operations and mandate implementation.
102. Lastly, I wish to express my appreciation to my Special Representative for the
Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA for his leadership and dedication. I
am grateful for the dedication of United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel in
performing the Mission’s mandate, and for troop- and police-contributing and donor
countries. I also commend regional, multilateral and non-governmental organizations
and all other partners for their invaluable contributions.

21-14115

17/20

S/2021/867

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic: military and police strength as at
1 October 2021
Military component

Police component

Experts on
mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Individual
police officers

Argentina

–

2

–

2

–

–

Bangladesh

10

34

1 297

1 341

–

–

Benin

4

2

–

6

–

32

Bhutan

2

3

–

5

–

–

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

1

2

–

3

–

–

Brazil

3

7

–

10

–

–

Burkina Faso

–

7

–

7

–

42

Burundi

8

11

741

760

–

–

Cambodia

4

6

204

214

–

–

Cameroon

3

5

800

808

320

15

Colombia

2

–

–

2

–

–

Congo

4

8

–

12

180

1

Côte d’Ivoire

–

1

–

1

–

55

Czechia

3

–

–

3

–

–

Djibouti

–

–

–

–

–

9

Egypt

8

24

990

1 022

139

26

France

–

8

–

8

–

4

Gabon

–

3

44

47

–

–

Gambia

4

6

–

10

–

12

Ghana

4

9

–

13

–

–

Guatemala

2

2

–

4

–

–

Guinea

–

–

–

–

–

14

Indonesia

2

8

220

230

140

4

Jordan

3

7

–

10

–

44

Kenya

8

7

–

15

–

–

Mali

–

–

–

–

–

21

Mauritania

8

10

446

464

279

–

Mexico

1

1

–

2

–

–

Morocco

2

18

747

767

–

–

Nepal

5

14

733

752

–

–

Niger

1

4

–

5

–

36

Nigeria

–

5

–

5

–

3

Pakistan

9

31

1 274

1 314

–

–

Paraguay

2

2

–

4

–

–

Peru

7

6

204

217

–

–

Philippines

2

–

–

2

–

–

Portugal

–

9

180

189

–

9

Country

18/20

21-14115

S/2021/867
Military component

Police component

Experts on
mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Formed
police units

Individual
police officers

Republic of Moldova

3

1

–

4

–

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

–

8

Russian Federation

1

7

–

8

–

–

Rwanda

8

22

1 660

1 690

460

33

Senegal

–

9

–

9

279

26

Serbia

2

3

71

76

–

–

Sierra Leone

4

1

–

5

–

–

Spain

–

–

–

–

–

4

Sri Lanka

–

3

110

113

–

–

Sweden

–

–

–

–

–

2

Togo

4

6

–

10

–

22

Tunisia

2

2

130

134

–

44

United Republic of Tanzania

–

8

448

456

–

–

United States of America

–

8

–

8

–

–

Uruguay

–

3

–

3

–

–

Viet Nam

1

6

–

7

–

–

Zambia

9

13

910

932

–

–

Zimbabwe

1

1

–

2

–

–

Total

147

355

11 209

11 711

1 797

466

Country

21-14115

19/20

S/2021/867

Annex II
Map

20/20

21-14115
