A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/197
9 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (c)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.3)]

49/197. Situation of human rights in Myanmar

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all Member States have an obligation to promote and protect human rights and
fundamental freedoms as stated in the Charter of the United Nations and elaborated in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 1/ the International Covenants on Human Rights 2/ and other applicable human rights
instruments,
Aware that, in accordance with the Charter, the Organization promotes and encourages respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms for all and that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that
"the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government",
Recalling its resolution 48/150 of 20 December 1993,
Recalling also Commission on Human Rights resolution 1992/58 of 3 March 1992, 3/ in which the
Commission, inter alia, decided to nominate a special rapporteur to establish direct contacts with the Government

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1992, Supplement No. 2 (E/1992/22), chap.
II, sect. A.
95-77179

/...

A/RES/49/197
Page 2

and with the people of Myanmar, including political leaders deprived of their liberty, their families and their
lawyers, with a view to examining the situation of human rights in Myanmar and following any progress made
towards the transfer of power to a civilian Government and the drafting of a new constitution, the lifting of
restrictions on personal freedoms and the restoration of human rights in Myanmar,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/85 of 9 March 1994, 4/ in which the
Commission decided to extend for one year the mandate of the Special Rapporteur,
Gravely concerned that the Government of Myanmar still has not implemented its commitments to take
all necessary steps towards democracy in the light of the results of the elections held in 1990,
Gravely concerned also at the continued violations of human rights in Myanmar, as reported by the
Special Rapporteur, in particular summary and arbitrary executions, torture, forced labour and forced relocations,
abuse of women, politically motivated arrests and detentions, restrictions on fundamental freedoms, including the
freedom of expression and assembly, and the imposition of oppressive measures directed in particular at ethnic
and religious minorities,
Noting that the human rights situation in Myanmar has consequently resulted in flows of refugees to
neighbouring countries, thus creating problems for the countries concerned,
Noting also the measures taken by the Government of Myanmar, including its accession to the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 5/ for the protection of victims of war, the conclusion of cease-fire agreements
with several groups of ethnic and religious minorities in Myanmar, the withdrawal of its reservations to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child 6/ and the release of a number of political prisoners in response to the
concerns expressed by the international community, including the General Assembly and the Commission on
Human Rights,
Welcoming the cooperation between the Government of Myanmar and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the voluntary repatriation of refugees from Bangladesh to Myanmar,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights for
his interim report; 7/
2.

Also expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report; 8/

3.

Deplores the continued violations of human rights in Myanmar;

4/

Ibid., 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum (E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.

5/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.

6/

Resolution 44/25, annex.

7/

A/49/594 and Add.1, annex.

8/

A/49/716.
/...

A/RES/49/197
Page 3

4.
Repeats its call on the Government of Myanmar to release unconditionally and immediately the
Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, who is now in her sixth year of detention without trial, and
other political leaders and remaining political prisoners;
5.
Welcomes the recent meetings between the Government of Myanmar and Nobel Peace Prize
Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, and encourages the Government of Myanmar to engage in a substantive political
dialogue with Aung San Suu Kyi and other political leaders, including representatives from ethnic groups, as the
best means of promoting national reconciliation and the full and early restoration of democracy;
6.
Also welcomes the recent discussions between the Government of Myanmar and the SecretaryGeneral, and further encourages the Government of Myanmar to continue to cooperate fully with the SecretaryGeneral;
7.
Again urges the Government of Myanmar, in conformity with its assurances given at various
times, to take all necessary steps towards the restoration of democracy in accordance with the will of the people
as expressed in the democratic elections held in 1990 and to ensure that political parties can function freely;
8.
Notes with concern that most of the representatives duly elected in 1990 are still excluded from
participating in the meetings of the National Convention, created to prepare basic elements for the drafting of a
new constitution, and that one of its objectives is to maintain the participation of the armed forces in a leading
role in the future political life of the State, and notes also that there is as yet no process or timetable for
concluding the National Convention;
9.
Strongly urges the Government of Myanmar to take all appropriate measures to allow all
citizens to participate freely in the political process in accordance with the principles of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and to accelerate the process of transition to democracy, in particular through the transfer of
power to democratically elected representatives;
10.
Urges the Government of Myanmar to ensure full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of expression and assembly, and the protection of the rights of persons belonging to
ethnic and religious minorities, and to put an end to violations of the right to life and integrity of the human
being, to the practices of torture, abuse of women, forced labour and forced relocations, and to enforced
disappearances and summary executions;
11.
Appeals to the Government of Myanmar to consider becoming a party to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2/ and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights 2/ and to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or
Punishment; 9/
12.
Urges the Government of Myanmar to fulfil its obligations as a State party to the Forced
Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29) and to the Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organize
Convention, 1948 (No. 87) of the International Labour Organization;
13.
Stresses the importance for the Government of Myanmar to give particular attention to
conditions in the country’s jails and to allow the International Committee of the Red Cross to communicate
freely and confidentially with prisoners;

9/

Resolution 39/46, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/197
Page 4

14.
Regrets the recent harsh sentences meted out to a number of dissidents, including persons
voicing dissent with regard to the procedures of the National Convention and persons sentenced, inter alia, for
seeking to communicate with the Special Rapporteur;
15.
Also regrets that, while a certain number of political prisoners have been released, many
political leaders are still deprived of their freedom and their fundamental rights;
16.
Calls upon the Government of Myanmar to respect fully the obligations of the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949, 5/ in particular the obligations in article 3 common to the Conventions, and to
make use of such services as may be offered by impartial humanitarian bodies;
17.
Expresses its concern at the attack by Myanmar army soldiers on the civilian refugee camp at
Halockhani on 21 July 1994;
18.
Encourages the Government of Myanmar to create the necessary conditions to ensure an end to
the flows of refugees to neighbouring countries and to facilitate their speedy repatriation and their full
reintegration, in conditions of safety and dignity;
19.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his discussions with the Government of Myanmar in
order to assist in the implementation of the present resolution and in its efforts to achieve national reconciliation,
and to report to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session and to the Commission on Human Rights at its fiftyfirst session;
20.

Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fiftieth session.

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
