A/RES/68/106

United Nations

Distr.: General
18 December 2013

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2013
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/68/462)]

68/106. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity, common interest and respect for the rule of law, to the
elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to peace, stability
and the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17).

13-44581

*1344581*

Please recycle

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session

A/RES/68/106

trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law; 1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of the Rules
on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration, 2 the Arbitration Rules
(as revised in 2010, with new article 1, paragraph 4, as adopted in 2013), 3 the Guide
on the Implementation of a Security Rights Registry, 4 the Guide to Enactment and
Interpretation of the Model Law on Cross-Border Insolvency, 5 part four of the
Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law, on the obligations of directors in the period
approaching insolvency, 6 the guidance on procurement regulations to be
promulgated in accordance with article 4 of the Model Law on Public Procurement 7
and the glossary of procurement-related terms used in the Model Law on Public
Procurement, 7 as well as for the updating of the Model Law on Cross-Border
Insolvency: The Judicial Perspective; 8
3.
Recognizes the opinion expressed by the Commission that the secretariat of
the Commission should fulfil the role of a repository of published information under
the Rules on Transparency in Treaty-based Investor-State Arbitration (“transparency
repository”), 9 invites the Secretary-General to consider performing, in accordance
with article 8 of the Rules on Transparency, the role of the transparency repository
through the secretariat of the Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly and the Commission in this regard;
Takes note with interest of the decisions taken by the Commission as
4.
regards its future work and the progress made by the Commission in its work in the
areas of arbitration and conciliation, online dispute resolution, electronic commerce,
insolvency law, security interests, international trade law aimed at reducing the legal
obstacles faced by micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises throughout their life
cycle and public-private partnerships, and commends in particular the efforts
undertaken by the Commission to improve the management of its resources while
maintaining and increasing its current levels of activity, including through the use of
informal working methods where appropriate, with due regard to the formal
negotiation process; 10
5.
Notes with appreciation the projects of the Commission aimed at
promoting the uniform and effective application of the Convention on the
Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (the New York
Convention), done at New York on 10 June 1958, 11 including the preparation of a
_______________
2

Ibid., chap. III and annex I.
Ibid., chap. III and annex II.
4
Ibid., chap. IV.
5
Ibid., chap. V, sect. A.
6
Ibid., sect. B.
7
Ibid., chap. VI.
8
Ibid., chap. V, sect. C.
9
Ibid., para. 80.
10
Ibid., chaps. III–V, VII, VIII and XV.
11
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
3

2/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session

A/RES/68/106

guide on the Convention, in close cooperation with international experts, to be
submitted to the Commission at a future session for its consideration; 12
6.
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law and at promoting
the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in this regard
appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate their legal
activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts and to promote
efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of
international trade law;
7.
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
work of the Commission concerned with technical cooperation and assistance in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical cooperation and assistance programme, and in that
respect encourages the Secretary-General to seek partnerships with State and
non-State actors to increase awareness about the work of the Commission and
facilitate the effective implementation of legal standards resulting from its work;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
cooperation and assistance activities and for providing assistance with legislative
drafting in the field of international trade law, and draws the attention of the
Secretary-General to the limited resources that are made available in this field;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical cooperation and assistance activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, for the financing of special projects and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical cooperation and assistance
activities, in particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical cooperation and assistance programme of the
Commission and to cooperate with the Commission and coordinate their activities
with those of the Commission in the light of the relevance and importance of the
work and programmes of the Commission for the promotion of the rule of law at the
national and international levels and for the implementation of the international
development agenda, including the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals;
8.
Recalls the importance of adherence to the rules of procedure and
methods of work of the Commission, including transparent and inclusive
deliberations, taking into account the summary of conclusions as reproduced in

_______________
12
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17),
chap. III, sect. E.

3/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session

A/RES/68/106

annex III to the report on the work of its forty-third session, 13 requests the
Secretariat to issue, prior to meetings of the Commission and of its working groups,
a reminder of those rules of procedure and methods of work with a view to ensuring
the high quality of the work of the Commission and encouraging the assessment of
its instruments, and in this regard recalls its previous resolutions related to this
matter;
9.
Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law Regional Centre for Asia and the Pacific, in the Republic of Korea,
towards reaching out and providing technical assistance with international trade law
reforms to developing countries in the region, notes with satisfaction expressions of
interest from other States in hosting regional centres of the Commission, and
requests the Secretary-General to keep the General Assembly informed of
developments regarding the establishment of regional centres, in particular their
funding and budgetary situation; 14
10. Appeals to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions
to the Trust Fund established to provide travel assistance to developing countries
that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the
Secretary-General, in order to enable renewal of the provision of that assistance and
to increase expert representation from developing countries at sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, necessary to build local expertise and
capacities in those countries to put in place a regulatory and enabling environment
for business, trade and investment;
11. Decides, in order to ensure full participation of all Member States in
the sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the
competent Main Committee during the sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly, its consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed
countries that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation
with the Secretary-General;
12. Endorses the conviction of the Commission that the implementation and
effective use of modern private law standards in international trade are essential for
advancing good governance, sustained economic development and the eradication of
poverty and hunger and that the promotion of the rule of law in commercial
relations should be an integral part of the broader agenda of the United Nations to
promote the rule of law at the national and international levels, including through
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, supported by the Rule of Law
Unit in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General;
13. Notes the rule of law panel discussion held at the forty-sixth session of
the Commission and the comments transmitted by the Commission highlighting its
role in promoting the rule of law and the peaceful settlement of international
disputes through its work in the areas of arbitration and conciliation, transparency in
investor-State dispute resolution and online dispute resolution and its work towards
achieving universal accession to, and the effective implementation and uniform
interpretation and application of, the New York Convention; 15

_______________
13

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/65/17).
Ibid., Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), chap. XIII.
15
Ibid., chap. XIV, sect. C.
14

4/6

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session

A/RES/68/106

14. Notes with satisfaction that, in paragraph 8 of the declaration of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and
international levels, adopted by consensus as resolution 67/1 of 24 September 2012,
Member States recognized the importance of fair, stable and predictable legal
frameworks for generating inclusive, sustainable and equitable development,
economic growth and employment, generating investment and facilitating
entrepreneurship and, in this regard, commended the work of the Commission in
modernizing and harmonizing international trade law and that, in paragraph 7 of the
declaration, Member States expressed their conviction that the rule of law and
development were strongly interrelated and mutually reinforcing;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with
resolutions of the General Assembly on documentation-related matters, 16 which, in
particular, emphasize that any invitation to limit, where appropriate, the length of
documents should not adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the
substance of the documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the
mandate and functions of the Commission in the progressive development and
codification of international trade law when implementing page limits with respect
to the documentation of the Commission; 17
16. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the publication of Commission
standards and the provision of summary records of the meetings of the Commission,
including committees of the whole established by the Commission for the duration
of its annual session, relating to the formulation of normative texts, and takes
note of the Commission’s decision to continue the trial use of digital recordings,
in parallel with summary records where applicable, with a view to assessing at its
forty-seventh session, in 2014, the experience of using digital recordings and, on the
basis of that assessment, taking a decision regarding the possible replacement of
summary records by digital recordings; 18
17. Recalls paragraph 48 of its resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011
regarding the rotation scheme of meetings between Vienna and New York;
18. Notes with appreciation the work of the Secretariat on the system for the
collection and dissemination of case law on Commission texts in the six official
languages of the United Nations (the CLOUT system), notes the resource-intensive
nature of the system, acknowledges the need for further resources to sustain and
expand it, and in this regard welcomes efforts by the Secretariat towards building
partnerships with interested institutions, and appeals to Governments, the relevant
bodies of the United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to
assist the secretariat of the Commission in raising awareness as to the availability
and usefulness of the CLOUT system in professional, academic and judiciary circles
and in securing the funding required for the coordination and expansion of the
system and the establishment, within the secretariat of the Commission, of a pillar
focused on the promotion of ways and means of interpreting Commission texts in a
uniform manner;
19. Stresses the importance of promoting the use of texts emanating from the
work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
_______________
16

Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
Resolutions 59/39, para. 9, and 65/21, para. 18; see also Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/59/17), paras. 124–128.
18
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/68/17), para. 341.
17

5/6

A/RES/68/106

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its forty-sixth session

international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to conventions, enacting model laws and
encouraging the use of other relevant texts;
20. Welcomes the continued work of the Secretariat on digests of case law
related to Commission texts, including their wide dissemination, as well as the
continuing increase in the number of abstracts available through the CLOUT
system, in view of the role of the digests and the CLOUT system as important tools
for the promotion of the uniform interpretation of international trade law, in
particular by building local capacity of judges, arbitrators and other legal
practitioners to interpret those standards in the light of their international character
and the need to promote uniformity in their application and the observance of good
faith in international trade.
68th plenary meeting
16 December 2013

6/6
