UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1185
18 November 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 18 NOVEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo
covering the period from 27 September to 26 October 1999.
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

99-35433 (E)

191199

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1185
English
Page 2

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations
of the Kosovo Force

1.
Over the reporting period (27 September-26 October), troops of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) continued their deployment into the theatre. As at 26 October,
there were 49,517 troops in place. Seventeen countries members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) have now completed their deployments. On
8 October, General Dr. Klaus Reinhardt assumed command of KFOR from the outgoing
commander, Lieutenant General Sir Michael Jackson.
2.
Argentina, Azerbaijan and Georgia completed their deployments over the
reporting period. Russian deployment into the town of Orahovac continues to be
hampered by ongoing demonstrations and roadblocks set up around the town by
various groups of ethnic Albanians. Efforts to resolve the problem are ongoing.
Security
3.
Overall, criminal and violent acts decreased over the period. Acts of
aggression against KFOR personnel decreased significantly, despite an upswing in
the second week of October, which coincided with an upswing in attacks by
Kosovar Albanians against Kosovar Serbs. In the period since then, attacks on
Kosovar Serbs decreased, although attacks on Serb property, including arson
attacks, continued. The protection of minorities remains one of the highest
priorities for KFOR. Over 50 per cent of KFOR personnel are involved. KFOR
troops provide a permanent presence in Serb towns, villages, neighbourhoods and
even in individual houses. Checkpoints and patrols are organized in key areas
to provide security and instil a feeling of confidence in the community. Ethnic
tension remains, however, particularly in areas where Kosovar Serbs and Kosovar
Albanians live in close proximity, as is the case in Kosovska Mitrovica, where
there were a number of clashes over the reporting period.
4.
On 28 September, a grenade attack near the market place in Kosovo Polje
resulted in the death of two Kosovar Serbs and serious injuries to 50 others.
In the immediate aftermath, additional KFOR troops and platoons from the
Multinational Specialized Unit deployed into the town. KFOR will continue to
seek to improve the security situation, to protect all the communities in
Kosovo, and to deter violence.
5.
KFOR continues to work closely with the United Nations Mine Action
Coordination Centre and other demining organizations, and is currently
conducting mine awareness training in an effort to teach the local population of
the dangers of mines and unexploded ordnance. KFOR continues to focus on
eradicating the threat posed by cluster bomb units and on clearing border
crossing sites, and hopes to mark all areas and clear as many as possible before
the onset of the first snow. As at 22 October, 6,130 anti-personnel mines,
3,481 anti-tank mines and 7,408 bomblets had been cleared. Residual caches of
weapons continue to be discovered and confiscated throughout the area of
operation. KFOR began the destruction of confiscated weapons on 15 October.

/...

S/1999/1185
English
Page 3

Until 30 November, KFOR will accept the voluntary handing in of all weapons and
military ordnance by the local population.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
6.
Since demilitarization on 21 September, the Kosovo Liberation Army
(KLA(UÇK)) has ceased to exist. The Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), which came
into being at that time, will be a multi-ethnic civil emergency agency, with no
law enforcement role, under the authority of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. KPC is under the day-to-day
operational direction and supervision of KFOR and is currently in a 60-day
transition phase, to be completed by 21 November. Progress to date has been
hampered by inadequate funding for the training and operation of the new Corps.
7.
During the reporting period, Serb security forces continued to comply with
the terms of the military-technical agreement and in general remain cooperative
in their dealings with KFOR. Seasonal military training by the Serb forces
continues and this has, on some occasions, brought elements of their forces
close to the ground safety zone. On the night of 25/26 October, a minor
incident occurred when three Yugoslav Army soldiers, apparently lost, entered
Kosovo in the Multinational Brigade (West) area. They were detained for the
night, before being returned to the Yugoslav Army on 26 October. A formal
protest was sent to the staff of the Yugoslav Army.
Cooperation with international organizations
8.
KFOR continues to provide humanitarian assistance throughout Kosovo on a
daily basis, focusing on transportation, food distribution and the protection
and escort of refugees and internally displaced persons. KFOR is assisting the
United Nations winterization emergency team so as better to coordinate common
activities. In this respect, an exercise was held on 20 October, which
simulated KFOR emergency support to the population, pursuant to request from the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. KFOR has also been working to
facilitate the flow of humanitarian aid by building a bypass at the
Deneral-Jankovic border crossing. Work on the bypass is almost complete.
9.
With the police force of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) numbering 1,747 at the end of October, civil administration in
the area of public security remains principally a KFOR responsibility. KFOR
provides soldiers for joint patrols with the UNMIK police and, as noted above,
also continues to patrol in all major urban areas and in the countryside in
order to deter crime and instil a sense of personal safety in civilians. KFOR
provides daily support to the Kosovo Police School whose first intake of 173
students graduated on 16 October. The next class will start on 22 November.
10. KFOR continues to provide 24-hour control and monitoring on the authorized
border-crossing points with Albania and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia,1 and provides security for the transportation to Pristina of the
customs duties collected at the border. Routine border-monitoring operations,

1

Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.
/...

S/1999/1185
English
Page 4

including random searches of vehicles, continue, in accordance with the approach
of KFOR to targeting illegal border activity. KFOR will continue to attach high
priority to monitoring cross-border movements into Kosovo.
11. KFOR continues to support UNMIK at all levels of the civil administration
in Kosovo and is represented in the Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC) and the
joint civil commissions. KTC continues to meet, but has been boycotted by the
Serbs in protest against the establishment of KPC, which they consider is not
multi-ethnic.
12. With respect to infrastructure, KFOR troops are still involved in such
tasks as sanitation, securing water supplies and power plant operations. Rail
transportation has resumed, operated and maintained by KFOR with funds from the
trust fund of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Government of Japan. Pristina airport was opened to commercial traffic on
15 October. Commercial flights, which had been suspended on 20 October, resumed
on 28 October.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
13. Almost 90 per cent of some 900,000 refugees in regional and third countries
have now returned to Kosovo. During the month of September, 10,000 refugee
returns were organized, 700 from the Balkans and the rest from third countries.
The Serbs in Kosovo, however, remain largely isolated and dependent on aid
provided by humanitarian organizations and KFOR for food delivery and medical
care.
Outlook
14. There has been no significant change in the security situation in Kosovo
since the most recent report. Attacks against ethnic minorities, especially
Kosovar Serbs, remain a concern, and the potential exists for tension in areas
such as Mitrovica and Orahovac to escalate and spread. KFOR will continue to
work in close cooperation with UNMIK to address these and other issues in order
to maintain peace and stability.

-----
