S/2015/485

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 June 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 26 June 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the twenty-first monthly report of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), submitted pursuant to paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013) (see annex). The report covers the period from 22 May to 22 June 2015.
With respect to the destruction of the 12 chemical weapons production
facilities, I note that the explosives required to destroy the hangars are now
expected to arrive in the Syrian Arab Republic by the end of June. I am pleased to
learn that sufficient access to one additional hangar has permitted the completion of
drilling operations. As a result, six of the seven hangars are now ready to receive the
explosives. The seventh, as before, remains inaccessible owing to security
considerations.
The outstanding issues relating to the initial declaration of the Syrian Arab
Republic are the focus of continuing activities by the OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team, and the resolution of those issues depends upon the o ngoing
cooperation between OPCW and the Syrian authorities. I take note of the fact that
the samples taken during the eighth and ninth visits of the Team to the Syrian Arab
Republic are undergoing laboratory analysis, and I look forward to learning of the
results of that analysis. The Team is now planning its tenth visit in order to continue
its work.
While all of the above activities are continuing, however, so too are the
allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. I n
my letter to the Director-General of OPCW dated 18 May 2015, I shared my deep
concern at those continuing and disturbing allegations. I also reaffirmed the
willingness of the United Nations to provide assistance to OPCW, as required. I
welcome the safe return of the OPCW fact-finding mission team that spent two
weeks in the Syrian Arab Republic to pursue information provided by the
Government of that country in December 2014. Likewise, I welcome the efforts of
the other OPCW fact-finding mission team that is investigating allegations of the
use of toxic chemicals in Idlib province through the collection of all available
information, including that gathered during its first deployment.
The continuing allegations of the use of toxic chemicals as weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic serve as a powerful and shameful reminder that such weapons
have not yet been consigned to history. There must be no doubt as to the absolute

15-10796 (E)

290615

*1510796*

S/2015/485

unacceptability of such weapons and the need for those responsible for their use to
be held accountable.
I would be grateful if you could urgently bring the present letter and its annex
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

2/6

15-10796

S/2015/485

Annex
I have the honour to transmit to you my report entitled “Progress in the
elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons programme”, prepared in accordance
with the relevant provisions contained in Executive Council decision EC -M33/DEC.1 of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and in
Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), both dated 27 September 2013, for
transmission to the Council. My report covers the period from 22 May to 22 June
2015 and the reporting requirements of Executive Council decision EC -M34/DEC.1, dated 15 November 2013.
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

15-10796

3/6

S/2015/485

Enclosure
Note by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Progress in the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme
1.
In accordance with subparagraph 2(f) of the decision by the Executive Council
(hereinafter “the Council”) at its Thirty-Third Meeting (EC-M-33/DEC.1, dated
27 September 2013), the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) is to
report to the Council on a monthly basis regarding the implementati on of that
decision. In accordance with paragraph 12 of United Nations Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013), the report by the Secretariat is also to be submitted to the
Security Council through the Secretary-General.
2.
The Council, at its Thirty-Fourth Meeting, adopted a decision entitled
“Detailed Requirements for the Destruction of Syrian Chemical Weapons and Syrian
Chemical Weapons Production Facilities” (EC-M-34/DEC.1, dated 15 November
2013). In paragraph 22 of that decision, the Council decided that the Secretariat
should report on its implementation “in conjunction with its reporting required by
subparagraph 2(f) of Council decision EC-M-33/DEC.1”.
3.
The Council, at its Forty-Eighth Meeting, also adopted a decision entitled
“Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria” (EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated
4 February 2015).
4.
This, the twenty-first monthly report, is therefore submitted in accordance
with the aforementioned Council decisions, and includes information relevant to the
period from 22 May to 22 June 2015.
Progress achieved by the Syrian Arab Republic in meeting the requirements of
EC-M-33/DEC.1 and EC-M-34/DEC.1
5.

Progress within the reporting period by the Syrian Arab Republic is as follows:

(a) With respect to the 12 chemical weapons production facilities (CWPFs)
(seven aircraft hangars and five underground structures) in the Syrian Arab
Republic, since the last report, brief periods of stable security conditions have
allowed the completion of drilling operations at one hangar site and the near
completion of destruction activities at one underground structure. As such, six
hangars are now ready to accommodate explosives, and the Secretariat has verified
the destruction of four underground structures, as previously reported. Expl osives
are now expected to arrive before the end of June 2015. Severe security conditions
continue to preclude safe access to one hangar;
(b) On 15 June 2015, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to the Council its
nineteenth monthly report (EC-79/P/NAT.3, dated 15 June 2015) regarding activities
on its territory related to the destruction of its chemical weapons and CWPFs, as
required by paragraph 19 of EC-M-34/DEC.1;
(c) The Syrian authorities have continued to extend the necessary
cooperation in accordance with the implementation of subparagraph 1(e) of EC -M-

4/6

15-10796

S/2015/485

33/DEC.1 and paragraph 7 of United Nations Security Council resolution 2118
(2013).
Progress in the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons by States Parties hosting
destruction activities
6.
As reported previously, all declared chemicals have been removed from the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, and all declared stocks of the Category 1
chemicals have been destroyed. A total of 93.7% of the Category 2 chemicals has
now been destroyed, representing a combined total of 98.8% of all chemical
weapons declared by the Syrian Arab Republic, including the isopropanol
previously destroyed in the Syrian Arab Republic. The status of the destruction of
the remaining Category 2 chemical (hydrogen fluorid e (HF)) and effluents is as
follows:
(a) Veolia ES Technical Solutions, LLC in the United States of America has
finalised its arrangements to safely process the corroded HF cylinders, and is
expected to restart its activities soon. As reported previously, a total of 48.7% of the
HF has already been destroyed;
(b) As Ekokem in Finland has now completed the destruction of DF effluent,
and as GEKA had already completed the destruction of HD effluent, as previously
reported, all effluent that was produced by the neutralisation process on board the
United States vessel MV Cape Ray has been destroyed.
7.
The Secretariat will continue to brief States Parties in The Hague on the
destruction activities relating to the remaining HF cylinders.
Activities carried out by the Secretariat with respect to the Syrian Arab Republic
8.
In the context of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, cooperation
with the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS) has continued and
seven OPCW staff members were deployed as part of that Mission as at the cut-off
date of this report. Ms. Grete Faremo, Executive Director of UNOPS, along with her
colleagues in charge of the Mission, visited the OPCW Headquarters on 18 June
2015 and met with the Director-General and other OPCW staff dealing with the
Mission. The two sides discussed the ongoing cooperation between the OPCW and
UNOPS in the Syrian Arab Republic on activities related to the destruction of the 12
former CWPFs, as well as other operations carried out by the Mi ssion.
9.
The Director-General has continued to communicate with senior
representatives of the States Parties hosting a destruction facility or providing
assistance with the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons, and with senior
officials of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. As requested by the
Council at its Seventy-Fifth Session (paragraph 7.12 of EC-75/2, dated 7 March
2014), the Secretariat, on behalf of the Director-General, has continued to brief
States Parties in The Hague on its activities.
10. The Secretariat and the Syrian authorities have continued to cooperate on
outstanding issues regarding the Syrian initial declaration, as encouraged by the
Council at its Seventy-Sixth Session (paragraph 6.17 of EC-76/6, dated 11 July
2014). The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) continued interviews, site visits,
and technical discussions on issues still requiring clarification with the Syrian
authorities in the course of its ninth mission, which was conducted from 17 to

15-10796

5/6

S/2015/485

29 May 2015. The laboratory analysis of the samples taken at three sites visited
during the ninth mission, and the samples taken at three locations during the DAT’s
eighth mission, is in progress. The Secretariat is expecting to receive the results
within a few weeks. The DAT is preparing its fifth status report, which is to be
tabled at the Seventy-Ninth Session of the Council, to be held from 7 to 10 July
2015. The DAT’s next mission is planned for 19 July to 1 August 2015.
11. Regarding the implementation of additional special monitoring measures in
accordance with Notes EC-M-43/DG.1/Rev.1 (dated 21 July 2014) and EC-M40/DG.2/Add.1 (dated 20 July 2014), the special monitoring system equipment was
cleared by the Syrian customs authorities, and the contractor has begun installation
of the equipment at two of the four sites under the supervision of OPCW inspectors.
12. Although not part of the Syrian chemical weapons programme, the Secretariat
verified on 21 May 2015 the destruction of two items declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic as abandoned chemical weapons in accordance with Council decision EC 78/DEC.9 (dated 19 March 2015).
Supplementary resources
13. The total contributions of EUR 50.3 million in the Syria Trust Fund for the
Destruction of Chemical Weapons and the contributors thereto remained unchanged
from the previous report.
Activities carried out with respect to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria
14. Following the information provided by the Syrian Arab Republic in December
2014 alleging a number of incidents of use of toxic chemicals for hostile purposes,
the Director-General had offered to investigate these allegations. Final confirmation
from the Syrian Arab Republic that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) could
undertake a visit to Damascus was received on 21 May 2015, and an FFM team was
immediately despatched. This team, and another that conducted work in the context
of the recent allegations of the use of toxic chemicals in the Idlib province of the
Syrian Arab Republic, are now analysing the informatio n collected from their first
deployments. On 24 June 2015, the two FFM teams will brief States Parties on their
activities, which included conducting numerous interviews and collecting other
relevant information and evidence.
15. The United Nations Secretary-General, in a letter received by the OPCW on
27 May 2015, noted his deep concern over all recent allegations of use of toxic
chemicals in the Syria Arab Republic, and confirmed the willingness of the United
Nations to provide assistance in the framework of ongoing cooperation constituted
by the relationship agreement between the United Nations and the OPCW.
Conclusion
16. The main focus of the future activities of the OPCW Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic will continue to be on the destruction of the seven remaining CWPFs
and on installing and operationalising the special remote monitoring system in the
underground structures. The DAT and the FFM will also continue their work in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

6/6

15-10796
