A/74/976–S/2020/773

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
30 July 2020
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 62
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Security Council
Seventy-fifth year

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 72/276,
in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to submit to it during its
seventy-fourth session, a detailed report in connection with the next comprehensive
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, focusing on continued
implementation of resolution 70/262 and progress in the implementation of the
recommendations and options contained in his report on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (A/72/707-S/2018/43). In its resolution 2413 (2018), the Security Council took
note of that request.

20-10342 (E)

040920

*2010342*

A/74/976
S/2020/773

I. Introduction
1.
The third review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture was requested
in landmark twin resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, namely General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016). Launched
in October 2019, the review takes place at a time when there is greater consensus than
ever that the human and financial costs of responding to crisis rather than investing
in prevention are unsustainably high. The celebration of the seventy -fifth anniversary
of the United Nations is an opportunity to recall the aspiration, expressed in the
Charter of the United Nations, to save succeeding generations from the scou rge of
war. The Charter serves to highlight the critical relationship among peace and
security, development, human rights and international cooperation. Member States
reaffirmed these interlinkages in adopting the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as the framework for collective efforts to build peaceful, just,
prosperous and inclusive societies. The coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic
and its consequences have brought the necessity of these efforts into more acute focus.
2.
In the twin resolutions adopted in 2016, Member States reaffirmed the primary
responsibility of national Governments and authorities in identifying and driving
priorities, strategies and activities for sustaining peace, at all stages of conflict, and
emphasized that inclusivity was key to advancing national peacebuilding objectives.
Inclusive and sustainable development, anchored in the protection and promotion of
human rights, gender equality, and the goal of leaving no one behind, is the best
defence against conflict. Since assuming office, I have reiterated that the prevention
of crisis and human suffering must be placed at the heart of the work of the United
Nations in order to address the root causes of vulnerability and provide pathways to
sustainable development and peace.
3.
The world’s population continues to face increased poverty, inequality and
exclusion as well as threats to peace and security. By the end of 2019, the number of
forcibly displaced persons had reached 79.5 million, having doubled over the
preceding 20 years. A record 19 million children were internally displaced owing to
conflict and violence in 2019. 1 As at late 2018, only 18 per cent of conflict-affected
States were on track to meet Sustainable Development Goal targets related to basic
needs. 2 Inequalities in human development persist 3 and are likely to increase because
of the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change. There are growing gaps in trust
among people, institutions and leaders. Around the world, mass protests and unrest
have multiplied over the past decade, with increased intensity in 2019. In 2019 and
2020, global protests have called for greater inclusion, equality, climate action and
justice as well as women’s rights. Some have also identified racism as a pervasive
and systemic threat to justice, sustainable development and equality.
4.
The COVID-19 pandemic has devastated communities and economies
throughout the world, in particular the poorest and most vulnerable. Livelihoods are
at a risk as jobs evaporate and remittances dwindle. The n umber of people living in
poverty could increase by as much as half a billion globally. 4 The indirect effects of
COVID-19 and the actions taken in response can contribute to rising tensions,
__________________

United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), Lost at Home: The Risks and Challenges for
Internally Displaced Children and the Urgent Actions Needed to Protect Them (New York, 2020).
2
Emma Samman and others, SDG Progress: Fragility, Crisis and Leaving No One Behind
(London, Overseas Development Institute, 2018).
3
Human Development Report 2019: Beyond Income, Beyond Averages, Beyond Today – Inequalities
in Human Development in the 21st Century (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.20.III.B.1).
4
Andy Sumner, Chris Hoy and Eduardo Ortiz-Juarez, “Estimates of the impact of COVID-19 on
global poverty”, United Nations University World Institute for Development Economics
Research Working Paper No. 2020/43 (Helsinki, 2020).
1

2/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

violence and hate speech, exacerbate existing drivers of conflic t and undermine social
and economic resilience. 5 In particular, violence and insecurity against women and
girls continue to escalate, and the number of attacks against women human rights
defenders, humanitarians and peacebuilders continues to rise (see S/2019/800). The
current pandemic threatens not only hard-won development and peacebuilding gains
but also risks re-instigating conflicts or fomenting new ones. In some countries,
fragile peace processes could be derailed by the crisis – hence, a call for a global
ceasefire was issued, to help to focus collective efforts to address the pandemic and
its impact as a matter of priority. The call for a global ceasefire was followed by a
call for peace in the home, and therefore an end to all violence everywhere, from war
zones to people’s homes. Unless the alarming levels of violence against women and
girls are addressed, the achievement of sustainable peace and development will
remain elusive.
5.
The United Nations is committed, now more urgently than ever, to forging a
common and multilateralist vision, showing solidarity and using common systems
and capacities across the system to adequately support Member States in efforts to
achieve inclusive sustainable development and to sustain peace. The challenges of the
pandemic further underscore the imperative of coherent, multidimensional and cross pillar responses aligned with the integrated logic of the Sustainable Development
Goals. Responses have to be inclusive, people-centred and conflict-sensitive and
build opportunities to increase social cohesion and trust in government, including
through participatory dialogue mechanisms. Achieving that end would entail the
consistent inclusion of women in peace processes and p olitical decision-making. The
international community has to rally around the 2030 Agenda as a cornerstone of
long-term prevention and address drivers of vulnerability and insecurity. As I outlined
in “The highest aspiration: a call to action for human rights”, the United Nations is
committed to making fuller use of its human rights tools to support Member States.
The call was made with the full understanding that to invest in equitable access to
social services, inclusive and just institutions, the establishment of grievance
mechanisms and the fostering of social cohesion is to invest in peace.
6.
The current peacebuilding architecture review has been a broad and inclusive
process, guided by the Peacebuilding Commission and informed by open meetin gs of
all Member States and regional and thematic consultations held around the world,
many of which have been conducted online. In June 2020, the group of independent
eminent persons selected to support the review shared their reflections on the
implementation of the twin resolutions (see A/74/680-S/2020/91), and the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission informed me of key issues that had emerged during
Commission meetings. Member States have provided valuable insights in
submissions on their contributions to peacebuilding. The review coincides with a year
of significant milestones, including the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Platform for Ac tion of the
Fourth World Conference on Women, the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security, the
submission of my first report on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167) and the
launch of the decade of action for the Sustainable Development Goals.
7.
Mutually reinforcing reforms to restructure the peace and security pillar,
reposition the development system and improve management processes and practices
have led to demonstrable system-wide progress towards a more coherent,
comprehensive and holistic approach to peacebuilding. The Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs is leading the Organization’s efforts to support conflict
__________________
5

20-10342

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and World Food Programme
(WFP), “FAO-WFP early warning analysis of acute food insecurity hotspots: July 2020”.
3/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

prevention and resolution and to encourage integration across the system in that
regard.
8.
Of the 42 recommendations in my 2018 report (A/72/707-S/2018/43), 35 are in
various stages of implementation, 3 have been completed and 4 related to financing
are pending. I welcome the Commission’s highlighting of the need for Member States
to further discuss the options I had formulated in 2018. I have strengthened
leadership, accountability and capacities and enhanced partnerships that maximize
comparative advantage. Adequate, predictable and sustained financing for
peacebuilding remains a critical challenge. It is necessary to strive to secure the
resources needed to support peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
9.
The impact of the twin resolutions has to be gauged on the ground at the local,
national and regional levels and from the perspectives of a diverse set of actors.
Measuring the impact and the contribution of the United Nations is challenging.
Systemic change occurs only over time and in non-linear ways. Between 2020 and
2025, a key goal will be to sufficiently resource and strengthen monitoring and
evaluation systems to improve the design of peacebuilding approaches and learning
across the United Nations system. Efforts to achieve that goal will be bolstered by
stronger data capabilities and the implementation of the framework entitled Data
Strategy of the Secretary-General for Action by Everyone, Everywhere: with Insight,
Impact and Integrity – 2020–2022, supported by the United Nations Innovation
Network. The present report serves to highlight evidence of significant peacebuilding
results to date (see box 1).
Box 1
Change on the ground
United Nations peacebuilding efforts have generated the following results on the
ground: increased trust in government, improved social cohesion, lower levels of
violence, increased capacity to peacefully prevent and resolve conflict, inclusion of
peacebuilding in public policy, and durable political settlements. a
Facilitation, negotiation, inclusive approaches and efforts to build national
capacities create positive incentives. In Honduras, in response to requests from the
Government and opposition political parties, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), under
the leadership of the Resident Coordinator, facilitated an inter-party dialogue that led
to consensus on peacebuilding priorities, including electoral and constitutional
reforms and human rights.
The establishment of grievance mechanisms and participatory, inclusive
institutions expands access for vulnerable groups. In Madagascar, with the support of
UNDP, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
and OHCHR and funded by the Peacebuilding Fund, an anti-corruption hub and the
National Human Rights Commission have been fully operationalized and their
services are being utilized by an increasing number of people.
Institutions of a more inclusive and responsive nature correlate with increased
trust in the State. In South Sudan, UNDP assistance in building police posts in
locations identified by community members has complemented the efforts of United
Nations Mission in South Sudan police and the Global Focal Point for the Rule of
Law, helping to extend state authority and increase the population’s confidence in
local government. In parts of Côte d’Ivoire where there are frameworks in place for
dialogue among the population, local administration and security forces, supported
by UNDP, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
4/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Women (UN-Women) and UNESCO and funded by the Fund, public confidence in
security forces increased from 52 to 72 per cent for the period 2016–2019.
Inter-community dialogues, capacity-building, and monitoring and early warning
systems, supported by the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations
Population Fund, the International Organization for Migration, the Uni ted Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization and civil society partners, contributed to social
cohesion among ethnic groups, which 92 per cent of the surveyed population
recognized.
a

In the preparation of the present report, 400 documents were consulted, including
independent evaluations, thematic papers, surveys and project reports, in which
approximately 300 examples were highlighted from more than 35 countries. While not
mapping the full spectrum of United Nations peacebuilding efforts and impact, the examples
do indicate real and progressive impact.

II. Comprehensive cross-pillar approaches to peace
10. Comprehensive cross-pillar approaches to building and sustaining peace are the
cornerstone of the work of the United Nations to promote the coherence of
international efforts in support of national Governments and their people. Sustaining
peace has been integrated into 300 outcome documents from United Nations
intergovernmental bodies since 2015, and in double the number of Security Council
resolutions in 2019 compared to 2015. Security Council resolution 2417 (2018) on
the connection between armed conflict and food insecurity is an example of the
recognition of the linkages among the pillars of work, namely development,
humanitarian, human rights, and peace and security.
11. Member States and regional organizations are promoting conflict prevention
and advancing integrated approaches. Examples include the 2019 Aswan conclusions
on sustainable peace and development in Africa; the work of the European Union to
systematically apply a joined-up approach to humanitarian assistance, development
and peacebuilding; and initiatives in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Pacific to
support South-South cooperation and capacity-building for peacebuilding. The 2019
Global Refugee Forum, held in support of the global compact on refugees (A/73/12
(Part II)), yielded commitments from Member States and other stakeholders,
including to create enabling conditions for refugees to return home in safety and
dignity. Among international and financial institutions, there is increasing agreement
on the value of holistic, prevention-based approaches. The aim of the strategy of the
World Bank Group that addresses fragility, conflict and violence, which covers the
period 2020–2025, is to strengthen resilience to help countries to address root causes
of conflict, with a focus on prevention and a people-centred approach. Other examples
include the recommendation on the humanitarian-development-peace nexus prepared
by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development 6 and the resolution on sustaining peace as a vehicle
for achieving sustainable development, adopted in Geneva on 28 March 2018 by the
Inter-Parliamentary Union at its 138th assembly.
12. The Peacebuilding Commission is a flexible intergovernmental platform that
promotes national ownership and strengthens coordination and coherence among
partners and across the United Nations system. The Commission has adjusted its
workplan in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and convened virtually to discuss
national and regional implications for peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
__________________
6

20-10342

OECD/LEGAL/5019, available at https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECDLEGAL-5019.
5/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Engagement across 17 countries and regions 7 since 2016 has supported national
efforts to address political, socioeconomic, development and security challenges.
Engagement in support of Burkina Faso has strengthened international follow-up and
delivery on commitments for the Government’s priority action plan. Since 2017, the
Commission has served as a venue for the Gambia to discuss progress and challenges
related to women and youth in political and peace processes and decision -making,
security sector and constitutional reform, transitional justice, human rights, and good
governance, including regular updates from my Special Representative for West
Africa and the Sahel. The Commission more systematically integrated the gender
dimensions of peacebuilding into its work by adopting its gender strategy in 2016. I
welcome the Commission’s decision to report annually on imp lementation and to
prioritize the implementation of the strategy. I also welcome discussions to develop
an implementation plan on youth, peace and security.
13. The Commission has taken part in 18 joint meetings with the General Assembly,
Security Council or Economic and Social Council since 2016. Aided by the annual
appointment by the Peacebuilding Commission of an informal coordinator, and in
accordance with presidential statements S/PRST/2017/27 and S/PRST/2018/20, the
Commission’s advisory role with regard to the Council has expanded, in particular
during the review and drawdown of peacekeeping operations and special political
missions. The Commission provided advice to the Security Council on 50 occasions
between 2016 and 2019, including written advice on mandate renewals of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS). An informal interactive dialogue held in March 2019 informed the
preparations for the Security Council visit to the Sahel. The Commission’s bridging
role with regard to the Economic and Social Council has included annual joint highlevel meetings since 2017. A Commission side event at the humanitarian affairs
segment of the 2019 joint high-level meeting served to promote complementarity
between peacebuilding and humanitarian support in the Central African R epublic and
to highlight the work of UNOWAS to support the Economic Community of West
African States in addressing the impact of cross-border transhumance on peace and
development in West Africa and the Sahel. The 2020 Economic and Social Council
operational activities for development segment also served to underscore the need to
better connect actions in development, humanitarian assistance and peace. There is
potential for greater collaboration with the Security Council. I welcome the
Commission’s consideration of the designation of an informal coordinator to liaise
with the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. Designating a
coordinator would contribute to closer cooperation and coherence among
intergovernmental bodies, including the governing bodies of agencies, funds and
programmes.
14. Since January 2019, work related to the restructured peace and security pillar
has driven a more multidimensional, whole-of-pillar approach throughout various
phases of conflict, and closer collaboration with the development, human rights and
humanitarian sectors. The United Nations reforms position the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs as the lead entity supporting the Organization’s
efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts at the global l evel and play a central role in
advancing the agendas on women and peace and security and on youth, peace and
security, underpinned by the Department’s “Strategic plan: 2020 –2022”. The
__________________
7

6/21

The 14 countries are Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Colombia, the
Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Papua New Guinea, Sierra Leone,
Solomon Islands, Somalia and Sri Lanka, and the three regions are the Great Lakes, the Lake
Chad Basin, and West Africa and the Sahel.
20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Department is providing support, including in the contexts of transitions, good
offices, assistance with mediation efforts and peace processes, and help to ensure
peaceful election processes or defuse tensions related to elections. Ten distinct reform
initiatives for the peace and security pillar are on track, with identified targets and
leads. 8 The pillar’s regional structure, comprising the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations, has become a hub for
political analysis that grounds the Organization’s work, in particular through
backstopping of peace operations and guidance on tailored support for resident
coordinator offices. Early results are emerging from the Central African Republic
(box 2) and Burkina Faso (box 3). Regional strategies informed by regional p artners
drive more coherent responses. One such strategy is the United Nations Regional
Prevention Strategy for the Horn of Africa, which is informed by the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and led by my Special Envoy
for the Horn of Africa. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region continued to
convene platforms for information-sharing and joint analyses among United Nations
presences to promote complementary peacebuilding efforts. My Personal Envoy for
Bolivia worked with local and international facilitators to help national actors to reach
an agreement to de-escalate the crisis following the October 2019 elections and hold
credible and inclusive elections in 2020. He has since worked with the Resident
Coordinator and the United Nations country team to design and implement the United
Nations system initiative to consolidate peace in Bolivia to ensure that preventive
efforts are sustained prior, during and after the electoral process. I continue to
prioritize culture change to fully inculcate an approach based on prevention and
sustaining peace throughout the pillar, as underscored by the above -mentioned
Departments in their vision for the peace and security pillar.
15. Special political missions play an important prevention role in increasingly
complex situations and have made significant contributions to preventing large -scale
violence in a number of cases. Special political missions in Central Africa, Central
Asia and West Africa serve as platforms for preventive diplomacy and dialogue. In
Iraq, following large-scale protests at the end of 2019, the Electoral Assistance Office
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) provided technical
assistance and advice to the Council of Representatives, at its request, on electoral
reform and the reorganization of the Independent High Electoral Commission.
16. The Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations includes a reiteration of support for the role of peacekeeping operations
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace and the importance of coordination with other
actors to lay the foundations for sustaining peace beyond the lifetime of a
peacekeeping operation. When sustaining peace through multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, it is important to seek to strengthen national ownership and
capacity and, in doing so, to ensure integrated analysis and planning, in particular for
transitions. It is also important to seek greater coherence within the United Nations
system.
17. The development system is more integrated, cohesive and transparent, with
empowered, independent resident coordinators leading country teams in joint analysis
and joined-up planning and programming as well as mainstreaming core norms and
standards, with the aim of supporting Member States in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. In many countries, achieving the Goals will require stepped -up
support by country teams to address prevention and peacebuilding challenges. Data
collected through the United Nations Sustainable Development Group information
management system point to a system that is moving in the right direction, with 95
per cent of country teams reporting that joint approaches have strengthened their
__________________
8

20-10342

A/75/202; and https://reform.un.org/content/benefits-tracker.
7/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

relationships with Governments (see E/2020/54 and A/75/79-E/2020/55). According
to the results of the 2019 survey of programme country Governments conducted by
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, the Governments
of two thirds of programme countries indicated that resident coordinators had shown
an increased capacity to support national development priorities. A new internal
mutual accountability framework has been launched. The new common c ountry
analysis and the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks
facilitate support for national partners on the basis of joint multidimensional risk
analysis. According to the results of the 2019 survey of resident coordinators
conducted by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 57 per cent of the
Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks explicitly addressed
peacebuilding and 90 per cent substantively addressed drivers of needs, risk and
vulnerability. Almost 90 per cent of partner Governments agree that the Frameworks
have helped to align United Nations activities more closely with national needs and
priorities. In Tunisia, a multi-stakeholder risk analysis identified root causes of
conflict, such as exclusion and inequalities, and approaches to prevent or mitigate
those risks. In Somalia, the common country analysis and the United Nations country
results reports are a joint endeavour of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia (UNSOM) and the country team. In Guinea-Bissau, conflict analysis
conducted by UNIOGBIS enabled a more unified understanding of the root causes of
conflict, which helped to define peacebuilding priorities.
18. A systemic focus on prevention and multidimensional approaches to peace with
closer alignment among pillars has improved delivery in the field, including through
increased substantive and technical expertise for resident coordinator offices. Across
the globe, the offices now have standardized capacities for coordination, planning,
economic analysis and communications as well as monitoring and evaluation. In
addition, in countries facing specific challenges, additional office capacities exist for
analysis, constitution-making, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
electoral assistance, mediation, mine action, public administration, rule of law,
security sector reform and support for partnerships with international financial
institutions. Colombia offers an example of complementarity between a special
political mission with a verification mandate and a country team supporting
peacebuilding activities, including assistance in the reintegration of combatants and
reconciliation among communities. A continued focus on the implementation of the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
signed in 2016, is intended to help to seize opportunities in Colombia to bring lasting
reductions in violence and to uphold development gains in former conflict areas. To
that end, the special political mission regularly facilitates dialogue among the parties
and other stakeholders on the implementation of the Agreement.
19. The Peacebuilding Fund continues to serve an important integration function
between country teams and missions. In 2019, 30 per cent of the Fund’s investments
supported transition settings, 39 per cent supported peacekeeping settings and 12 per
cent supported countries with special political missions. In Somalia, the Mediation
Support Unit of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs supp orted local
peace processes and advised on the design of Fund initiatives, and UNSOM is now
an implementing partner in most Fund projects. The Fund’s strategy for the period
2020–2024 represents its most ambitious plan to date, maintaining core focus areas
while scaling up support for cross-border and regional approaches, transition contexts
and inclusion of women and youth in political and peacebuilding processes.

8/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Box 2
Cross-pillar collaboration to sustain peace in the Central African Republic
In the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission (MINUSCA), the United Nations country team and
international and regional partners are working with stakeholders at the regional,
national, local levels. The Mission plays a critical role in supporting the political
process, including the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed in 2019, in partnership with
the African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States and others,
including the European Union. At the regional level, MINUSCA works with the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, which has provided good offices
support that has been instrumental in reactivating bilateral joint commissions with
Cameroon, Chad and the Congo.
While the environment remained fragile, 2018 and 2019 saw a 42 per cent
decrease in human rights violations, and conflict-related civilian casualties decreased
by 82 per cent since the signing of the Agreement. The United Nations Peacebuilding
and Development Assistance Framework, developed by MINUSCA and the country
team, is aligned with the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, which is based
on a joint assessment conducted by the European Union, the United Nations, the
World Bank and the African Development Bank.
The Peacebuilding Commission has provided an international platform for
discussion of the implementation of the Agreement and the Plan, the 2020 –2021
elections and cooperation among international financial institutions. The discussion
is intended to help with the formulation of advice to be provided to the Security
Council ahead of the renewal of the mandate of MINUSCA. In May 2020, the
Commission convened to discuss the implications of the coronavirus disease in the
Central African Republic.
A quick Peacebuilding Fund disbursement of $23.9 million allowed the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, the International Organization for
Migration (IOM), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
the United Nations Population Fund and civil society partners, in close coordination
with MINUSCA and the Government, to support coordination and communication
mechanisms as well as the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Reconciliation, special mixed security units and prefectural committees for the
implementation of the Agreement. The Mission, UNDP, the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UN-Women and the United
Nations Volunteers programme support human rights and the restoration of justice
through the Special Criminal Court. Community violence reduction programmes
initiated by MINUSCA are being implemented, including by IOM, in seven locations
in Paoua and Bambari, supported by the Peacebuilding Fund. The programmes have
contributed to a decline in violence by providing vocational training and employment
opportunities for youth.

20. The United Nations system continues to refine tools for integrated analysis and
approaches. Multidisciplinary missions on mainstreaming, acceleration and policy
support, led by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), have supported
51 countries since 2016. In 2017, engagement in Mali in this regard led to greater
alignment of municipal strategies with the National Development Plan and emphasis
on excluded communities. In May 2020, I initiated a comprehensive review of the

20-10342

9/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Policy on Integrated Assessment and Planning in order to fully reflect my vision for
integrated, predictable cross-pillar action.
21. More effective collaboration is emerging among humanitarian, development and
peace actors. 9 According to data collected through the United Nations Sustainable
Development Group information management system, all country teams report that
changes have been made to activities in response to reforms, in particular highlighting
improved joint analysis, planning and programme implementation. Country -level
decision-making platforms bring together stakeholders to design multisectoral
approaches to challenges. One example, the Shabunda action plan in South Kivu,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, led by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, brings together
authorities, the country team and civil society partners to address conflict -related
sexual violence, which significantly decreased in 2019. In the Central African
Republic and Chad, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and WFP supported national and
local actors to improve management of cross-border transhumance by building
resilience to climate change and strengthening community engagement. In
Kyrgyzstan, through the work of a Fund-supported civil society organization, young
people have been empowered to play key roles in identifying peacebuilding needs and
to take them up with local authorities. As a result, youth agendas, which have had a
gender focus, have been increasingly integrated into local government policies and
development plans. A task team of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Group, co-chaired by UNDP, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the Peacebuilding Support Office, is
dedicated to ensuring Headquarters-level policy coordination on transitions and
recovery. The regional monthly review mechanism, co-chaired by the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace Operations and UNDP,
with the active participation of the new Development Coordination Office, is the main
Headquarters forum for cross-pillar prevention discussions. Now in its third year, the
Joint Steering Committee to Advance Humanitarian and Development Collaboration
has worked closely with resident coordinators, country teams and, where present,
missions, supporting joint analyses to inform coherent programming in Burkina Faso,
Chad, Cameroon, Ethiopia, the Niger, Nigeria, Somalia and, more recently, the Sudan.
22. The international human rights framework, in particular the obligations of
Member States under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and human rights
treaties, provides a critical foundation for sustaining peace. In my call to action for
human rights, I articulated how the entire United Nations system can make fuller use
of human rights tools to support Member States. The collective work of the United
Nations to advance human rights is grounded in a commitment to identifying root
causes and responses to crisis. To this end, with regard to the peace and security and
development pillars, advances are being made in the use of human rights mechanisms,
such as special procedures, the treaty bodies and the un iversal periodic review, and
the recommendations those mechanisms make in support of Member States. Human
rights protection responsibilities are being further institutionalized across the system,
and senior leadership access to advice and expertise on huma n rights is being
expanded. 10
23. Objectives related to peacebuilding and sustaining peace are increasingly
mainstreamed across the United Nations system. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) included prevention and stab ilization in
__________________

Centre on International Cooperation, The Triple Nexus in Practice: Toward a New Way of
Working in Protracted and Repeated Crises (New York, 2020).
10
Gert Rosenthal, “A brief and independent inquiry into the involvement of the United Nations in
Myanmar from 2010 to 2018”, 29 May 2019.
9

10/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

its strategic directions for the period 2017–2021, with particular attention afforded to
durable solutions for internally displaced persons and the prevention of statelessness.
The International Organization for Migration works on addressing c auses and drivers
of displacement and facilitating lasting solutions through community -based
peacebuilding. Investment in supply-chain and related infrastructure, supported by
WFP and the United Nations Office for Project Services, enhances peacebuilding b y
enabling access to basic services and economic opportunities. Similarly, FAO and
WFP are helping communities to manage competition over land, water and other
natural resources and the multiple dimensions of food insecurity. The United Nations
Population Fund (UNFPA) identified peacebuilding as a guiding principle for its
strategic plan for the period 2018–2021. The World Health Organization has issued
guiding principles on implementing health interventions conducive to peace in
conflict settings. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) included prevention in its management plan for the period 2018 –
2021 and adopted a prevention strategy. A total of 59 United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) country offices supported child-centred social services, in particular
education, with a view to fostering community engagement and trust and promoting
young people’s participation. Conflict-sensitive approaches are being strengthened,
including through forthcoming guidance on conflict sensitivity, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace from the United Nations Sustainable Development Group. As
underlined by the group of independent eminent persons, the United Nations system
is determined to continue transcending divides in humanitarian, deve lopment and
peace work to ensure effective and coherent responses.
24. Innovation in cross-pillar collaboration has emerged, including through the
United Nations Innovation Network and the Innovation Cell of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs. New technologies have supported inclusive peace
processes, including online dialogues by my special envoys and the Standby Team of
Senior Mediation Advisers, the use of which has been accelerated by COVID -19.
Examples include support for the strategy of my Special Envoy for Yemen to enhance
women’s participation in the Yemen peace process. The climate security mechanism
of the Department, UNDP and the United Nations Environment Programme addresses
climate-related security risks by leveraging capacities and coordinating inter-agency
activities. A toolbox for climate-related security risk analysis has been developed.
The United Nations Network on Migration, which supports the implementation of the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, is ensuring system-wide
coordination with regard to the contribution of well-managed migration to peace. The
further development of the integration of mental health and psychosocial support into
peacebuilding is envisaged with a view to increasing the resilience and agency of
people and communities.
Box 3
Joined-up and prevention-focused approach in Burkina Faso
United Nations support for Burkina Faso illustrates the system’s ability to drive
a holistic conflict prevention approach in a non-mission setting. The United Nations
country team worked with the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and received technical support from across the system, on mediation, security sector
reform and the prevention of violent extremism, to strengthen its footprint with the
establishment of five integrated subregional offices to support the Government’s
efforts. A prevention and peacebuilding assessment, conducted by the United Nations,
the European Union, the World Bank and the African Development Bank at the
request of the Government, helped to prioritize peacebuilding within existing budgets
and led to improved coordination and alignment of support with the Government’s

20-10342

11/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

priority action plan in the areas of security and the rule of law, social services, local
governance, and resilience and social cohesion.
The Peacebuilding Fund approved $2.3 million in 2019 for initiatives led by the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and civil society partners, including to strengthen the
capacities of women and youth to prevent conflict in their communities , in particular
in cross-border areas. Security and defence forces of more than 2,000 are supporting
public activities, and community-based policing has enabled forces to interact with
local leaders and build trust with the population by implementing community
solutions to security threats.

III. Leadership, accountability and capacity to build and
sustain peace
25. The Organization’s commitment to strengthening national capacities for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace has been evident in several peace and security
contexts. In Guinea-Bissau, UNIOGBIS supported a national human rights defenders’
network in monitoring the human rights context in the 2019 election. The network
has since become a strategic partner of UNIOGBIS in its early warning efforts. In
Libya, since 2018, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and UNDP have
implemented a joint programme on policing and security, providing assistance to
improve capacities and establish policing and rule of law services that are more
effective and public-oriented. In Iraq, UNAMI trains local human rights organizations
and lawyers. In Yemen, a project implemented by IOM and FAO in the Governorates
of Sana’a and Lahij helped water user associations to resolve 15 water-related
conflicts and increase access to water for an estimated 27,000 farmers. In the regions
of Mopti and Ségou in Mali, WFP, FAO and UNHCR supported laboratories for peace,
bringing together women, men, young people, elected municipal officials, and
community and religious leaders to negotiate ceasefire agreements that led to a
significant decrease in intercommunity violence. In 2019, the Mediation Support Unit
supported the Resident Coordinators in Malawi, Somalia and Sri Lanka by coaching
national interlocutors on mediation skills to support local peacemaking efforts. In
Colombia, support from the United Nations Democracy Fund helped to restore local
media networks in regions affected by armed conflict. In the Niger, volunteer women
mediators are now part of land commissions to prevent conflict over natural
resources. See box 4 for additional information on local peacebuilding and sustaining
peace.
26. The youth, peace and security agenda promotes the role of young women and
men as positive forces for building peaceful and just societies. In Burundi, UNICEF,
UNFPA and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO), supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, work with more than 1,000 young
agents of peace in local communities and 57 associations to resolve local conflicts
and strengthen social cohesion. In 2017, the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa cooperated with the Economic Community of Central African States
and UNESCO to jointly develop and launch a three-year programme to build the
capacity of youth to manage an early warning system with a view to promoting peace
and security in Central Africa. The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia organized the first-ever government-youth dialogue in
Central Asia and Afghanistan. An evaluation of UNICEF support for young people in
peacebuilding showed that developing relevant life skills had demonstrable impact
on the ability of young people to prevent, resolve and transform conflicts. As
12/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

highlighted in my first report on youth, peace and security ( S/2020/167), core
challenges include structural barriers limiting the participation of young people and
their capacity to influence decision-making; violations of their human rights; and
insufficient investment in facilitating their inclusion, in particular through education.
Prioritizing education in approaches to peace, including conflict-sensitive curricula
for peace and non-violence, is considered catalytic.
27. Accountable, inclusive and responsive governance is critical to building and
sustaining peace. Five years into the implementation of t he 2030 Agenda, the uneven
nature of national advances in ending violence, promoting the rule of law,
strengthening institutions and increasing access to justice is of serious concern. 11
Equitable access to basic social services builds trust in government institutions,
reduces perceived exclusion and strengthens social cohesion. Inclusive and
accountable institutions accelerate progress on all Sustainable Development Goals.
The United Nations Joint Programme on Local Government and Decentralized
Service Delivery in Somalia 12 helped to build trust between citizens and the
government through basic service delivery and increased avenues for citizen
participation in governance. The United Nations Legal Identity Agenda, led by the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, UNDP and UNICEF,
supports national, sustainable civil registration, vital statistics and identity
management systems as building blocks of inclusive and accountable governance. In
Guinea-Bissau, UNICEF support for the civil registration and vital statistics system
increased birth registration and confidence in state services.
28. The unprecedented challenges arising from COVID-19 are testing the
effectiveness of health systems and social services and trust in institutions and
systems of governance. But the crisis also offers opportunities to strengthen
institutions, reduce inequalities and enhance dialogue and social cohesion, including
through community participation in response and recovery, as articulated in the
“United Nations comprehensive response to COVID-19: saving lives, protecting
societies, recovering better”. Conflict-sensitive, coherent and preventive approaches
that help to address the present health and humanitarian crisis will contribute to
sustainable peace. United Nations support for Member States in this regard is guided
by the “United Nations framework for the immediate socioeconomic response to
COVID-19”, developed by the United Nations Sustainable Development Group.
Box 4
Local peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The United Nations increasingly supports local peacebuilding capacities and
initiatives, recognizing that peace is more sustainable when peacebuilding efforts are
locally owned, led and implemented. Examples collected for the present r eport
highlight cases in which communities peacefully resolve conflicts and resist violence,
including in Chad, Colombia, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mauritania, Solomon Islands
and Somalia. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan has been
strengthening local conflict resolution mechanisms to end disputes, foster community
cohesion and promote inclusive peacebuilding, which have led to the successful
resolution of a long-standing water dispute in Nangarhar province. In the Niger,
through the efforts of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, more than 350 local peace
__________________

See The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2019 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.19.I.6);
and General Assembly resolution 74/4.
12
The Joint Programme is implemented by the International Labour Organization, the United
Nations Capital Development Fund, UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme and
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat).
11

20-10342

13/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

structures comprising more than 10,000 members in 60 villages have resolved more
than 480 local conflicts between farmers and herders from January to May 2020. In
Iraq, with the support of the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, women -led
peacebuilding interventions at the community level have incr eased local authorities’
appreciation of women as agents of peace. In Abyei, to prevent conflict over grazing
land and water, the International Organization for Migration and the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei jointly conduct pre- and post-migration conferences
for farmers and herders. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, building on their
role as conflict prevention actors in local communities and supported by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Repu blic of the Congo,
women advocated for armed elements to demobilize and contributed to the signing of
a peace agreement in Ituri.
Restoring community peace structures during periods of conflict can also foster
trust and collaboration over the long term. Local peacebuilding initiatives can play a
valuable role in the responses to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19), creating
collaborative environments for communities, health workers and government
institutions. In Libya, a countrywide network of local mediators, supported by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the United Nations Development
Programme, has developed an independent online campaign in which it advocates for
an end to the ongoing conflict and for unified efforts to fight COVID -19. When
community-based peace initiatives are integrated into local governance mechanisms,
their ongoing contribution is sustained, paving the way for structural changes. a In
Kosovo, b women’s networks and a joint European Union-United Nations leadership
programme enabled women activists and organizations to advocate for gender responsive dialogue processes and women’s representation at all levels of leadership.
a

See Peace Direct and Alliance for Peacebuilding, “Local peacebuilding: what works and
why”, 6 June 2019.
b
References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

29. At the heart of my development system reforms, resident coordinators are now
vested with greater authority and capacities to fulfil their functions, including
development coordination, with clear lines of accountability. The resident coordinator
job description, including competencies, aligned with the United Nations system
leadership framework, has been revised. In addition, the selection, training and talent
management process for resident coordinators is being strengthened progressively.
Barriers to external applicants have been removed and the Development Coordination
Office is now identifying candidates, with a five-year horizon. As the independent
eminent persons underlined, it is important to find people with appropriate
competencies and experience for conflict-affected settings and during transitions and
provide them with adequate training, underpinned by accountability. Each resident
coordinator office now has five core positions. According to the results of the 2019
survey of resident coordinators, the offices now have greater capacities and more
diverse skill sets, and more than 90 per cent of resident coordinators believe that the
country team values the new office as a common resource for analysis, policy and
programming.
30. Strengthening capacities to respond with regard to the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus has been central to United Nations reform efforts. To
support field leadership, the United Nations system has continued to expand its
toolbox of integrated support. Flexible and timely surge capacity is critical in
responding to emerging threats to peace and, thus, an area envisaged to be further
strengthened. Already, UNDP has a dedicated roster of experts for rapid response and
14/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

has deployed 124 peacebuilding experts since 2016. The Peacebuilding Fund
launched a roster of deployable experts to support project design and evaluation.
Other entities, including FAO, UNICEF and WFP, have created teams dedicated to
peace and conflict issues.
31. The UNDP-Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Joint Programme
on Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention is a centrepiece of the
system’s support, with an expanded cadre of 56 peace and development advisers and
regional specialists in six locations. Peace and development advi sers have assisted
national stakeholders by supporting inclusive dialogue processes, preventive
diplomacy and social cohesion efforts in Cambodia, Guatemala, the Republic of
Moldova and Sierra Leone. In Chad, Tunisia and countries in the Caribbean and the
Pacific, the advisers ensured increased understanding of climate-related security
risks. They also worked on strengthening peace efforts across borders in Bangladesh,
Ecuador, Myanmar and Uganda. More than 80 per cent have supported the
participation of women or youth in conflict prevention.
32. The deployment of human rights advisers has been scaled up, with presences in
37 countries, and OHCHR has strengthened its field capacity as well. In Malawi,
human rights analysis informed a dialogue with political and community leaders, led
by the Resident Coordinator, and work with UNDP and the Standing Police Capacity
of the United Nations Police Service to help the Malawi Police Service to improve
the management of public demonstrations and policing in line with international
human rights standards, which facilitated a secure and peaceful environment for the
2019 electoral period.
33. The Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the Department of Peace
Operations, a system-wide service provider, is increasing deployment to support
country teams, including 28 in 2019. The cross-pillar arrangement of the Global Focal
Point for the Rule of Law brings together analysis, planning and programming. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Global Focal Point pa rtners have helped to bring
justice for war crimes and crimes against humanity closer to the communities where
the acts were perpetrated, including by facilitating victim and witness protection and
supporting defence counsels and investigators. Over the past three years, almost 5,000
survivors have benefited from legal assistance which led to 2,661 judicial decisions.
34. The timing, modalities and desired outcomes of transitions require
determination and implementation with national counterparts, civil so ciety and
women’s organizations, as well as alignment with national development plans.
Planning needs to include bilateral actors and international financial institutions.
Investments in transition settings are expected to account for the largest share of the
Fund’s investments in its strategy for the period 2020–2024. In Côte d’Ivoire, the
Fund filled a critical gap during the transition from peacekeeping, sustaining the focus
on peacebuilding efforts. Resident coordinator offices in transition settings ne ed to
be adequately resourced to maintain political engagement, analyse risks to address
potential conflict drivers, and provide technical assistance to national authorities.
35. In my planning directive for the development of consistent and coherent Unit ed
Nations transition processes, in line with Executive Committee decision 2018/38,
clear expectations of United Nations missions, country teams and Headquarters
entities are indicated, namely to develop transition processes that are coherent and
timely. The directive also includes a description of the key operational, financing and
staffing issues and mechanisms to resolve them, and contains a call for articulating
jointly, with government counterparts, support requirements for sustaining peace. In
recent years, directives have guided integrated United Nations planning processes,
including in Colombia, Haiti, Libya and the Sudan. The United Nations Transitions
Project of UNDP, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the
20-10342

15/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Department of Peace Operations and Development Coordination Office has supported
integrated assessment and planning processes in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Mali and the Sudan.
36. Support for the women and peace and security agenda is essential, including
through the integration of gender equality and agenda -related issues into tools (see
S/2019/800) and guidance material, such as the new policy of the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs on women and peace and security. A gender responsive conflict analysis in Haiti conducted by the Department of Peace
Operations and UN-Women identified agenda-related priorities for the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, ensuring they were taken up by its
replacement, the new United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti.
37. The Peacebuilding Support Office and UN-Women have led the review and
revision of the Seven-Point Action Plan on Gender-Responsive Peacebuilding. The
Plan, adopted in 2010, has been aligned to sustaining peace and the Sustainable
Development Goals in the following substantive areas: women’s participation in
political processes; ensuring security, safety and health of women and girls;
promotion of women’s and girls’ rights and access to rule of law and justice; genderresponsive social services; gender-responsive government functions; and economic
revitalization and livelihood. The seventh area is focused on the implementation of
the Plan, including planning and analysis, financing, and gender architecture and
staffing. The indicators will be aligned with the accountability framework on women
and peace and security.

IV. Financing for peacebuilding
38. Ensuring adequate, predictable and sustained resources for peacebuilding
remains our greatest challenge, perhaps now more than ever, in the context of a global
economic downturn. I share the fear, expressed by the independent eminent persons,
that growing demands to address the pandemic could weaken the ability to build and
sustain peace and put gains at risk. Local peacebuilders have similar fears. 13 Increased
investments in peacebuilding initiatives will contribute substantially to building back
better over the long term.
39. Devastating consequences including historic levels of unemployment and
deprivation were articulated in my report entitled “Shared responsibility, global
solidarity: responding to the socioeconomic impacts of COVID-19”. The economic
downturn is reducing financial flows to developing countries, including remittances
and official development assistance (ODA). The share of total ODA allocated to
conflict-affected countries and territories continued to increase in 2018, to 31.2 per
cent. However, the share of the ODA committed to peacebuilding in such countries
and territories declined to 11.4 per cent in 2018 (see figure). The proportion of ODA
going to gender equality programmes is stagnating belo w 5 per cent.

__________________
13

16/21

Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, “Survey on COVID-19-related impacts and needs:
WPHF CSO partners – summary of findings”, 2020; and Conducive Space for Peace, Humanity
United and Peace Direct, “COVID-19 and the impact on local peacebuilding”, April 2020.
20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

Official development assistance in conflict-affected countries, 2008–2018
(Percentage)

35
32.4

Percentage of total ODA

30

29.1

29.0

28.6
26.8

25
19.7

20
15

31.2

29.0

18.1

26.7

28.6

27.0

25.3

18.8
15.9

17.3

16.2
13.6

14.3

12.3

12.2

11.4

10

5
0
2008

2009

2010

2011

ODA to conflict-affected countries

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

Peacebuilding Fund ODA to conflict-affected countries

Source: Peacebuilding Support Office of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, based on data
from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Abbreviation: ODA, official development assistance.

40. Aided by the funding compact, 15 country-level pooled funds have been
established since 2019, and contributions to inter-agency pooled funds increased to
$2.46 billion in 2018. Domestic budget allocation for peacebuilding is critical. I call
on Member States to urgently step up their support to finance the 2030 Agenda as
well, using the integrated national financing framework to finance national priorities
(see E/FFDF/2019/2). The contribution to peacebuilding of South-South cooperation
can also be significant. The United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation is
coordinating a system-wide strategy as part of the follow-up to the 2019 High-level
Conference on South-South Cooperation.
41. In United Nations peacekeeping contexts, programmatic activities funded
through assessed budgets can facilitate whole-of-system approaches to mandate
implementation. In the Darfur region of the Sudan, assessed programmatic funding
has expanded the geographical reach and presence of the country team through State
liaison functions in areas from which the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) withdrew. In 2019, $32 million in the UNAMID
assessed budget for programmatic work, accompanied by $20 million from the
Peacebuilding Fund for country team partners, laid the foundations for sustaining
peace beyond the lifetime of the peacekeeping operation. The Fund will continue its
work in support of the new United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
42. In 2019, the Fund approved investments of $191 million in 34 countries. A total
of 40 per cent of all investments supported gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Between 2017 and 2019, an estimated $7.65 in additional investments
was catalysed for every $1 disbursed by the Fund. A prototype of the funding
dashboard for peacebuilding has been developed to enhance coordination and access
to information across funding mechanisms.
43. For the period 2017–2019, contributions to the Fund have almost doubled, to
$370 million, and approvals have more than doubled, to $564 million. However, the
quantum leap I called for in support of the Fund has not been achieved. As a
20-10342

17/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

consequence, support for some peacebuilding efforts had to be postponed or denied
in 2019, namely in the Gambia, Guinea, Haiti and the Sudan. The Fund would be
completely depleted by early 2021 if it were to respond to the present rate of requests.
44. In Colombia, the Fund is supporting private sector investments in conflictaffected areas through blended finance mechanisms, leveraging at a ratio of 1 to 7.
The Fund provides timely and catalytic support, complementing the Central
Emergency Response Fund, the Joint Sustainable Development Goals Fund and the
United Nations COVID-19 Response and Recovery Fund. In response to COVID-19,
the Peacebuilding Fund is helping resident coordinators, country teams and national
partners to rapidly reallocate funds where needed. Priority areas include support for
crisis response, local peace initiatives and community engagement in implementing
ceasefires; inclusive dialogues; strategic communication to prevent misinformation
and hate speech; and engagement of women and youth in COVID -19 responses.
Collaboration between the Peacebuilding Fund, the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund and the Spotlight Initiative is supporting efforts by women’s organizations to
end gender-based violence and to make clear the linkages between violence against
women and prevention, inclusive peace and security. The Saving Lives Entity fund,
launched by the Peacebuilding Fund, the Office for Disarmament Affairs and UNDP,
is a global fund for comprehensive approaches to small-arms and armed-violence
reduction.
45. In 2018, at the request of Member States, I provided options to increase,
restructure and better prioritize funding of United Nations peacebuilding activities.
There has been very limited progress on their implementation. Predictable
peacebuilding funding is acutely needed in setting s with multidimensional
peacekeeping operations, in particular in anticipation of and during transitions, where
fulfilling mission mandates requires resources to support national ownership and
capacity-building in aligning peace gains with longer-term development goals.
Consistent with the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, and underpinned by my planning directive for the
development of consistent and coherent United Nations transition processes, it is
imperative to complement programmatic activities that are funded through assessed
budgets in support of mandated mission tasks with funding for peacebuilding
activities to further strengthen national ownership and capacities, accelerate
transitions and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, and maintain
gains beyond the life cycle of peacekeeping missions.
46. Ensuring that missions have sufficient programmatic funding to support
mandated peacebuilding activities will be a priority in my peacekeeping budg et
requests for 2021/22 to facilitate a transition towards a greater emphasis on
peacebuilding efforts. The Peacebuilding Support Office can play a valuable role by
supporting missions in operationalizing programmes with a view to transitioning
mission responsibilities and modalities towards post-mandate capacities. The Fund,
with its strategic focus on support for transitions, would ensure that these programmes
administered on behalf of missions, with assessed contributions, support nationally
owned and led initiatives that address root causes and conflict drivers to sustain peace
over time. The requirement for programmatic funding increases when a
multidimensional peacekeeping mission approaches drawdown, in line with the
requirement to support national peacebuilding strategies in an integrated way to
promote national ownership and donor coordination in the five years following
closure. I call again for a quantum leap in support for the Fund and request that every
Member State make a voluntary contribution to the Fund, which would reflect
universal recognition of the importance of support for building and sustaining peace
as a core mandate of the Organization. In the light of the ongoing drawdown of
UNAMID, I also wish to recall my previous proposal for Member States to voluntarily
18/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

commit the equivalent of 15 per cent of the final full-year budget of a closing
peacekeeping mission to be contributed to peacebuilding activities each year for a
period of two years following the end of a mission mandate.
47. I welcome the emphasis of the independent eminent persons on good
peacebuilding donorship. More coherent approaches within donor institutions and
between donors and international financial institutions will be vital in maintaining the
focus on strategic, long-term priorities, in particular in times of crisis. Contributions
to existing pooled funding mechanisms, preferably through multi -year and
unearmarked funding, will foster greater synergies across funding instruments. I
further urge donors to commit to spending at least 20 per cent of ODA on
peacebuilding priorities in conflict settings.

V. Partnerships for peacebuilding and sustaining peace
48. The Peacebuilding Commission continued to enhance partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations, including convening annual interactive dialogues with
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. The Commission has also
engaged international financial institutions, and there is scope to further strengthen
collaboration with the World Bank and the African Development Bank, to mobilize
coordinated support for peacebuilding priorities and development plans of countries
in Africa, and with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
49. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union on
peacebuilding has been strengthened since the signing of the Joint United Nations African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, in 2017,
and the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda
2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in 2018. The African Union United Nations Framework on Human Rights will be signed in 2020 pursuant to the
2018 African Union-United Nations High-Level Dialogue on Human Rights. The
African Union Commission is partnering with UN-Women to launch the African
Women Leaders Network for African women to share leadership experiences and
lessons. High-level advocacy missions to support regional and national processes on
women and peace and security have been carried out in pa rtnership with the African
Union.
50. United Nations partnership with the World Bank Group has continued to
advance, building on the 2017 United Nations-World Bank Partnership Framework
for Crisis-Affected Situations. In the wake of the publication of the joint 2018 study
entitled Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict , I
see growing policy convergence between the two institutions, reflected in the Bank’s
strategy that addressed fragility, conflict and violence. I welcome th e Strategy and its
accompanying envelope for concessional lending, which strengthen the Bank’s
capacities to support nationally led prevention efforts and enhance its focus on
partnerships, community engagement, and the security and justice sectors. The
Strategy and envelope offer scope for even deeper partnership between the United
Nations and the Bank at the country level, in particular support of countries accessing
additional International Development Association financing for prevention and
resilience efforts.
51. The 2019 United Nations-World Bank report on partnership monitoring serves
to document collaboration in around 40 crisis-affected settings. While much of the
content is sector-specific, a few cases demonstrate the benefits of sustained strateg ic
collaboration to leverage comparative advantages. In Lebanon, the United Nations World Bank Partnership Compact for Lebanon enabled sustained engagement and
mutual accountability with regard to agreed priorities. In Zimbabwe, partnership
20-10342

19/21

A/74/976
S/2020/773

supported the exceptional release by the World Bank of $50 million in financing for
recovery from Cyclone Idai, despite the country’s non-accrual status.
52. It is important that joint planning by the United Nations, international financial
institutions and partners take place at key turning points in a peacebuilding process.
United Nations transitions require holistic support. For example, the appointment of
a World Bank focal point to the United Nations transition to UNITAMS in the Sudan
has proved valuable. Member States can help by aligning their approaches to include
support for joint planning and policy development. With their support, since 2019,
the Peacebuilding Support Office has operationalized its Humanitarian -DevelopmentPeacebuilding and Partnership Facility to support joint data, analysis and operational
collaboration between United Nations and World Bank teams, for example in Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, the Niger, Sierra Leone and Togo.
53. Alignment of efforts by the United Nations, international financial in stitutions
and partners is critical in the context of COVID-19 recovery. The United Nations, the
World Bank and the European Union are working together closely on rapid
assessments that will capture multidimensional risks and support nationally led,
conflict-sensitive prioritization of recovery needs. I will continue to pursue
partnerships with regional development banks, which have a vital role in helping to
reduce multidimensional risk. Lastly, I see value in more institutional collaboration
between the United Nations and the IMF, a view which the independent eminent
persons also stressed, to coordinate and sequence efforts in peacebuilding contexts,
given the importance of sound macroeconomic management, fiscal transparency and
equitable access to social protection for sustaining peace.
54. Civil society engagement and participation is indispensable to peacebuilding. In
a global context of shrinking civic space, the United Nations is committed to
promoting, protecting and expanding a safe and enabling env ironment for civil
society and communities to build and sustain peace, as also articulated in my call to
action for human rights. The COVID-19 pandemic is posing new challenges to civil
society, including at times disproportionate restrictions on public fr eedoms through
emergency and other measures, and reports of arrests and intimidation of
peacebuilding actors, among others.
55. Recent examples of United Nations support for civil society in peacebuilding
contexts include the work of OHCHR and UN-Women in Papua New Guinea, where
they worked with networks of women, youth and persons with disabilities as well as
religious and community leaders to conduct community outreach to help to facilitate
a credible, peaceful and inclusive process in preparation for th e 2019 Bougainville
referendum. The community outreach was an important element of the broader United
Nations support to foster the successful implementation of the Bougainville Peace
Agreement. In support of the Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative of th e African
Union, the United Nations has partnered with a non-governmental organization and
supported online training and mentoring in unarmed civilian protection of more than
40 African youth leaders from Kenya, Nigeria, Somalia and the Sudan.
56. The United Nations has developed system-wide community engagement
guidelines to support country-speciﬁc and local-level community engagement
strategies on building and sustaining peace. It will make use of these guidelines to
ensure that all engagement with civil society organizations is meaningful and
effective, including by seeking ways in which the pandemic can serve to engage local
peacebuilders in advancing people-centred responses.
57. In 2019, the Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative of the Peacebu ilding Fund
was focused on diversifying partnerships and engaging with local partners, and
approved $12.9 million directly to civil society organizations out of a record total of
$40.1 million. The Initiative invested approximately half of the total ($20.4 million)
20/21

20-10342

A/74/976
S/2020/773

in youth leadership, making it the largest funding initiative in support of youth, peace
and security. I continue to encourage initiatives that allow civil society organizations
to be recipients of direct funding and that specify funding percenta ges to be allocated
for the work of local civil society organizations.

VI. Conclusion
58. Sustaining peace is a greater imperative than ever that urgently requires a
renewed commitment to the purposes, principles and mandates of the Charter, in spirit
and in practice. While the United Nations system and Member States have come a
long way towards realizing the vision for the peacebuilding architecture and the
implementation of the twin resolutions, the COVID-19 pandemic has exposed and
exacerbated vulnerabilities with particularly devastating consequences in developing
and conflict-affected countries. Hard-won development and peacebuilding gains must
not be lost in the face of new challenges.
59. More than ever, multidimensional, coordinated and conflict-sensitive responses
and whole-of-society approaches are required to ensure that peacebuilding and
sustaining peace initiatives go hand in hand with the work of the United Nations in
helping the peoples of the world to attain the benefits of inclusive and sustainable
development, anchored in the protection and promotion of human rights, gender
equality, and the goal of leaving no one behind. Adequately and predictably financed
and supported by Member States, such approaches are the best defence again st
conflict, and the way to build back better.

20-10342

21/21
