VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

221

promote universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind,
including distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate
equally in social, economic and political development,
should contribute equally to such development and should
share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also its resolutions 35/140 of 11 December
1980, 36/131 of 14 December 1981, 37/64 of3 December
1982 and 38/109 of 16 December 1983,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention, 160

Having considered the reports of the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women on its
second and third sessions, 161
Noting that the Committee, in its rules of procedure, 162
decided that it would have summary records and would
include Arabic among its official languages and that the
Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 1984/8 of
22 May 1984, recommended that the General Assembly
should take the necessary steps to ensure the provision and
distribution in all official languages of such records,
Recognizing the importance of the summary records of
bodies established to monitor the implementation of international human rights instruments,
Noting that the Committee decided to consider the
achievements and obstacles experienced by States parties
in the implementation of the Convention as a contribution
to the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, to be held at Nairobi
from 15 to 26 July 1985, and that the Economic and Social
Council, in its resolution 1984/8, requested the SecretaryGeneral to assist the Committee therein,
l. Notes with appreciation the increasing number of
Member States that have ratified or acceded to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women;
2. Invites States that have not yet done so to become
parties to the Convention by ratifying or acceding to it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually
to the General Assembly a report on the status of the
Convention;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women on its second and third sessions and commends
the Committee for its work;
5. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the
Convention;
6. Requests States parties to make all possible efforts to
submit their initial implementation reports in accordance
with article 18 of the Convention, bearing in mind the
Committee's general guidelines regarding the form and
contents of such reports;
7. Requests the Committee, in organizing its work, to
ensure that the reports of States parties are adequately
reviewed within the quadrennial cycle envisaged in the
Convention;
8. Takes note of the discussion in the Committee concerning the inclusion in the agenda of a future session of an
item on the discussion of article 21 of the Convention,
specifically the provision that the Committee may make
suggestions and general recommendations based on the
examination of reports; 163
9. Authorizes the provision and distribution in all official languages of the United Nations of summary records of
the meetings of the Committee and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take appropriate measures to that end;
10. Invites the Committee to consider, in the light of
this authorization of the provision and distribution of
summary records of its meetings on a regular basis, the
format and content of its future reports, bearing in mind

160 A/39/486.
161 01/icial Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple-

162 /bid., Thirty-eighth Session. Supplement No. 45 (N38/45), annex III.
163 /bid., Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/39/45), vol. II,

Stressing the importance of the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women,
Bearing in mind the important role of the Commission
on the Status of Women acting as the preparatory body for
the Conference, as well as the need for ensuring the high
quality of the documents to be submitted to the
Conference,
1. Reiterates its appreciation to the Government of
Kenya for its offer to act as host to the World Conference
to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985;
2. Urges all Member States to make all efforts to
ensure the success of the Conference;
3. Takes note of the report of the Commission on the
Status of Women acting as the preparatory body for the
Conference on its second session and endorses the recommendations contained therein, as approved by the Economic and Social Council at its first regular session of 1984;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the preparatory body for the Conference at its third session all the
recommendations contained in the reports of each of the
regional preparatory meetings;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
preparatory body for the Conference at its third session a
report containing information from interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, in accordance with Council
resolution 1983/28;
6. Requests that the preparatory body for the Conference ensure the high quality of the documents to be submitted to the Conference, which should be distributed at
least six weeks before the opening of the Conference;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled .. United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace".
JO 1st plenary meeting

14 December 1984

39/130. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly.
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to

ment No. 45 (A/39/45), vols. I and II.

para. 360.

222

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolution
37/14 C of 16 November 1982.
JO 1st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/131. Elimination of all forms of religious
intolerance
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the need to promote universal respect for,
and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or
religion,
Reaffirming its resolution 36/55 of 25 November 1981,
in which it proclaimed the Declaration on the Elimination
of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based
on Religion or Belief,
Recalling its resolutions 37/187 of 18 December 1982
and 38/ l 10 of 16 December 1983, in which it requested
the Commission on Human Rights to consider what measures might be necessary to implement the Declaration,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/39 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council authorized
the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities to entrust its Special Rapporteur
with the preparation of a study, in accordance with the
terms of Sub-Commission resolution 1983/31 of 6 September 1983, 164 on the current dimensions of the problems
of intolerance and of discrimination based on religion or
belief,
Taking note of the proposed outline for the study 165
presented by the Special Rapporteur to the Sub-Commission at its thirty-seventh session,
Welcoming the fact that the Secretary-General organized
at Geneva, from 3 to 14 December 1984, within the
framework of the advisory services programme, the Seminar on the Encouragement of Understanding, Tolerance
and Respect in Matters relating to Freedom of Religion or
Belief,
Recognizing that it is desirable to enhance the promotional and public information activities of the United
Nations in matters relating to freedom of religion or belief
and that both Governments and non-governmental organizations have an important role to play in this domain,
Aware that intolerance and discrimination based on religion or belief continue to exist in many parts of the world,
Believing that further efforts are, therefore, required to
promote and protect the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief,
l. Reaffirms that everyone has the right to freedom of
thought, conscience, religion or belief;
2. Urges all States to give continuing attention to the
need for adequate legislation to prohibit discrimination
based on religion or belief in the recognition, exercise and
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Also urges all States to take all appropriate measures
to combat intolerance and to encourage understanding,
tolerance and respect in matters relating to freedom ofreligion or belief;
4. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to continue its consideration of measures to implement the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance
and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief and to
164 See E/CN.4/l 984/3-E/CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43 and Corr. I and 2. chap

XXI, sect. A.

report, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, to this
end, the report of the Seminar on the Encouragement of
Understanding, Tolerance and Respect in Matters relating
to Freedom of Religion or Belief to the Commission on
Human Rights at its forty-first session and to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to continue to give
high priority to the dissemination of the text of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and
of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief, in all official languages of the United Nations, and to take all appropriate measures to make the text available for use both by
United Nations information centres and by other interested bodies;
7. Requests the Secretary-General in this context to
invite interested non-governmental organizations to consider what further role they could envisage playing regarding the dissemination of the Declaration in national and
local languages;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance" and to consider the report of the
Commission on Human Rights in the context of that item.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/132.

Implications of scientific and technological
developments for human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/53 of 14 December 1978, in
which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
urge the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to undertake, as a matter
of priority, a study of the question of the protection of
those detained on the grounds of mental ill-health, with a
view to formulating guidelines,
Recalling also its resolution 38/ 111 of I 6 December
1983, in which it urged the Commission on Human Rights
and the Sub-Commission to expedite their consideration
of this question, so that the Commission could submit its
views and recommendations, including a draft body of
guidelines, principles and guarantees, to the General
Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic and
Social Council,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/33 and decision 1984/ l 42 of 24 May 1984,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights will not
be in a position to submit its views and recommendations
to the General Assembly at its fortieth session through the
Economic and Social Council because the Sub-Commission has still not concluded its consideration of the draft
body of guidelines, principles and guarantees, 166
Noting with satisfaction the progress made by the SubCommission on this question,
Reaffirming its conviction that detention of persons in
mental institutions on account of their political views or
on other non-medical grounds is a violation of their
human rights,
Again urges the Commission on Human Rights and,
through it, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to expedite their
165 See E/CN.4/Sub.c, 1984128.
166 See E/C'N.4/1985 1-EiC'N.4/Sub.2/1984/43. chap. IX.
