TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

10 JUNE 1969

YORK

CONTENTS

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1474) . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

...,.,.................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
\
(S/9233)
.. ........ .. ,. ... .. ... ..,. ... ... .. .,. . .,. ... .

1

,““,

Expression of thanks to the retiring Presidents

S/PV. 1474

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions df the
Security Council. The new system, which has been.applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 10 June 1969, at 3 p.m.
President; Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).

6. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr.President, permit me to,
thank you most profoundly for the kind words that you
have said in respect of myself in connexion with the
Presidency of the Security Council; and may I in turn offer
to you my heartfelt felicitations on your assumption of the
Presidency for this month? We have important business to
transact, and I have no doubt that under your wise and able
leadership the Council will move forward unitedly towards
unanimous action.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l474)

7. May I also extend my sincere tribute to Ambassador
Khatri of Nepal for the conspicuous ability and wisdom
with which he presided over the work of the Council in
April?

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent

Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Pqations Operation in Cyprus (S/9233).

Adoption of the agenda

Expression of thanks to the retiring Presidents

Theagendawasadopted,

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Before
proceeding to the adoption of the agenda, I should like to
use the prerogative of my office to pay a warm tribute of
appreciation and gratitude to Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan
and Ambassador Khatri of Nepal, who occupied the
Presidency of the Council in May and April respectively.

letter

dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representativeof Cyprus addressedto the Presidentof
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-Generalon the United Nations
Operationin Cyprus(S/9233)

8. The PRESIDENT (translatedfvam Spanish):The representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece have asked to be
invited to take part in the debate on the item before the
Council. In conformity with the usual practice, and if the
Council agrees, I shall invite those representatives to be
seated at the Council table so asto take part in the debate,
without the right to vote.

2. I do not intend to mention the outstanding qualities of
these two distinguished colleagues of ours, because the
Council is fully aware of them and because I do not wish to
offend their modesty; but I trust that these very simple
words will convey the profound feeling of sincerity behind
them *

At the invitation of the President, Mr. 2. Rossides
(Cyprus), Mr. 0. Eralp (Turkey), and Mr. D. S.Bitsios
(Greece) took placesat the Counciltuble.

3. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President,,from this comfortable position of a past President, I am very happy indeed to
congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Security Council for this month, and to assure you of
the whole-hearted co-operation of my delegation in your
tasks.

9. The PRESIDENT (translatedj?om Spanish): The Security Council will now take up its agenda for today’s
meeting. In that connexion the Secretary-General has
submitted a report on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus for the period 3 December 1968 to 2 June 1969.
This report was circulated in the middle of last week as
document S/9233.

4. May I convey our appreciation to Ambassador Shahi of
Pakistan for his leadership of the Council last month-a
leadership which was so effective and excellent that the
Council managed to dispense with the need for any meeting
whatever,

10. As a result of consultations held among the members
of the Council before this meeting, a draft resolution has
been prepared. Copies in all the working languages of the
Council have been distributed to members, I shall, however,
request the Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General to be
good enough to read it out.

5. I should also like to thank you, Sir, for your generous
remarks addressed to me, and at the same time, expressmy
gratitude to you and all members of the Council for the
unfailing courtesy and co-operation rendered to me during
my term of office during the month of April.
1

14. There are reassuring signs, the report states, of a better
understanding at the village level as a result of the growing
co-operation in public services and in agriculture. Thus,
Turkish Cypriot farmers participate in soil conservation
work financed by the Government, in the World Food
Programme as well as in the development of water supplies
for the benefit of Turkish-Cypriot villages. In th.is context,
the report adds, the Government is prepared to issueloans
to the Turkish Cypriots on the same terms: as those
provided to Greek Cypriot farmers; it will assist them in
every way and offers to build new public roads to Turkish
villages, provided, of course, these roads are to be opened
to the use of the whole population and are not bllocked.

11. Mr. CHACKO (Deputy to the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Security Council Affairs): The text of the
draft resolution reads as follows:
“The Securi[v Council,

‘Natirrg from the report of the Secretary-General of
3 June 1969 (S/9233) that in the present circumstances
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus is still
needed if peace is to be maintained in the Island,
“Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that
in view of the prevailing conditions in the Island it is
necessaryto continue the Force beyond 15 June 1969,

15. The Turkish Cypriots can be fully assured that
whenever and wherever co-operation takes the place of
obstruction, the response from the Government will be
both ready and generous.

‘Noting, from the observations in the report, that the
improvement of the situation in Cyprus has been maintained during the period under review,
“1. Reuffirms its resolutions 186 (1964) of 4 March,
187(1964) of 13 March, 192 (1964) of 20 June,
193 (1964) of 9 August, 194 (1964) of 25 September and
198(1964) of 18 December 1964, 201 (1965) of 19
March, 206 (1965) of 15 June, 207 (1965) of 10 August
and 219 (1965) of 17 December 1965,220 (1966) of 16
March, 222(1966) of 16 June and 231 (1966) of 15
December 1966, 238 (1967) of 19 June and 244 (1967)
of 22 December 1967, and 247 (1968) of 18 March,
254 (1968) of 18 June and 261 (1968) of 10 December
1968, and the consensusexpressed by the President at the
1143rd meeting on 11 August 1964 and at the 1383rd
meeting on 24 November 1967;

16. However, in the economic field the report states that
there has not been the desired rapprochement, becausethe
Turkish Cypriot leadership aims at a separate eco:nomy with
financial assistance from Turkey. In the report the
Secretary-General expresses the hope: “that the present
trend towards separate economic development may be
reversed soon, so that the human and other resourcesof the
whole Island may be fully utilized for the benefit of all
Cypriots”. [S/9233, para. 60.1
17. It is obvious that economic development in separativenesscannot possibly prosper and will be to the detriment of
all, but more particularly of the Turkish Cypriots themselves,

“2. Urges the parties concerned to act with the utmost
restraint and to continue determined co-operative efforts
to achieve the objectives of the Security Council by
availing themselves in a constructive manner of the
present auspicious climate and oppor,unities;

18. In a number of reports issued since March 1966 the
Secretary-General has mentioned the desire of t.he bulk of
the people of Cyprus-Greek and Turkish alike-to live
together in peace and harmony and to resume their former
amicable relations in a spirit of conciliation and
co-operation. I refer to the reports in documents S/8446
and S/8914 and previous ones. That is further borne out by
the readiness on both sides to co-operate where no
obstacles are placed to hinder such co-operation.

“3. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force, established under
Security Council resolution 186 (1964), for a further
period ending 15 December 1969, in the expectation that
by then sufficient progress toward a final solution will
make possible a withdrawal or substantial reduction of
the Force. ”

19. AIi these are encouraging developments. They may not
be as rapid or as broad as we should have wished but they
are steadily moving in the right direction. Notwithstanding
impediments, gradually better understanding prevails between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots, greater confidence
is created, and there is growing awareness of the common
interests which bind them together-by far transcending the
artificial differences and divisions standing in the way of
their joint advance towards peace and progress.

12. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Several
representatives have indicated that they would like to make
statements before the Council votes on the draft resolution
that has just been read out. Accordingly I shall call on them
in the order in which they appear on the list of speakers.
First I call upon the representative of Cyprus.
13. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): The Council is seized of the
question of renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
force in Cyprus and has before it the report of the
Secretary-General. The report depicts with accuracy and
objectivity the developments during the six-month period
now ending. It showsthat the improvement in the situation
has been maintained and that calm has prevailed; that
relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots continue to
show improvement and that there has been a marked
increase in the number of contacts between members of
both communities.

20. The Secretary-General rightly attaches importance to
the need for a further move in normalization of the
situation. This was stressedalso in previous reports.
21. Normalization and intercommunal talks towards a
solution of the problem are parallel and interdependent
efforts. The solution of every problem-and the problem of
Cyprus is no exception-depends to a great extent on the
creation of mutual trust and confidence through contact
and conciliation.
2

22. In that,sense the report draws attention to two aspects
that have not shown the requisite, or any, piogress. They
are: (al the problem of military disengagement, particularly
in areas of close confrontation; and fb) the continuing lack
of responseto the normalization measuresof the Government regarding freedom of movement, as referred to in
paragraph55 of the report and also in paragraph79 under
“Observations”. Both those aspectswere alsohighlightedin
the observationsof the Secretary-Generalin his report of
December1968[S/8914]. 1

a rather slow pace,but they havemarkedsomeprogressand
commonground was found on severalpoints. They have
ho beena great assetin contributing to the creation of a
better climate. In this sensethe parallelnormalization of
the situation, to which I have already referred, is of vital
importanceto the progressof the talks.

24. It should,however, be noted from the report that the
Government has relaxed and de-emphasizedthe military
aspect,by various measures;this is describedin paragraph
20. But conversely and regrettably in the Turkish Cypriot
enclaves,asappearsin paragraph21, increasingrecruitment
and the intensification of military preparation andtraining
have been going on feverishly of late. We hope that the
matter will be consideredand that it may prove to be only
a passingphaseof anomaly.

29. TO be enduringandto bring lastingpeaceany solution
must be workable and based on the conciliation and
co-operationof the peoplein a unitary state-on an agreed
basis in this case-not in their division and resulting
antagonism.The wholesomeness
andsoundness,
therefore,
of the substance
of the solutionis andshouldbe of primary
importanceto the peopleof Cyprusasa whole, and to all
thosewho wishthem well and desireto seetheir problem
really solved.An unnatural,divisiveor forced solution,and
its concomitant abnormality and unworkability, can lead
only to graver and more perilousproblemsand threats to
peace.

28. The difficulties involved in the talks, however, ought
not to be minimized,particularly havingregardto outside
influences and pressureswhich may not always be as
constructive as would be expected, As. Mr. Cleridesand
23. With regard to the first, disengagement,
my Govern. Mr. Denktashhave aptly pointed out: “the talks werebeing
ment, in its desireto contribute towardsnormalization,had conducted with goodwill and determination but quick
indicated its willingness to co-operate in such disengage. progress
wasnot possible”. It wasbetter to go slowly and
ment /139&h
meeting, para. 201. This, however, is a
carefully than to be led to a difficult situation through
matter on which the Government cannot possiblyproceed unduehaste.” The recentestablishmentof sub-committees
unilaterally, without correspondingaction from the other
to dealwith certainmattersis anotherstepforward towards
side.
understanding
andaccommodationon a broaderscale,

25. Regardingthe secondaspectreferred to in the report,
namely, the lack of responseto the Government’sunilateral
normalization measures,which results in the continued
absenceof freedom of movementfor the whole population,
I would merely cite paragraph55 of the report which reads
asfollows:

30. My President,ArchbishopMakarios,speakingrecently
on the subjectsaidthat:
“ . . .there was certainly no desire to deprive the

‘WhereasTurkish Cypriots may move freely throughout the Island except in a few militarily restricted
areas,“--and it should be noted that in the militarily
restrictedareasno civilians of whatever origin areallowed
to enter-“access to Turkish Cypriot enclaves,a number
of Turkish Cypriot villagesand certain roadscontinueto
be deniedto Greek Cypriots. Of particularconcernis the
lack of free accessto the following public trunk roads”
[S/9233,

Turkish Cypriots of political or other rights; on the
contrary it wasthe intention to cedein addition certain
privilegesto the Turkishcommunity, but not to an extent
exceedingthe securityzonenecessaryfor the unity of the
Stateand the future of the Island”.
He alsoemphasized
that the difficulties encounteredin the
intercommunaltalks shouldleadto a further intensification
of efforts towards a democratic solution which would
safeguardthe interestsof the peopleof Cyprusas a whole
andguaranteepermanentpeace.

para. .55].

The Nicosia-Kyrenia and four other main communication
roadsarecited. The report continues:

31. We hope and trust that perseverancein the talks,
conductedin mutual goodwill and with a wider outlook,
will permit the steeringaway from perilousexcesses,
and
lead, in a spirit of understandingand unity, to a sound,
workable and enduring solution in the interests of the
whole peopleof Cyprus. Such a solution can only be one
consistentwith democratic tenets, the principles of the
Charterand the relevantresolutionsof the United Nations.
Peaceis the work of justice, not of force. And it is in
justice, in understandingand in unity that we can build
peace.

‘This abnormal situation, if not remedied,could mar
the presentfavourable atmosphere. . . whilst the Greek
Cypriots are still prevented from using some of the
Republic’smain roads.” [Ibid.]
26. In his observations in paragraph79 the Secretary
General reverts to this important aspect, urging that
freedomof movement on all roadsbe madeavailableto the
whole population of Cyprus.
27. Regarding the intercommunal talks with which the
report dealsin paragraph 61, they have beenproceedingat

32. The Secretary-Generalconsidersthe peace-keeping
work of the United Nations Force indispensablein the
present
circumstancesand the renewal of the mandate
imperative.
He therefore proposesa six-month extension.

1 See official Records of the Security Council, T’wew-third
Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1968.

3

solution and agreed settlement are to succeed:, UNFICYP
must necessarily be maintained in its present strength and
efficiency, at all times capable of dealing with unexpected
situations which may arise and which may jeopardize the
peace-making endeavours.

My Government has expressed its agreement with such an
extension.
33. In this connexion I wish to place on record our sincere
appreciation of the work of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus both through the Force itself and through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. And I take
this opportunity to express our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral for his sincere and objective concern over the
problem of Cyprus and its peaceful development. His
dedication to the Charter and to the cause of peace is
reflected in all his endeavours, and his intellectual integrity
is the greatest asset of the United Nations, His efforts
towards a just and peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem
are deeply appreciated.

41. The atmosphere of hope and anticipation to which I
have just referred centres around the exploratory intercommunal talks which are now proceeding in C:yprus in the
hope that they may lead to a final settleme.nt with the
agreement of all the parties concerned. The SecretaryGeneral, in his appeal addressed to the parties on 26 March,
expressed his concern at the slow rate of progress of those
talks. My Government has put itself on record as being
equally interested in seeing the realisation of more speedy
agreement, but is fully aware of the delicate nature of those
talks and considers that the negotiators should be given
every possibility of reaching common ground as to the
constitutional regime in which the two c.ommumities in the
Island are destined to live together in peace.

34. Our sincere thanks also go to his advisers, especially
the Under-Secretaries-General, Mr. Bunche and Mr. RolzBennett, for their devoted efforts and their important
contributions. I also wish to make special mention of the
Special Representative
of
the
Secretary-General,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, whose competence, diplomatic experience and tact have brought a most constructive contribution to the work of the United Nations in Cyprus.

42. While those talks are going on, certain statements are
being made by responsiblt Greek Cypriot leaders which are
not calculated to contribute to the smooth progress of the
talks. The Secretary-General refers to certain such statements in paragraphs 66 and 68 of his report, I have the
texts of others which I could make available to the Council.
The unfortunate impression which such statements attempt
to convey is that a purely Greek Government has always
existed and continues to exist in Cyprus which, out of sheer
magnanimity, is now prepared to grant certain rights and
privileges to a Turkish minority. Those initiated with the
problem know of course that that is not the case.

35. We should also like to express to General Martola our
esteem and our regard for his most efficient command of
the Force.
36. Lastly, we should place once again on record our
profound appreciation to those countries whose valuable
contributions in military contingents and in funds make
the United Nations peace-keeping operations in Cyprus
possible.

43. The Republic of Cyprus was conceived and created on
the basis of the existence of two communities. As cofounders of the Republic, the Turkish community which
under the Constitution of the Island enjoys certain welldefined rights and for more than five years has been in a
struggle for survival for the defence of those rights, is not
asking for privileges charitably offered. It is not prepared to
concede at the conference table those sacred rights which it
has defended for five years at the risk of its existence. It has
sat down to talk with the Greek community in order to
work out a system whereby they can live t’ogether in a
unitary State-I repeat, in a unitary State within which
their identity as a community will not be impaired and
wherein they will run their local and communal affairs
themselves. There is no tendency to divisiveness in this
approach. There is not the slightest intention of creating a
state within a state, as the imputation has falsely been
made. Yet the statements of the Greek Cypriot leaders and
the tone of the Greek Cypriot press tends to create
despondency with the Turkish community and doubts as to
whether the Greek Cypriot regime will ever seriously
attempt to reach a solution other than one which they
would wish to impose.

37. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call on
the representative of Turkey.
38. Mr, ERALP (Turkey): The Council meets once again
under more or less auspicious circumstances in order to
extend the mandate of the Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus.
The report of the Secretary-General of 3 June /S/9233/
reflects the atmosphere of comparative calm on the Island
as well as the air of hope and anticipation which by and
large prevails. For the continued improvement of the
situation we owe a debt of gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral, as well as to his immediate collaborators, for their
patient and untiring efforts to maintain the present
peace-keeping effort in Cyprus at the best possible level.
39. We are also grateful to the able and efficient leaders of
UNFICYP, its Commander, General Martola, and the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. OsorioTafall, for their diligent and tactful handling of the many
complicated and delicate situations with which they are
often faced.
40. My Government fully appreciates the generous and
public-spirited manner in which the countries which contribute in manpower and in funds for the peace-keeping effort
in Cyprus maintain their. valuable support. In this connexion, I cannot refrain from expressing the view of my
Government that if the present promising trend is to
continue in Cyprus and the attempts to reach a peaceful

44. My Government, which has pinned its hopes on the
intercommunaI talks, cannot do much more than to counsel
patience and perseverance in the hope that reason and
moderation will prevail.
45. There are a few points in the Secretary-General’s
report to which reference has been made here this
4

afternoon by Ambassador Rossides. One of them concerns
the so-called freedom of movement. It would be useful for
the Council to understand some of the aspects of this
problem. Since the normalization measures adopted by the
Greek Cypriot Administration, the Turks are in fact free to
travel in most parts of the Island. This, of course, does not
include the so-called restricted areas under Greek control,
to which not only the Turks but even the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force authorities are not admitted. It is
interesting to point out that the area of these Greek
restricted zones is in fact larger than the areas under the
control of the Turkish community Furthermore, the Turks
proceed to the Greek-controlled
areas subject to the
unconstitutional control of the Greek police and into the
illegal and unconstitutional
jurisdiction of exclusively
Greek courts of law. On the other hand, the Greek
authorities would wish the Turkish-controlled areas to be
completely open to the Greek Cypriots, on condition-on
condition, and this is %hehitch-that the writ of the Greek
Administration should run in such areas, and thus in effect
bring the Turkish areas under the sovereignty and control
of an unconstitutional regime.
46. The intercommunal talks now proceeding in Cyprus
are intended to reach agreement between the two communities as to how they can once again, live together under the
aegis of a constitution
worked out together. In the
meantime, can it reasonably be expected for one side in
practice to submit to the rle facto authority of the other?
Once the claim for such de facto authority is set aside,
many Greeks are in fact entering the Turkish areas by giving
previous notice. This is the least that can be done under the
prevailing circumstances and until a lasting re’gime is set up
by agreement.
47. Another point mentioned in the report refers to the
alleged reorganization of the Turkish Cypriot defence units,
their equipment and the claim that heavier armaments are
being manufactured in the Turkish sector. The information
we have from the Turkish community indicates that in fact
no reorganization has taken place. As for the alleged
increase in the numbers of the Turkish Cypriot defence
forces, I should like to refer the Council to paragraph 22 of
the previous report of the Secretary-General where he states
that:

c

import arms from abroad and maintain a large, illegal army
capable of crushing Turkish resistance with one blow. That
UNFICYP is not in a position to prevent such an onslaught
was proved in the events of November 1967, which resulted
in the well-known consequences.
49. Under such circumstances can, in all fairness, the
Turkish Community be blamed for trying to maintain its
meagre defence potential? Can they be blamed for beginning to show anxiety as to the motive for the Greek
Cypriot press campaign against Turkish defence preparations, when they remember that it was just such a campaign
which became the prelude to the Greek Cypriot attacks of
December 1963?
50. It is not my intention to drag into this debate
day-to-day matters concerning the situation in Cyprus. My
Government’s primary concern in Cyprus is to maintain an
atmosphere of calm, free of inflammatory statements and
provocative attitudes, so that the talks now in progress may
continue towards their all-important objective. The way we
see it, the people of Cyprus, both Greeks and Turks, will
have to live together in peace and they must be allowed the
chance to work out the democratic system under which
they shall live together. As a Government we can only
encourage the Turkish Community towards a peaceful
settlement and try to allay the feelings of dejection and
despair w]tich sometimes come over them. It is our firm
belief that with goodwill on both sides we may, in the
words of Shakespeare, “Out of this nettle”, discord %e
pluck this flower, safety”.
51. The PRESIDENT (translated porn &x&h):
The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Greece, on whom
I now call +
52. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (translated jkom French):
Mr. President, I should like in my turn to thank you and
the members of the Security Council for giving me this
opportunity to make some remarks on the question which
is on the agenda of this meeting.

“The Turkish Cypriot leadership has announced a
decision to reduce the period of service from three to two
years. It WEIS also indicated that approximately 750 young
men who had completed their fighter service had left the
island for studies at higher educational establishments in
Turkey.” (S/8914, para. 22./

53. The tone of debates in the United Nations usually
reflects fairly accurately the degree of tension engendered
by a dispute. The Council has noted with satisfaction the
atmosphere of relaxation which prevailed at its meeting
(1459th meeting] in December 1968. That was in keeping
with the developments towards calm in Cyprus itself.
Today, as then, the stakes are too high and the situation is
too delicate for us to harbour any thought other than that
which leads us towards the hope of complete pacification,
which is more necessary than ever.

48. What, in fact, has taken place is that ihe numbers of
those released from the defence services is, higher than of
those newly conscripted. The allegation of the Greek
Cypriots as to the setting up of an arms factory are entirely
unfounded and are not corroborated by the observations of
UNFICYT!. But apart from all other considerations, I
wonder if it does not strike the Council as absurd to dwell
at any length on the defence preparations of the Turkish
Cypriots. The imbalance between the opposing forces on
the Island, from the point of view of manpower, resources
and armaments, is colossal. The Greek Cypriots freely

54. The Council is about to vote on a prolongation of the
stationing of the United Nations Force in Cyprus. We hope
that @is vote will be in the affirmative, for the establishment and maintenance of a more favourable atmosphere in
Cyprus is largely due to the peace-making work of the Force
on the Island. The importance of the services it has
rendered is obvious to all, and Cyprus may truthfully be
called a striking example of the very effective manner in
which the United Nations can contribute to the maintenance of peace in a specific case, however delicate it
may be.

directly linked with the time factor. We share the view
which the Secretary-General expressed on 26 March this
year “that the time factor is of importance in the present
case”, and also his concern that the passageof too much
time may hamper rather than facilitate the settlement of
the problem.

55. UNFICYP is a milestone in the history of international
co-operation; and here I should like to assurethe countries
participating in the Force, as well as the countries which are
helping to meet its expenses, that their gesture of international solidarity is greatly appreciated by the Greek
Government, Greece, for its part, is continuing to do
everything in its power to contribute to the steady
improvement of the situation in Cyprus and to promote a
rapid advance towards a solution of the problem, TO this
end it means to keep its contribution to the expensesof the
Force at the same level as in the past, already over
$7 million.

61. Before concluding, I should like to express to the
Secretary-General the warmest and most since:rethanks of
the Greek Government for the infinite patience with which
he continues to deal with this problem. I-hstorlans of the
Cyprus question will no doubt give him the praise he
deservesfor the immense effort needed for the maintenance
of peace on and around the Island. I shall merely say that
his profound wisdom, his great moral prestige and his vast
experience have made him, in Cyprus and elsew’here,now as
so often before, the inestimable ally of all who aspire
towards peace and seek conciliation.

56. We are happy to note that the Secretary-General’s
report, which bears that hallmark of clarity, objectivity and
brevity to which we have become accustomed, mentions a
substantia1 reduction in the number of incidents on the
Island and confirms that, on the whole, there have been no
important violations of the cease-tire.

62. We are no less grateful to his immediate clollaborators,
both here in New York and on the spot in Cyprus. I should
like to mention Dr. Ralph Bunche, Mr. R.olz-Bennett,
General Martola, and Mr. Osorio-Tafall, who has carried out
the mission entrusted to him by U Thant with zeal and a
high senseof duty.

57. On the relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots
the report sounds a somewhat optimistic note: they have,
the Secretary-General tells us, continued to improve during
the period that has elapsed and contacts between Greeks
and Turks have increased appreciably, especially in economic and social matters. Nevertheless, some deterioration
is mentioned in paragraphs 21, 22 and 23 of the report,
under the heading “Turkish Cypriot armed elements”.
Certain anomalies persist, and the Secretary-General reminds us that Greek Cypriots do not yet enjoy freedom of
movement in some areas of the Island, whereasthe Turkish
Cypriots can move freely throughout the territory. The
Secretary-General expressed the hope that this situation
will be corrected.

63. Greece, in its profound desire for peace, will continue
to give its full support to this international team which,
under the enlightened leadership of the Secrel:ary-General,
is working tirelessly to help to bring about the Iasting
pacification of Cyprus based on understanding between
Greek and Turkish Cypriots, We are firmly convinced that
this understanding is possible and necessary, and we shall
continue our unremitting efforts to transform it into a
tangible and lasting reality.

58. U Thant’s statement that the atmosphere continues to
be favourable for negotiations is indeed encouraging. We
should also take note of his observation that, if the parties
to the dialogue show “goodwill and statesmanship, it
should be possible” for them “to find common ground”.

64. The President (translatedfrom Spanish):My list shows
no other representatives who wish to speak before the vote
is taken. I shall now therefore put to the vote the draft
resolution that wasread out earlier.
A vote wastaken by showof hands.

59. The Council knows that my country has energetically
supported and has encouraged to the best of its ability the
beginning of the dialogue between Greek and Turkish
Cypriots. This dialogue, which has enabled calm to be
re-established on the Island, is continuing. Some people
wonder, at times not without a certain impatience, why it
has lasted so long. Although I do not want to say that it is
desirable for talks to drag on for ever, I must point out that
their continuation for a realtively long time is not inexplicable. Indeed, anyone who has studied the Cyprus question
must know that it hardly lends itself to an easy or rapid
solution. Time, patience and prolonged maintenance of a
peaceful atmosphere are essential factors which, as we knew
from the outset, had to be taken into account.

The draft resolutionwasadopted unanimously.2

65. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanibh):A number of representatives have asked to be allowed to explain
their vote after the vote. I shall therefore call on them in
t’:e order in which they appear on my list,
66. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): Mr. President, I am
pleased to have this opportunity to extend1 to you, as
President of the Council, the most sincere best wishesof
my delegation. With you in the Chair, we know that the
powers of the Presidency will be used both effectively and
impartially.

60. It must not be understood from what I have just said
that the Greek Government condones any unjustifiable

G7. I am also happy to pay tribute to Ambassador Khatri
01 Nepal and to Ambassador Shahi of Pakistan, Presidents
of the Council for the months of April and May, respectively, both outstanding representatives serving on this
Council.

delays in the conduct of the talks. On the contrary, Greece
is fully aware of the financial and other difficulties entailed
by the maintenance of the Force in Cyprus, and of the need
to take advantage as soon as possible of the present
favourable atmosphere. But even more important than the
economic considerations is the political aspect, which is

2 Seeresolution 266 (1969).
6

68’. According to the Secretary-General’s latest report on
United Nations operations in Cyprus, the improvement of
the situation on the Island has been maintained. The Island
has generally remained calm; there has been no major
incident. The intercommunal talks which have been in
progress for more than a year have produced some limited
progress and contact is being maintained. The patient and
discreet efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. bsorio:TafaIl, are also continuing.
Yet it must be recognized that no substantive progress on
the basic issues which separate the two communities in
Cyprus has as yet been made. This is cause for profound
disappointment. The considerable difficulties in the way of
an agreement are well-known and the repeated appeals for
patience addressed to this Council cannot be ignored, Yet
serious attention must also be given to the warning of the
Secretary-General, that the passageof too much time might
hamper rather than facilitate a settlement. A determined
effort by the parties is now needed to set the intercommunal taiks in motion in order to bring about a just
and peaceful solution.

72. I would’ not wish to end my statement without
commending, on behalf of my Government, all those who
have worked and continue to work for a peaceful settlement in Cyprus. My delegation also takes great satisfaction
from the tributes paid by the Secretary-General and others
to the Finnish Commander of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus, General Martola.
73. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr.President,
let me first congratulate you as President of our Council. In
my grateful congratulations I wish also to include Ambassador Khatri and Ambassador Shahi.
74. Until today the Council has not met for two months.
That is an unusual, not to say welcome, interval of
inactivity. Alas, it does not represent an absence of
controversy and conflict in the world. There is plenty of
both. But those of us who have long served on the Security
Council know that perhaps the first unwritten rule of the
Council is that it is unwise to call the Council until and
unless there is a plain prospect that agreement can be
reached, Only then can agreed and effective action be
taken. To call the Council with no such confidence can
often do more harm than good. It can sometimes embitter
controversy and even intensify conflict.

69. In present circumstances, the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Cyprus obviously must go on. In the
words of the Secretary-General, the United Nations Force
represents an indispensable element in maintaining and
further improving the calm atmosphere on the Island and in
promoting the steps towards normalization which constitute, as before, the major prerequisites for substantive
progress in the intercommunal talks. The United Nations
Force has thus been successful in carrying out its original
mandate of preventing fighting and contributing to the
maintenance of law and order and a return to more normal
conditions. It has been a major factor in creating conditions
conducive to a political settlement. It cannot be expected
to do more than that. In many respects, UNFICYP could
well serve as a model from which a great deal of valuable
experience can be gained for use in future peace-keeping
operations.

75. Today however we met with a clear purpose. We have
agreed. We have acted together. Whenever such achievement
is recorded we have reason to rejoice. Every step forward in
international co-operation is an advance on the long road to
a safer and a better world.
76. We are happy that we have been unanimous. We are,
moreover, glad to record our harmony under a President
whom we have learnt to respect as a leader and as an
example-a leader and an example in goodwill and good
humour and good judgement.
77. Sir, we have today again emphasized and demonstrated our support for one of the most sustained international peace-keeping efforts ever mounted. The extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus which we have today approved will bring the
Force almost to the end of its sixth year. Today we have
reaffirmed the original mandate of the Force for the
eighteenth time. No one can say that there has been lacking
a perseverance in the pursuit of peace.

70. Having said that, I am bound to add that my
Government strongly hopes that the current review of
United Nations peace-keeping operations in all their aspects
will remedy the one major defect of the Cyprus operation,
which is the manner in which UNFICYP is being financed.
My Government shares the view of the Secretary-Gene&
that reliance on voluntary contributions from a relatively
small number of Member States is quite unsatisfactory. We
firmly believe that a peace-keeping operation based on
decisions that the Security Council has taken on behalf of
all Member States should be paid for by all.

78. We must not weary in well-doing. My country, 1 am
glad to say, has throughout played a leading part in this
peace-keeping operation. We have from the start provided
the largest military contingent in the Force; we have paid
for the cost of that contingent. We shall continue to
provide for that contingent for the new period of six
months. We shall continue to meet its cost in full,

71. As the Security Council has just decided to extend the
mandate of UNFICYP for another period of six months,
that is, until 15 December 1969, I am authorized to state
that Finland is prepared to maintain a contingent with
UNFICYP for that additional period, under the same
arrangements as before. Finland is also continuing during
this year its voluntary financial contributions for the
maintenance of UNFICYP on the same scale tls before, in
spite of the reduction in the size of the Force. We do so in
expectation that real progress towards a peaceful solution
will be achieved, so as to bring this peace-keeping operation
to a successfulconclusion.

79. We shall moreover continue to make a substantial
voluntary financial contribution towards the cost of the
Force. Our voluntary contribution for the next six-month
period will be ti25,OOO sterling. This will bring the total of
British voluntary contributions since the Force was formed
to a tdtal of nearly $22 million.
80. Though we should have preferred a shorter extension
than six months, we should not have been content to be
7

87. So satisfactory has been the past year from the point
of view of freedom from violence and so many are the
advantages which we count as we surve:y the present
scene-and so great ‘are the opportunities of further
economic advance in friendly co.operation-that we can
feel nothing but dismay when we are reminded that all
these advantages and opportunities could even now br
thrown away.

second to any other country in the combination of
military, material, logistic and financial support for this
unique United Nations enterprise. We are proud to be
practical peace-keepers and especially proud to be peacekeepers in such excellent company.
81. Having expressed that sincere satisfaction with our
unanimous vote today, I have two other things to say on
matters which are subjects for serious concern.

88. When we see that the people of the Island have come
so far towards a happy release from their past differences
and dangers, it would be beyond endurancls to witness a
reaction to bitterness or bloodshed.

82. First, there is the question of finance. There has, I
believe, been a very sniall reduction in the large accumulated deficit. But the remaining debt of over $8 million is a
reproach to the parties, to the members of this Council and
to all Members of the United Nations. It is, as I have often
said, intolerable that we should make demands on the
Secretary-General and then fail to give him the means and
resourcesto carry them out.

89. Nevertheless the warning given by the SecretaryGeneral and those who so ably represent him is real and
alarming. The Secretary-General warns us that time may
not run in favour of peace. The same concern wasshownby
the Ambassador of Greece in his speech to which we have
now listened. We are bound to be deeply concerned when
we see in the Secretary-General’s report the ugly word
“deadlock”, though deadlock is still a danger and not yet a
reality.

83. The size of the deficit and the financial burden which
a few of us bear makes it important to be constantly
watchful to see what economies can be made. The
Secretary-General has spoken of the attention given to the
possibility of reducing the operating expenditures of the
Force without impairing its effectiveness. We very much
welcome this. The effectiveness of the Force is our first
concern, but we should warmly welcome a broad costeffectiveness study promptly undertaken under the direction of the Secretary-General, the purpose being to achieve
reduction in costs without impairing the capacity of the
Force to help in keeping the peace.

90. In all negotiations there comes a stage: when favourable circumstances converge. So, I believe, thley convergein
Cyprus now. If that stage and that opportunity are allowed
to passthey may never come back.
91. We have often said before that the solution of the
problems of Cyprus will be for the people of Cyprus. Soit
must be. But all of us, and especially those who have
endeavoured to help in the past, must surely use every
influence we have to encourage and support the efforts of
those who are working for understanding and co-operation.
We are all on the side of those who work for removal of
barriers and for prosperity in friendship and freedom.

84. The other matter in all our minds is the question of
progress towards a final settlement. No one who reads the
Secretary-General’s report can be complacent about the
future.
85. I have been brought up to believe that we should
always count our blessings, and certainly it is well to do so
in Cyprus. The Island is blessed in so many ways,and all of
us pray for the day when it can be rid of the curse of
communal distrust and factional dispute. When we met six
months ago we were delighted that the Secretary-General
could then report that “the last six months have been good
for peace in Cyprus”, Again we have the advantage of a
perceptive and penetrating report from the SecretaryGeneral. We have the advantage of the experienced United
Nations Force under its able Commander, Generd Martola.
We have the advantage of the capacity and skill of
Ambassador Osorio-Tafall. We see the advantage of the
discussions which have continued between Mr. Glafkos
Clerides and Mr, Raouf Denktash, and we know that there
could not be better representatives. We have good reason to
believe that the Governments of both Greece and Turkey
wish to seean early and final settlement.

92. All the favourable factors are still there. We now pray
for and wait for a greater initiative, an initiative in generosity
and faith and imagination. Permit me to follo~wthe example
of the representative of Turkey and quote Shakespeare. In
Shakespeare’s words, we may say to MI:. Clerides and
Mr. Denktash what the people cried out from the walls of
Famagusta as the ship of one of my predecessors,Governor
Othello, wassighted:
“Bring renewed fire to our extincted spirits,
And give all Cyprus comfort.”
93. Mr. KHATRI (NepaI): When on 10 December 1968
the Council extended the mandate df the IJnited Nations
Force in Cyprus for a period of six months, many of UShad
hoped that that extension would constitute a sufficient
period of grace for the current intercommunal talks to bear
some concrete beneficial results. That hope has not been
realized; but we also appreciate the gravity of the differences which divide the commcnities on fundamental issues
and the necesssity for the negotiators to proceed with
patience and perseverancerather than with undue haste.

86. Other advantages and advances have been noted in the
Secretary-GeneraI’s report. The absence of serious incidents
of disorder continues, There have been improvements in the
economic and social fields. The communities have been
brought closer together at the village level. There is
increased contact and increased mutual confidence and
increased co-operation in constructive enterprises for the
common good. All this is excellent news. There are indeed
many favourable factors.

94. For the last fifteen months or so the Republic of
Cyprus has been enjoying an intercommunal harmony and
8

tranquillity unknown in the Island’s contemporary history.
The past year has been a happy one. There have been
definite and welcome signs-to which the Secretary-General
refers-indicating that all concerned parties have shifted the
emphasis from confrontation to negotiation, and from
division to conciliation.
95. But the fact remains that despite this progress, the
settlement of the Cyprus problem is still remote. Much as
we may feel gratified at the limited success of the
intercommunal talks, for example the setting up of two
sub-committees, my delegation cannot but share the deep
concern expressed by the Secretary-General “at the slow
rate of progress” in those talks. The Secretary-General is
rightly concerned “that the passage of too much time” may
“hamper rather than facilitate” the settlement of the
Cyprus problem.
96,. My delegdtion would like to address an appeal to all
concerned parties to pay heed to the misgiving voiced by
the Secretary-General and to make an increasingly sustained
and determined effort to expedite the intercommunal talks.
As far as my delegation is concerned, it would seem to us
that the parties would be well-advised, as an immediate
step, to do all in their power to assure full freedom of
movement for all people, irrespective of their communal
attachment, within their country. We fully subscribe to the
belief that such measures would undoubtedly help to bring
the two communities closer together.
97. My delegation has noted with gratification that during
the preceding six months there has been a substantial
decrease in the number of shooting incidents. The United
Nations Force should be commended for its persistent
efforts to achieve military disengagement, wherever possible. The question of military disengagement is a tricky
problem; but it seems to us that it is another area in which
the parties concerned c!n usefully initiate conciliatory
measures. It is our view that they should increasingly make
use of the good offices provided by the Force for military
disengagement and that whenever an allegation of bad faith
is made on the part of either party, the Force should be
given, rather than denied, an opportunity to inquire into
the allegation. Such practice on all sides, I am sure, would
be congenial to a favourable atmosphere of mutual goodwill, trust and understanding.
98. In this connexion, it is satisfying, however, to note
that the pace of improvement in the situation in Cyprus
which began since the spring of last year has been
maintained, if not actually hastened, during these past six
months. And, in the interest of peace and the success of the
current intercommunal talks in Cyprus, it is the opinion of
the Secretary-General, in which all parties concur, that the
presence of the United Nations Force for a further period
of six months is imperative.
99. My delegation respects the opinion and judgement of
the Secretary-General. The intercommunal talks have
reached a crucial stage, and we feel that it is incumbent
upon the Security Council to contribute to the success of
those talks by extending the mandate of the Force as
recommended by the Secretary-General. Accordingly, my
delegation has voted in favour of the resolution, trusting

that this additional period of six months will be more
fruitfully utilized by the parties and that at the end of that
period it will be possible for the Council to contemplate
withdrawal of the Force.
100. In conclusion, I should like to pay my delegation’s
tribute to the Secretary-General, whose tireless efforts and
abiding concern for peace we all recognize. Our gratitude
and appreciation go to his Special Representative,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and to the Commander, General Martola,
and the men and officers of the United Nations Force for
the manner in which they have been carrying out their
important tasks. Also our grateful thanks are due to those
countries whose voluntary contribution in military contingents and funds has made possible this United Nations
peace operation.
101. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
Allow me, Mr. President, to express our profound satisfaction at seeing you assume for this month of June the highly
important duties of President of our Council. Your skill,
high qualities of heart and mind and diplomatic talents are
known to us all.
102. I should also like to congratulate your two hredecessors, our colleagues from Pakistan and Nepal, for the
exemplary manner in which they performed their duties.
103. The mandate of the United Nations Force in Cyprus
has just been extended by the Security Council for a
further six-month period. I should like to explain in a few
words the French delegation’s reason for its vote on the
resolution which has just been adopted.
104. The report by the Secretary-General, which my
delegation has studied carefully, states that the situation in
Cyprus has continued to improve during the past six
months, despite the tension which still prevails in certain
areas of the Island. We should certainly welcome this
development unreservedly if we had not read in this repor@>
as in that of last December, that (‘no substantive results on
the basic issues which separate the two sides have as yet
emerged” [S/9233, para. 801.
105. Our hopes for a lasting settlement of the problem
-which we share with our Secretary-General-are based on
tile talks which are taking place at Nicosia between the
leaders of the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot
communities. Without minimiting the existing difficnlties,
the French delegation sincerely hopes that the parties
realize the need to intensify their efforts towards a rapid
conclusion.
106. Indeed, the Council cannot perpetuate a provisional
arrangement which circumstances may have imposed five
years ago but which is all too likely to become a pretext for
further delaying a final settlement of the Cyprus problem.
Apart from the heavy financial implications of the operation, there is a risk that routine renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Force might incite the parties to reject
the concessions which are indispensable for the success of
the talks. In that event our Council would be pursuing an
aim diametrically opposite to that which it set itself in
1964 to enable the situation on the Island to return to
normal and to open the door to a lasting solution.

107. The French delegation has agreed that the mandate
of UNFICYP should be prolonged for a further period of
six months, in view of the wishes’expressedby the parties.
Nevertheless, my delegation considers it essential not to
lose sight of the possibility of putting an end in the near
future to the stationing of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus.

vote in favour of the draft resolution, on the clear
understanding that the six-month extension is in full
accordance with the provisions of Se-curity Council resolution 186 (1964), including the provisions concerning the
financing of the United Nations Force in Cyprus..
115. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Mr. President,
may I join my colleagues in expressing my congratulations
and welcome you as you assume your high functions, which
we know you will fill with your customary distinction and
tact.

108. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, it is a
privilege for me to extend to you my heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the high office of the
Presidency of the Security Council. Your high abilities are
familiar to every member of this Council, and even beyond
the walls of the Council chamber. Your oonsideration,
politeness and deep understanding of the problems facing
the Council will greatly facilitate the carrying out of our
duties during your tenure of office. I can only promise the
full support of my delegation in your very difficult task.

116. I should also like to express appreciation to our
colleagues, Ambassador Khatri and Ambassador Shahi, for
their distinguished service to the Council during the past
months.
117. Eighteen months ago the threat of disaster had been
narrowly averted as the Council met to consider the Cyprus
situation and the future of the United Nations Force in
Cyprus. Then it was clearly necessary to extend this
peace-keeping force once more; and we came to this same
decision again in March, in June and in December of last
year.

109. At the same time I wish to congratulate my
successor, Ambassador Khatri, who presided over the
Council during the month of April, and who gave the final
touch to the unfinished business I had to leave him, because
of unfortunate circumstances. He conducted the business of
the Council with the calm serenity so characteristic of his
personality, with wise patience and understanding, always
having regard for the abundantly different views in OX
Council.

118. During the first six months of 1968, considerable
improvement in the situation on the Island took place,
reflecting an awarenessboth of how close Cyprus had come
to catastrophe and of the urgent need to find a framework
in which a settlement might be sought which would bring
real peace to the Island.

110. I also wish to congratulate the representative of
Pakistan, Ambassador Shahi, who, as an outstanding member of our Council has always displayed exceptionally clear
perception, even in the most complex issues before our
Council. His perspicacity succeededin assisting our Council
to forgo certain troublesome moments, and spared at least
the non-permanent members of the Council from engaging
in debates on the great problems facing mankind.

119. In the second half of 196X that framlework was
found, and it is greatly ,to the credit of the leaders of the
Greek and Turkish Cypriots, and to the representatives of
the Secretary-General who assisted them in such distinguished fashion, that for the first time since the events of
1963 the twb sides began negotiating directly with each
other, and that intercommunal talks at last got under way.
The talks have, however, now been in progress for a full
year. That we in this Council are anxious to see progressin
the talks is self-evident. We trust the parties themselves
share this senseof urgency. The world has borne the weight
of the Cyprus crisis too long; but its weight had been an
even greater burden on those directly concerned. Patience is
demanded from all of us, but we share with the SecretaryGeneral the concern expressed in his report of 3 June that
“no Substantive results on the basic issues which separate
the two sides have as yet emerged”. /S/9233, para. 80.1

111. The position of Hungary on the question of Cyprus
has been made clear in the Security Council and elsewhere
on many occasions. Therefore I shall only try briefly to
stressa few points.
112. This problem can and should be settled by peaceful
means, and the people of Cyprus should resolve their
internal and intercommunal problems by themselves, without foreign interference. Only the exercise of the right of
self-determination will enable them to normalize the
situation in their country, and it will genuinely strengthen
the independence, sovereignty and integrity of Cyprus.

120. We agree with the Secretary-General that the work of
UNFICYP “represents an indispensable element in maintaining and further improving the calm atmosphere in the
Island and in promoting the steps towards normalization,
which constitute as before the two major prerequisites for
substantive progress in the inter-communal talks”. ,/Ibid.,

113. I cannot hide the fact that my delegation had
expected a faster advance at the intercommunal talks. We
had hoped for a speedier solution of the problem. Six
months ago it seemed to us that the Security Council had
given the last authorization to the extension of the mandate
of UNFICYP .

pare. 83.1

114. Nevertheless, my delegation learned with satisfaction
from the report of the Secretary-General [S/9233] that the
general political climate on the Island has improved in the
last six months, and that the inter-communal talks have
achieved important results and are promising further fruits.
It was with this prospect in mind that my delegation cast a

121. We therefore have supported the recommendation
that UNFICW’s mandate be extended for another six
months.
122. Looking ahead however, we solemnly urge the parties
in Cyprus to build on the progress achieved to date, to press
10

on with measures designed to normalize the situation on
the Island, and to pursue, with a determination to succeed,
the search for a negotiated settlement of their problems. As
Lord Caradon has just pointed out, there is too much at
stake for them to allow themselves to fail. If, as we hope,
an advance should take place towards an ultimate solution,
with a commensurate reduction of internal tensions, all of
us would, I am sure, expect the Secretary-General to
contemplate a corresponding reduction of the size of the
Force. I am convinced that the Council would be highly
gratified if conditions of stability were to make it possible
and safe to reduce the size of the Force and eventually,
over the longer term, to terminate its mission when there
was agreement that it was no longer required. My delegation hopes that the Secretary-General and the parties will
keep those objectives in mind and that they will reassess the
immediate situation with respect to UNFICYP during the
next six months.

128. Permit me to express the sincere hope that the
Security Council, under your guidance as President, will
succeed in reaching solutions of the problems before it, in
the interests of strengthening international peace, developing friendship and co-operation between nations and
effectively promoting the liberation of peoples which are
still suffering under the yoke of colonialism and racism.
129. The position of the Soviet Union on the problem of
Cyprus is well known, It has been expounded more than
once in declarations by the Soviet Government and in the
statements of its representatives,including those in the
Security Council.
130. In connexion with this renewed discussionof the
problem of Cyprus in the Security Council, the USSR
delegationfeels compelledto confirm that this position
remainsentirely unchangedand retains its full significance.
The Soviet Union hasalwaysacted on the assumptionthat
the problemof Cypruscan and must be settled by peaceful
means,in the interestsof the entire Cypriot people and of
both its componentnational communities.Such a settlement of this problemwould also alleviate tension in the
EasternMediterraneanarea. The Soviet Union resolutely
supports the struggleof the Cypriots for the complete
independence,sovereigntyand territorial integrity of their
country, the ,Republicof Cyprus, which asa State Member
of the United Nations,pursuesa policy of peace,a policy
of non-alignmentwith military blocs.

123. My Government has contributed heavily to the
financing of UNFICYP,
and, although we intend to
continue our financial support to this peace-keeping effort,
we are increasingly concerned over the burden it represents
and over the mounting deficit caused, as the SecretaryGeneral has pointed out, by the failure of some Members to
shoulder an equitable part of the burden.
124. Therefore we should hope that the SecretaryGeneral, who under the mandate of URFICYP is responsible for the “composition and size of the Force”, would
undertake a full examination of the possibilities for
effective economies in the operation of the Force, including
a study of possible personnel adjustments consistent with
UNFICYP’s ability to continue fully to discharge its present
functions.

131. The solution of the domestic problems of the
Republic of Cyprusis a matter for the Cypriots themselves;
they must settle their domestic affairs for themselves
without external interference. The legitimate rights of the
Greek and Turkish communitiesin Cyprus must be fully
respectedby everyone.

125. In addition we urge other Members, particularly
Security Council members, to review their own position on
financial contributions. The entire world community profits from the maintenance of peace in Cyprus, and those
with particular responsibility for international peace and
security have a special obligation to carry a fair share of the
burden.

132. The Soviet Union resolutely opposesany attemptsto
infringe the sovereigntyof the Republic of Cyprus, and
intentions, not unfamiliar to certain States, to settle the
problem of Cyprusbehindthe back of the Cypriot people
in a mannerprejudicialto their vital interestsand favourable to the imperialistaims of certain States membersof
the NATO bloc. The Security Council and the United
Nationsasa wholemustcategorically opposeany attempts,
intentions or aspirationsto subordinate the fate of the
Cypriot people to the interests of executing the military
plansof this bloc in the Mediterraneanbasin.

126. We share Mr. Jakobson’s concern that a more effective and comprehensive means of financing United Nations
peace-keeping be found rapidly. In the meantime, however,
the United States would hope that those Members that have
not yet contributed financially to UNFICYP will now do
so, so that the Force can continue to discharge its
important functions with full assurance of a safe future.

133. This approachby the Soviet Union to the question
under discussionarisesfrom the generalcourse of Soviet
foreign policy, determinedby the great founder of our
State, V.I. Lenin, the hundredth anniversary of whose
birth will soonbe celebratedby mankind. Sincethe earliest
days of its existencethe Soviet Government, following
Lenin’s ‘directives, has pursued a policy of peace and
friendship betweennations and has resolutely and consistently opposedthe enslavementand subjectionof peoples.
Today alsothe Soviet people remainsa determinedadvocate of the eradicationof the vestigesof colonialismin all
its formsandmanifestations.

127. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist, Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, before. stating the
views of the Soviet delegation on the substance of the
question under discussion, I should like to associate myself
with the good wishes and congratulations which have
already been addressed by earlier speakers to you,
Mr. President, and to your predecessors, our distinguished
colleagues representing two States with which the Soviet
Union maintains ties of friendship and co-operation, the
Ambassadors of Nepal and Pakistan, who successfully
occupied this eminent post before you assumed it.

134. The Soviet delegationcould not fail to notice the
statementin the Secretary-General’sreport that talks are
13

justified, and it continues to hold this view. At the same
time, in view of the opinions and wishes of the parties
&rectIy concerned and, above all, of the Government of
Cyprus, the USSR delegation did not oppose the Secretary.
General’s proposal that the stationing of t’hose forces in
Cyprus should be prolonged for a further six-month period,
It is self-evident that, at the same time, we advance as an
essential condition that this extension of the period of their
stationing shall take place in full conformity with the
provisions of the Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964, namely that the present duties, of the United
Nations forces in Cyprus and the present method of
financing the operation, that is to say on a v’oluntary basis,
will be maintained.

now being conducted in Cyprus between representatives of
the Greek and the Turkish communities and are directed
towards the solution of problems subsisting in the relations
between them. Unfortunately these talks are being prolonged. We sincerely hope for the success of these talks
between the two national communities composing the
people of the Republic of Cyprus. We maintain that these
talks are a domestic matter for the Republic of Cyprus.
Their successful conclusion will be in the interests of all
Cypriots, It is obvious that the participants in the talks have
to overcome considerable difficulties in achieving the goal
they have set themselves. The reasons for these difficulties
are well known to all. They, like the complexity of the
problem of Cyprus as a whole, are the result of the go-year
domination of Cyprus by foreign imperialist colonialists,
who tried to suppress the Cypriot liberation movement by
their well-known traditional method “divide and rule”.

140. Some speakers here have mentioned the question of
the deficit that has resulted from such a prolonged
stationing of these forces in Cyprus. Nowevlsr, we cannot,
of course, agree with the views expressed in this connexion.
Their acceptance would be unfair to many members of the
Security Council and to many Members of the United
Nations as well as unjustified.

13.5. Whereas the former foreign colonialists tried to use
the intercommunal strife that they had fostered in Cyprus
as the main tool for strengthening their domination,
especially during the period of the Cypriot struggle for
liberation, certain members of the ruling circles of NATO
complicated the relations between these two communities
in Cyprus in pursuing their over-all policy of military
strategy in the Mediterranean area. Their plans apparently
include designs to profit from the disturbed atmosphere on
the Island and to try to turn it into an “unsinkable
nuclear-rocket aircraft carrier” for NATO. It is not hard to
see that those are the underlying reasons why the problem
of Cyprus has not yet been removed from the agenda of the
Security Council.

141. There can be only one solution to this problem:
those who bear the long-term responsibility for this
problem should reimburse the costs and co’ver the deficit
resulting from the need for United Nations forces to be
stationed on this Island for such a long time.
142. The PRESIDENT (trunsluted front S~mish): My list
shows no other representatives who wish to explain their
vote after the voting.

136. The Soviet delegation would also like specially to
point out that under the Security Council resolution
186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 all States Members of the
United Nations are bound to refrain from any activities
which might complicate the situation in Cyprus.

143. I now call on the representative of Cyprus, who has
asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
144. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Before exercising my right
of reply, I should like to thank the members of the Security
Council who have spoken on this question and who have
shown understanding, particularly those who have referred
to matters which are very important such as the need for
the freedomof movement, and, in particular, I would thank
the representative of Nepal for supporting what I said
regarding the freedom of movement for tlie whole population.

137. Today the Security Council examined the report by
the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in
Cyprus for the period 3 December last year to 2 June this
year (S/9233/. The report contains a recommendation that
the stationing of armed forces in Cyprus be extended for a
further period of six months. In this connexion we feef
obliged to point out that more than four years have passed
since the armed forces of the United Nations, consisting
mainly of military contingents from NATO countries,
arrived in Cyprus. Such prolonged stationing of armed
forces in Cyprus cannot .be regarded as normal. Although
the Soviet delegation has not raised the question of their
withdrawal from Cyprus, in view of the position of the
parties directly concerned, it nevertheless expresses the
hope that their stationing in that country will be brougllt to
an end in the not too distant future.

145. In this respect I might answer the relevant point
raised by the representative of Turkey who said that the
restricted areas to which the Turks do not have access-and
to which indeed no Greek or anyone else except the
military has access-are extensive, The size of those areas,
however, is of no importance because they are out of the
way; there are no villages or roads there, and nobody is in
any way restricted in his movements on the Island, unless it
is someone who specifically wants to go into the military
areas.

138. With regard to the resolution adopted at this meeting
of the Security Council, the Soviet delegation feels obliged
to point out first of all that the resolution confirms the
PrOviSiOnS
of Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of
4 March 1964 and subsequent decisions of the Council on
the problem of Cyprus.

146. But conversely, where there are Turkish Cypriot
enclaves, freedom of movement on important roads is
restricted. Five main communications roads, ,Brementioned
in the report; these are blocked and they are in inhabited
areas.Personswho want to go from Nicosiato Kyrenia
instead of taking twenty or twenty-five minutes,have to
spendone hour doing so and go in a roundabout way,

139. From the very outset the Soviet Union as never
considered the stationing of troops in Cyprus to be
12

because the Turkish Cypriots, quite unreasonably, hinder
their movement. And this is being done at a time when
negotiations are taking place in a spirit of understanding. It
takes the villagers of the Trypimeni area more than an hour
to travel in a roundabout way to bring their produce to the
market. This constitutes hindrance to freedom of movement, and this is distinct from the fact that the Turkish
Cypriots or the Greek Cypriots or anyone else cannot enter
restricted out-of-the-way military areas. But this is characteristic of the manner in which these matters are treated.

the hope of finding a peaceful and applicable solution. We
have even made several concessions. But there are limits
and a line beyond which we cannot retreat, We have
stated and reiterate that in no case will the Greek
Cypriots accept a solution creating a kind of state within
a state and generally a solution running counter to the
concept of a unitary State.” /S/9233, para. 66.1
152. NOW, that is the statementthat createsopposition
from the other side. That statementisthe one about which
the representativeof Turkey complains.But I must say that
I greatly appreciatewhat the representativeof Turkey has
said-that they do not want a state within a state. Well, if
that is true, the problemis solved. The representative of
Turkey also said: ‘We do not want divisiveness’..I thank
him for that; and I hopethat it will prove true, becauseif
suchbe the casethe problemis solved,

147. I am grateful to the representative of Turkey for
really making it clear now what the difficulty is, so that
there can be an understanding here as to why there is such
delay in the solution of the problem. We are at one with the
representatives who urged that the negotiations should be
speeded up. But what is the difficulty? Let us see. The
representative of Turkey says, “In any case, we do not want
to give up one iota of our rights, the rights of the Turkish
Cypriots”. Now what are those rights? Are they the rights.
that they had over the ages? No. Are they the rights that
they had during the Turkish Administration? No. Are they
the rights which they had under the British Administration? No. They are the rights-the so-called rights-derived
from the Zurich and London Agreements. And what are
those rights? They are mainly two: one, the essence of
divisiveness and, two, the essence of imbalance.

153. It is not a questionof depriving the Turks of any
rights.They will have all the rights possible,rights that no
minority ever had in anycountry. No matter what is said,a
minority remainsthe minority, and it cannot be given the
power of ruling over the majority and of obstructing and
stallingthe functioning of the State, asthey had under the
Zurich and London Agreements.Whatwe want is simply to
save the State from destruction and give the .Turkish
minority all the rights that they possiblycanhave within a
unitary State.

148. These two elements, combined toge.ther, created the
situation which led to the trouble and the fighting. By
dividing the towns, by dividing the courts of justice, by
dividing everything in the Island, and also by creating a
constitutional imbalance, by which eight Turkish votes in
the House of Representatives could defeat forty-two other
votes, the stage for trouble and fighting was set.

154. Therefore, I do not considerthe statement of the
representativeof Turkey, Mr. Eralp, as unconstructive,
because
he saidthat they areagainstdivisiveness
andagainst
a State within a State. I think that alongthoselineswe can
agree,and geta solutionof the problem.
155. Now, I shallhave to say a few wordswith regardto
the presscampaign.The representativeof Turkey complains
about the presscampaignin the Greek papers;however,
thereare many more complaintsabout the presscampaign
of the Turkish papers.But what is the essence
of the press
campaignof the Turks? Divisiveness.
Whatis the essence
of
the presscampaignon the Greek side? Unity. Thus,it can
now be seenclearly that the opposingsidesare: divisiveness
and unity. I submit that we are on the right course.Oursis
the coursefor unity, for harmony, for the Turks in Cyprus
to enjoy the benefits of free citizensin a united country as
a united peopleand in a united economywhere they can
prosperand live in peace.Now, what are the guarantees?
Wehave offered every possibleguarantee:a legally binding
Declaration of Intent; United Nations inspection and a
United Nations Commissioner
who would ensurethat all
the rights givento them and agreedupon in the courseof
the negotiationsare fully implemented.

149. This was such an abnormal situation that it could not
last. It was unworkable.
That is why a distinguished
personality who dealt with it thoroughly called it the
oddity of a constitution, an unprecedented situation.
Therefore, when inevitably it broke down, we said: “We are
going to remedy it”. And how do we remedy it? By
eliminating at least part of the divisiveness, by creating a
truly unitary State. And it was agreed that it should be a
unitary State. But the moment you come to speak about
unity, then there is the objection.
150. The representative of Turkey is objecting to the
statement of President Makarios merely because he spoke
of unity. When the President speaks of “concessions”, what
does he mean? Concessions towards the demands of the
Turks within reasonable bounds, but not to such an extent
that separativeness of local automy will destroy the unitary
State and again bring insecurity and fighting.

156. So what is the reasonfor the difficulties in reachinga
solution? I hope that this very discussionwill encourage
progressin the negotiations,and that the stumblingblocks
of a State within a Stateand of divisiveness
will disappear.

151. What does the Archbishop say? The representative
of Turkey complains of the statement of the President
contained in paragraph 66. Let us see what is objectionable
there. Let me read it: “We have displayed a spirit of
goodwill and we shall continue the talks in the same spirit”.
Is that anything to which one can object? The Archbishop
says:

157. There is one morething I shouldlike to say.It has to
do with the question of the arms factory in the Turkish
sector.I did not raisethe questionbut the representativeof
Turkey mentioned it. He saysthat it is not true and that
UNFICYP doesnot confirm it. UNFICYP says that they

“We have submitted constructive proposals”-and constructive they are : I wish I could produce them here-“in
13

have not been given the opportunity to visit the shops in
question. If it is true that there is no arms factory, why do
they not aBow UNFICYP to check on it? UNFICYP says:
“We have seen new weapons of local manufacture in the
hands of the Turkish Cypriots”-which
means that they
must be manufactured there-“but
we have not seen the
factory because we have not been given the opportunity”.
That is no reason to say that there is no factory.
158. But those are minor things. The important thing is
that we hope that we shall move forward towards a solution
of the problem, as a united people, in a truly unitary State,
and, in a way that will ensure peace, progress and welfare
for the people of Cyprus as a whole.
1.59. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
representative of Turkey has asked to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.
160. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): I have asked for the floor not
so much to exercise a right of reply as to specify that my
replies to the points just made by Ambassador Rossides
were amply given in my original statement. It is with much
regret that I must classify certain portions of Ambassador
Rossides’ last statement as among those to which I took
objection in my original remarks and which reflect a spirit
not calculated to maintain the atmosphere of calm which is
essential to the progress of the intercommunal talks.
161. I am not going to take up the points which were
raised by Ambassador Rossides, in detail. He wished that he
had the proposals recently made by the Greek Cypriot
administration in the course of the intercommunal talks
and that he could have shown how reasonable they were
and how many concessions they contained. That is a matter
which is being taken up in the Island and I am not going to
go into it here.
162. I merely wish to say that the Turkish community has
taken objection to it in the first instance, but they have
approached the subject in a constructive manner. They have
asked for clarifications and they will come back with
counter-proposals. The main thing about the proposals is
that we should understand that what is at issue is not a
question of giving concessions to a minority, but the
recognition of the rights of a community, which is
recognized as such in the structure of the Republic. The
Ambassador asked what those rights were. In our view, they
are quite clear. They are communal rights enshrined in the
Constitution of the Island. They are not the rights which go
back to the British Administration or the Turkish Administration, but the rights freely negotiated, accepted and
enshrined in the Constitution. And he quoted a certain
authority as saying that this Constitution was an oddity.
163. Of course the Council is aware of the fact that the
highest authority who could pass judgement on the
Constitution, namely, the President of the Constitutional
Court, who was a German, was quite convinced that with
goodwill the Constitution could have worked. For having
said that and for having held that view he was hounded out
of the Island.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

164. One minor point which is illustrative: I did bringuD
the question of t^he factory which was supposed to have
been set upin the Turkish sector because it was mentioned in
paragraph 23 of the report of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Rossides, of course, said that UNFICYP had
previously noticed new weapons believed to be of local
manufacture. He carefully omitted to complete the phrase:
“UNFICYP had previously noticed new weapons of the
small arms type, believed to be of local manufacture , . ,“,
while, of course, the factory that was supposed to exist was
supposed to manufacture bazookas, mortars and small
arms.
165. These are minor matters which I would like not to
have brought up and I hope that this will be the end of the
debate at this juncture. We have to turn our eyes to the
Island and hope that the intercommunal .talks there wil1
reach success.

’
(
;
i
i
t
:

;
;
:
’

166. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I call on
the representative of Cyprus.
167. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I wish to express the hope
that after this meeting the negotiations in Cyprus may
move forward at a better pace, with better understanding
and towards a spirit of less mistrust and more confidence
between the two sides so that we can reach a reasonable
solution within a unitary State as agreed upon, without the
elements of division that would destroy it.
168. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I have
no other speakers on my list, At this point in our
deliberations I wish to express my gratitud’e to the States,
Governments and organizations, to various persons whose
names I need not mention, and to the Secretary-Generai
whom I do wish to mention, for their joint efforts and their
generous co-operation in establishing harmony, peace,
justice and prosperity in Cyprus.

;
I

169. The Council has completed the consideration of its
agenda, but before closing the meeting I should like once
more to use the prerogative of the Chair to add a few words
on two particular topics.
170. What I have to say first is intended a,s a clarification.
As a rule, in addressing those who wish to speak, the person
holding this office usually prefaces the title “representa.
tive” by the word “distinguished”.
By not doing that, I
have in a way upset an established procedure. I did so for
one reason only, however, and I should like to explain it: to
my mind, all the representatives who sit at the Council
table possess qualities of the most outstanding order, and it
is a pleasure for me to repeat that statement.
171. Secondly, I should like to express my appreciation to
the members of the Council who have bestowed SUCII
extremely lavish praise upon me and in whose words I see
the evidence of friendship. No President could perform his
duties successfully without
loyal and unstinting CO.
operation from the members, I rely on the loyal and
unstinting co-operation of each and every one of the
Council members.

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

The meeting rose at 5.50 pm!.

in other currencies)

82055-November

1972-2,050

:
