,
~,

4'

.;

If

..;

~

I

"',-

I
"

I

100th

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
THIRTY·FIRST SESSION

Official Records

•

CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 26:
Admission of new Members to the United Nations (concluded) ...........•...•...•.•••...•..•.• 1491
Agenda item 54:
Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations In all their aspects: report of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations
Report of the Specinl Political Committee .•........ 1498

PLENARY MEmNO

G
S
in

Wednesday, 15 December 1976,
at 3.35 p.m.
NEW YORK

association between my country and Samoa. 1 This I need
not recapitulate. New Zealand takes pride in the fact that,
after the United Nations had set new goals for the
self-determination of peoples which were then under
Trusteeship or colonial administration, Samoa was the first
South Pacific nation to achieve independence, and that it
did so through a peaceful and democratic process that was
supervised and approved by the United Nations at every
step.

N
SI

hI

6. Samoa is not newly independent. It became an independent State on I January 1962, and since then it has been
developing a network of bilateral, regional and international
relationships, moving at its own pace and in accordance
with its own perception of its national interest. Membership
in the United Nations is an important milestone in the
process of the development of Samoa's international
relations, but that process of development will nevertheless
continue. Samoa is already well versed in the exercise of its
political independence, but, as a small and remote island
State with limited resources, it may legitimately look to the
United Nations for continued help in strengthening and
making more secure its economic independence.

President: Mr. Hamilton Shirley AMERASINGHE
(Sri Lanka).

AGENDA ITEM 26
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
(collc/llded) *
1. The PRESIDENT: The recommendation of the Security
Council regarding the admission of the Independent State
of Western Samoa to membership in the United Nations is
contained in document A/31/369.

se

7. Samoa is situated in a vast ocean region, the South

2. I call on the representative of New Zealand, who wishes
to introduce draft resolution A/3 I/L,32 and Add. I.

3. Mr. TEMPLETON (New Zealand): It is an honour and a
pleasure to introduce, on behalf of a large number of
sponsors, draft resolution A/31/L,32 and Add.1 by which
the Assembly is asked to admit the Independent State of
Western Samoa as the one hundred and forty-seventh
Member of the United Nations. I am confident that it will
do so unanimously.
4. Samoa, as it wishes simply to be known in ordinary
United Nations usagf), is an island State in the South Pacific
which is already a mcmbl~r of the South Pacific Forum, of
the Commonwealth and of a number of the United Nations
agencies. It is appropriate that its application should be
sponsored by those of its partners in the South Pacific
Forum which are Members of the United Nations, by a
large number of Commonwealth countries, by the member
States of the Association of South-East Asian Nations and
other Asian States bordering on the Pacific and by still
other countries with which Samoa has established friendly
relations.
5. I have already had the privilege of speaking in support
of Samoa's membership application in the Security Council,
and in doing so I gave some account of the long and close

Pacific. It is the fifth member of the South Pacific Forum,
an association of independent and self-governing countries
in the regior., to join the United Nations. For us, this is an
event of no little significance. The South Pacific island
countries have in common special problems arising from
their small size, their maritime environment, their limited
resources and, above all, their geographic isolation. The
negotiations on the law of the sea, in particular, have served
to heighten a sense of common purpose among these
countries. One may expect to hear their voices more often
in these halls. A significant number of South Pacific island
peoples are still in a transitional stage of their constitutional
development, and before long a number of them will help
to swell still further the membership of this Organization.
My Government, for its part, looks forward with keen
anticipation to the strengthening of the South Pacific voice
in this Assembly, to which the membership of Samoa and
other South Pacific countries will undoubtedly contribute.

1.
S

o

e)

w
a
a

8. In conclusion, may I extend from my delegation the
warmest of welcomes to the Deputy Head of State of
Samoa, Tupua Tamasese Lealofi IV, and his accompanying
delegation, and convey through him to the Head of State,
the Prime Minister, the Government and the pwple of
Samoa, our congratulations on this important moment in
their history.
p
c

9. I commend the draft resolution to the Assembly.
I Sec Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-first Year,
1977th meeting.

* Resumed from the 84th meeting.

vc
1491

Ai. '/PV.IOO

.
-----------------------..:..-----------II&-II!!!!!••!!!I!!!-.Q~;;;:e=!'!!;:z;g~-_!!!!!'JC!!·
!!!'L~-*!!'!.I!III~\al;;;:i:!!.-'!!!~!!!iI
~
,'\ !\l_
-

."

--,-

>....

•

1~92

GtIlenl Allembly - ThIrty·ftnt SeIIIon - PlCIIIUY Meetinp

10. The PRESIDENT: The Assembly has before it draft
resolution A/31/L.32 and Add.l, recommending the admis·
sion of the Independent State of Western Samoa to
membership in the United Nations. May I take it that the
General Assembly approves the recommendation of the
Security Council and adopts the draft resolution unan·
imously?

19. We did not join the United Nations in 1962, when the
world acknowledged that we were indepehderlt. We stood
back and waited. We were busy. at home putting our house
back in order, rearranging some of the furniture, putting
some of the old familiar things back where they belonged.
That gave us breathing space, time to stand back and take
stock of the world.

Tile draft resollltion was adopted (resoMion 31/104).

20. The Pacific islands no doubt all look alike from the
capitals of Europe and North America. To those of us who
live there they are not. Some of the things which are most
precious to us are the thinss which make us different from
our nearest neighbours. A Pa.:ific island is a fragile thing.
We had been touched by an alien world. That touch had
left its mark. We needed time to recover, to look at the
world, to decide for ourselves how close to it we could
afford to come and still retain our way of life and the
things that are important to us.

11. The PRESIDENT: I decla~ the Independent State of
Western Samoa admitted to membership in the United
Nations.

Tile delegation of tile Independent State of Western
Samoa was escorted to its place in tile General Assembly
lIal1.
12. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly,
it is both an honour and a pleasure to welcome the
fllpresentatives of the Independent State of Western Samoa
to the United Nations and to extend to them my sincere
congratulations on their country's election to membership
in the Organization. I am confident that their presence here
will b:~ of mutual benefit to them and to the United
Nation~.

13. I take this opportunity to state that the new Member
has expressed the desire to be known as Samoa.
14. I now invite the member of the Council of Deputies of
the Independent State of Western Samoa, His Excellency
Tupua Tamasese Lealofi IV, to address the General As·
sembly.
15. Tupua TAMASESE LEALOFI IV (Samoa):2 Western
Samoa was recognized as an independent State by this
Organization 15 years ago. On 1 January 1962 under the
eyes of the Trusteeship Council the Trusteeship Agreement
with New Zealand was ended. Before coming under the
administration of New Zealand, we had been administered
as a colony by European nations.
16. In the span of our history the colonial period was a
short interlude, and l10t an altogether unhappy one. The
world saia we were independent in 1962. But we had been
running our own affairs and had had our own identity
before the Europeans found us. The things which most
affect the lives of the Samoan people were much the same
then as they are now. The things which were important to
us then are still important.
17. In Polynesia we sense the natural timing of the earth;
the tide ebbs and flows; the sun rises and sets. People are
born, live and die.

21. Now we believe we know where we are going. The
pace of international events is such that the Pacific will not
remain a quiet backwater much longer. Many countries,
including the old colonial Powers, have rediscovered a
forgotten interest in the region. There is already evidence of
gwat-Power interest-even rivalry. The influences of the
cash economy have had their inevitable effect. The expectations of our people have changed with education and
contact with the world. We ourselves feel better able to
move and speak with confidence in the international
community of nations.
22. We know that in today's world we need friends. Our
old friends have stood by us over the years. We acknowledge their help, and patience, with gratitude. In tomorrow's world we will need new friends. We understand well
the concept of the interdependent world. We know that
just over the horizon there are challenges which we will not
be able to meet alone.
23. For those reasons we have joined the United Nations.
24. We know that our country is small and will not greatly
change the course of history. Yet we wish to speak with our
own voice. We wish to express our opinions in a place
where they might be heard. We have received help from
many United Naticns bodies in the past. We would like to
play our part in the parent body in guiding their activities.
Our special interest will be to make them aware of how
lightly and thoughtfully and carefully they must step in a
small island nation if they are to do the good they seek and
not to do harm instead.
25. We wish to build on old friendships and to make new
friends. We know that in this body we will fmd many with
a close community of interest. Closest at hand we have our
neighbours in the South Pacific, old and trusted friends:
New Zealand, Australia, Fiji and Papua New Guinea. We
share the South Pacific and we are equal partners together
in our regional body, the South Pacific Forum.

problems well
make the wor
28. With the
bond. We are
are not enviab
with the supp
be Insurmount
29. To all
friendship.
30. In 1962,
United Natio
with keeping
United Natio
Africa. It wa
concerned us.
survival of m
should be. In
spiritual, is
planet can fee
allow them
matters.
31. I make n
this Organiza
the Samoan
we are able'
people will b
position on d
only as they
countries and
32. The com
stop. The dec'
the last centu
possessions a
33. The proc
out in Africa.
debatable. Th
the Pacific.
and full self-g
countries wi
The pacific
difficult situ
avoided. But
are difficult,
because they
Power, or bec
the road to in
34. The peo
the Pacific ar
will speak in
know that ch

18. Ours is a small country. We are separated from our
neighbours by hundreds of miles of sea. We live mainly by
what we produce from the land and reap from the sea. We
depend on the resources around us. Not only are we an
independent State; we are an independent people. We are
proud of our identity, uur history, our language, our
culture and our traditions.

26. We sense that we will find a close community of
interest with the developing countries since we share with
them the common need for help if the gap between rich
and poor is ever to be removed.

35. Samoa
session of the
Assembly's w
look forward
year.

2 Tupua Tamasese Lealoti IV spoke in Samoan. The English
version of his statement was supplied by the delegation.

27. We know that we will find friends among other small
developing island countries. We understand each other's

36. I wish t
our applicati

looth meeting - IS December 1976

problems well. We will join our voice to theirs IUld try to
make the world listen, and become aware of our problems.
28. With the least developed countries we share a special
bond. We are one of them. The things we have in common
are not enviable, but they must be faced with courage, and,
with the support of friends, the problems we face will not
be insurmountable.
29. To all other peace·loving countries we offer our
friendship.
30. In 1962, when we first thought about joining the
United Nations, we saw it as a body that was preoccupied
with keeping peace in the world. The interests of the
United Nations lay in Europe, Asia, the Middle East and
Africa. It was not much interested in the concems that
concerned us. Now its predominant interests concern the
survival of manki..,d. We believe that is where its concern
should be. In Polynesia the condition of people, physical or
spiritual, is the question of first importance. Until this
planet can feed its people, clothe them, educate them and
allow them to live in peace and dignity, nothing else
matters.
31. I make no apology when I say that our first concern in
this Organization will be the betterment of the condition of
the Samoan people. We hope also to play as full a part as
we are able in this body in the future. The condition of
people will be foremost in our minds. It will guide our
position on development questions and human rights, not
only as they affect individuals, but as they affect groups,
countries and races-races that span countries.
32. The comforting thing about history is that it does not
stop. The decisions that were made in European capitals in
the last century to draw lines on the map and call them
possessions are not standing the test of time.
33. The process of decolonization has almost worked itself
out in Africa. The outcome is inevitable. Only the means is
debatable. The 1970s are the decade of decolonizalion in
the Pacific. That decade has progressed well. Independence
and full self-government have been achieved by a number of
countries with a tranquillity that must be envied elsewhere.
The pacific way, as we call it, has made it possible for
difficult situations to be overcome and trouble to be
avoided. But difficult cases remain. Perhaps because they
are difficult, because the Territories are poor and isolated,
because they are smothered by the domination of another
Power, or because they have been split by conflicting aims,
the road to independence is still not clear.

1493

resolution. I wish to thank all members for voting for it. I
have heard with humiUty the words spoken about my
country, and I offer those who have spo~en the gratitude of
the people and the Government of Western Samoa.
37'. Our thanks go te New Zealand, our good friend, which
in our absence made most of the arrangements for this
historic day.
38. Thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
speak and to put to this world body just some of the things
that are important to my country, Samoa.
39. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General Assembly
and on my own behalf I thank the distingUished member of
the Council of Deputies of the Independent State of
Western Samoa, His Excellency Tupua Tamasese Lealofi IV,
for his statement.
40. I cannot let this occasion pass without also extending
to the Government of New Zealand, through its Permanent
Representative, Ambassador Templeton, my deep appreciation of the honourable and efficient manner in which it
discharged its trust and led Samoa to achievement of the
status of an independent. sovereign State 14 years ago and
ultimately to membership in the United Nations today.
41. I call on the representative of Madagascar, who will
speak on behalf of the group of African States.
42. Mr. RABETAFIKA (Madagascar) (interpretation/rom
French).' In the absence of the present Chairman of our
group, my delegation would like to express what it believes
to be a priori the unanimous sentiment of the African
delegations, namely, great satisfaction at the decision of the
Government of Western Samoa to become a Member of our
Organization. The admission of that State to the United
Nations meets with our complete approval and is a source
of particular satisfaction to us.
43. A Pacific country, separated from the African continent by vast sea areas and by vast continents, Western
Samoa has perhaps not had much contact with our
respective countries. But it is a fact that the modem history
of that archipelago has developed in parallel with ours from
the period of colonial conquest until its rebirth to
intemationallife as a recognized independent and sovereign
nation.

35. Samoa has joined the United Nations late in the
session of the General Assembly. We have not shared in the
Assembly's work, but we know it has been worth while. We
look forward to participating in the Assembly's work next
year.

44. It is therefore not surprising that the African countries, confronting the same problems as those confronting
Samoa and sharing with it the same aspirations and
concerns, are particularly interested in the evolution which
led that country to independence on 1 December 1962. We
are pleased to note that that process, begun by a Constitutional Convention held in 1954, then marked by the
inauguration of a constitutional government in 1959, was
carried out without major difficulties and, under United
Nations supervision and with the loyal co-operation of the
administering Power, led to independence barely a year
after the adoption of resol ution 1514 (XV) on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples.

36. I wish to thank all those countries which supported
our application for admission by sponsoring the draft

45. That happy evolution, which we might describe as
exemplary of its type, augured well for L'Hi future of

34. The people whose shores are bathed by the waters of
the Pacific are our brothers. We share their ambitions. We
will speak in this body with their interests at heart. We
know that changes are wanted and that change must come.

•
~
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.......-==--=--~;.,.~=~~-.-~~~~
.-....4C '¥li"'y~'=i;\ 4.'
1\'"
~
.

"

r
--~

- - Jb

""'4

.." _ - - - - - - - - ' - - - - - ' -

Western Samoa, whiM has since consolidated its internal
structures and which, although it d~cided to delay its
aS60ciation with and participation in the work and the life
of the United Nations, has none the less in the course of the
last IS years demonstrated its intention to play an active
part In intemational life and its refusal ttl withdraw into
itself.

46. The country whose entry into the United Nations we
greet today is already a membl'lr of other organizations, of
the Commonwealth, of the World Health Organization and
of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific. It is also, as the representative of New Zealand has
indicated, the fifth member of the South Pacific Forum to
become a member of the United Nations.

47. This means that its contribution to our Organization
will be marked by the experience which its leaders have
already acquired and by the wealth of goodwill which they
intend to display in building a world of peace and universal
understanding.
48. In renewing to the delegation of Western Samoa the
expression of our warmest congratulations, I wish to assure
it of the complete and sincere co-operation of the African
delegations.
49. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Fiji,
who will speak on behalf of the Asian group of States.
50. Mr. VUNIBOBO (Fiji): I am profoundly grateful to
my colleagues of the Asian region for the particular
privilege of serving as the Chairman of the Asian group of
States for the month of December. This has provided me
with the opportunity of welcoming a close and valued
neighbour, the Independent State of Western Samoa, as a
Member of the United Nations. With pleasure, therefore,
and on behalf of the members of the Asian region and on
behalf of the Fiji delegation, I welcome it most warmly.
51. When Western Samoa attained its independence on
1 January 1962, it was widely accepted that the process
towards independence in that country constituted one of
the important chapters in the history of the International
Trusteeship System. In this regard, we wish to pay a
particular tribute to the Government of New Zealand as the
administering Power. New Zealand's contribution to the
development of Western Samoa has been significant. Since
independence, the Government of New Zealand has continued to provide technical and capital assistance and
remains the largest bilateral donvr. The people and Government of New Zealand are to be congratulated for the
manner in which they have changed their colonial relation·
ship with Western Samoa into a relationship between free
and equal nations. We in Fiji have watched that relationship
grow and develop to maturity.

52. Though Samoa is the youngest Member of this world
Organization its leaders are lacking neither in wisdom nor in
experience of international affairs. Although Samoa has not
been a Member of the United Nations since its indepen·
dence, it has been a member of several specialized agencies
of the United Nations system and has continued to play an
important role in several important regional organizations.
It is a member of the World Health Organization, the

Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the Asian Development Bank. It became a
member of the Commonwealth in 1970.
53. For the small Territories of the Pacific, regional
grouping is a necessity. We have been assisted in considerable measure by New Zealand and Australia. Samoa has
contributed in no small measure to these regional organizations.
54. The South Pacific Commission established by the
metropolitan Powers with dependent Territories in the
Pacific has grown from an exclusive club to one which
counts among its members countries of the region which
have achieved independence. We look forward to the day
when the remaining dependent Territories will take their
place in that organization. Of late the South Pacific Forum
and its executive arm, the South Pacific Bureau for
Economic Co-operation, have been formed. Samoa is a
member and plays an effective role in both organizations.
55. The people of the South Pacific by all accounts have
their origins in the Indo·Malay peninsula. What is now
~ndonesia appears to have been the route through which
successive waves of migration were dispersed and fanned
into the Pacific.
56. The Samoans, Tongans, Hawaiians, the Cook Islanders,
the French Polynesians and the Maoris of New Zealand
formed the Polynesian block-renowned for their seafaring
exploits, their dances and the beauty of their women. r:
own country lies in the dividing line between Polynesia and
Melanesia, in a chain begiiming with Papua New Guinea, the
Solomons and the New Hebrides, and has over the centuries
been enriched by our contact with Western Samoa and our
geographical situation. We share with our Samoan friends
the common aspiration of the South Pacific people-an
aspiration for peace, for friendship and tranquillity. We
look particularly to our friends of the great continent of
Asia for support and for help. It is worthy of note that the
South Pacific is one of the few remaining peaceful areas of
the world. We do not know for how long this state of
affairs will continue. Samoa's admission, we hope, will add
a new and welcome voice from the Pacific and, indeed,
from the Asian region.

57. The member States of the Asian region extend a very
warm welcome to Samoa. We express the hope that its
membership in this Organization will enable it to contribute
effectively to the resolving of the many problems and
challenges faced by the world community.
58. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Bulgaria, who will speak on behalf of the Eastern European
States.
59. Mr. YANKOV (Bulgaria): Permit me, on behalf of the
delegations of the Eastern European countries, to extend
our sincere congra~ulations to $e delegation of Western
Samoa on that country's admission to the United Nations
today.
60. The membership of the United Nations is thus
enlarged by another State, which, though small and distant,

r
&

,$.

61. T
followe
self-det
They
which,
effort
freely
Weste
of East
and ex
with it.

63.

United
the fu
and pI
constr
the 10
Organi

64. T
would
Samoa
and to

65. T
Guyan
Ameri

67.
S.:moa
respec
has co
years
Organ
nation
Charte

68. S
the re

I

~, _~,~.,,~_~.~.~~,.III'~<-.~,."...·;·.,!'!'..!!l!• •tm.!II!III!!."'..."'"!!'!'!!..;~IIiiI~---...........;~·. ...~!1

. ,. . . . . . . .""". . . . . .IIIIIl..."'...IIIIIII!. . . ."e-.,,!
... ...

looth meeting - 15 December 1976

became independent in 1962. It is perhaps worth men·
tioning here that Western Samoa was one of the first
Non-Self-Governing Territories which attained its indepen·
denca under the aegis of the United Nations and, in a way,
as a result of the adoption of the historic Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. The termination of the Trusteeslup Agreement for
Western Samoa by the Geneml Assembly at its sixteenth
session {resolution 1626 (XV1)! was a victory both for the
people of Western Samoa in their quest for freedom and for
the United Nations in its concerted efforts to eliminate
colonialism and to help colonial peoples to exercise their
right to self·determination and independence.
61. The countries of Eastern Europe have consistently
followed a policy of support for the just cause of the
self-determination and independence of colonial peoples.
They have always supported the countrie~ and peoples
which, having won their independence, have spared no
effort to consolidate their sovereignty and to follow their
freely chosen road of development. Immediately after
Westem Samoa proclaimed its independence, the countries
of Eastem Europe welcomed and recognized the new State
and expressed their readiness to establish friendly relations
with it.
62. Today, now that Western Samoa has become a State
Member of the United Nations, we look forward to the
contribution this country will make to our common
endeavour to strengthen international peace and security
and international co-operation.
63. Western Samoa's admission to membership in the
United Nations is bringing this Organization a step closer to
the fulfilment of its proclaimed principle of universality
and placing it in a better position to benefit from the
constructive contribution of all States in the furtherance of
the lofty ideals and purposes in the name of which this
Organization was created.
64. The delegations of the countries of Eastern Europe
would like to congratulate once again the people of Western
Samoa on their country's admission to the United Nations
and to wish them success on the road to their development.
65. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Guyana, who will speak on behalf of the group of Latin
American States.
66. Mr. JACKSON (Guyana): Today I have been entrusted
by the group of Latin American States with the pleasant
duty of welcoming Samoa to membership in this Organiza:ion.
67. The Latin American group greets the admission of
S..:moa to membership in the United Nations with deep
respect-respect for the quiet dignity with which that State
has conducted its international relations for more than 14
years and has sought, even before it was a Member of this
Organization, to uphold the goals of peace and inter·
national security in the spirit of the United Nations
Charter.
68. Samoa comes to us with considerable experience in
the realm of international affairs. Its association with the

1495

intemational community as a sovereign State dates back to
1 Janual)' 1962 when, in keeping with resolution
1514 (XV), containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, it decided
to exercise its right to self·determination and independence
as dn expression of the will of its peopie.
69. Samoa has, since independence, played a significant
role in the growth of the distinct identity of the South
Pacific region of which it is a pal"t, It has been an active
member of the South Pacific Commission. In 1970 it
became a founding member of the South Pacific Forum and
the regular meeting of the Heads of Government of
independent and self·governifib countries in that region. In
that year as well Samoa joined the Commonwealth of
Nations. In 1972 it was actively involved in establishing the
South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co·operation. In the
view of the Latin American group, these are indeed eminent
credentials. Furthermore, Samoa's membership in the
World Health Organization, the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the .Asian
Development Bank and other regional and international
organs reflects its continuing identification with and com·
mitment to the promotion of universally accepted ideals of
international peace and co-operation. Such involvement
reinforces the conviction that the admission of Samoa to
membership in the United Nations will give a new and rich
dimension to the work of this Organization.
70. The Latin American group regards as significant
Samoa's desire to associate itself fully with the hopes,
aspirations and activities of the United Nations and to
benefit from greater involvement with the international
community. It is significant because it represents a pledge
-a pledge to join in the intensification of efforts towards
the creation of an international system founded on equity
and justice. In accepting this pledge and extending the hand
of friendship and co-operation to the Government and
people of Samoa, the Latin American gruup looks forward
to sharing in the constructive contribution that Samoa will
undoubtedly make in this Organization.
71. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Malta, who will speak on behalf of the group of Western
European and other States.
72. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): On behalf of the group of
Western European and other States, 1 have once again
within the space of one month the special honour and
privilege of welcoming a new Member to our Organization
-this time Samoa.
73. Very briefly, I wish to express, on behalf of the group
of Western European and other States, our feelings of great
pleasure at seeing one more country join the family of
nations, thus bringing our total membership to 147 and
constituting yet another step forward towards our
cherished goal of universality.
74. I do not wish to reiterate the sentiments so eloquently
expressed by previous speakers in emphasizing the valid
basis for the admission of Samoa. It is sufficient for me to
mention that many European countries have in the past had
a close relationship with the history of Samoa. The

•

t-

'-. '-~"--I

.'
1496

Goneal Auembly - ThIrty·flnt SeNlon -Plenary Meetinsa

representative of New Zealand has capably explained the
special relationship between his country and Samoa; and I
feel it would be proper for us on this occl'Islon to express a
twofold satisfaction at this event in the history of the
United Nations and of Samoa: first, for the admission of
another new Member nnd, secondly, for the friendly and
positive way in which the admission of Samoa was helped
and promoted by the Government and people of New
Zealand.

75. For a small country like mine the admision of
another small, developing island country, a fellow member
of the Commonwealth, is an event which the people of
Malta will regard with a special measure of kinship, and on
behalf of my own country and people, I extend fraternal
greetings across the oceans and continents to the people
and Government of Samoa. Like them, we wish to have
friendly relations with all countries. We place our unbounded trust in the United Nations and hope to contribute to understanding among p?oples from th..: perspective of small countries determhh'., ,0 preserve their way
of life, their neutrality and their cherished liberty.
76. Although we are so far away geographically, there is
similarity both in our experience in the past and in our
prospects for the future. The inspiring statement just made
by the member of the Council of Deputies of Samoa is
sufficient guarantee of Samoa's dedication to the ideals of
the United Nations. I am sure that we shall all benefit from
Samoa's participation in our work, which comes as a result
of a well-considered decision after Samoa's official independence in 1962.
77. I must say that a country which has managed to
preserve the oldest form of Polynesian speech in the face of
the enticement of the French, English, German and Dutch
languages is clear evidence of the indomitable will of the
people to make their own valuable contribution to the
versatility and variety of the family of nations represented
here. We wish them all success in their endeavours and look
forward to collaboration with their representatives in our
future work.
78. As a token of our goodwill and as a first step in
co-operation, we were happy to join in sponsoring the draft
resolution for the admission of Samoa to membership in
the United Nations and to join in its unanimous adoption.
79. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Democratic Yemen, who will speak on behalf of the group
of Arab States.
80. Mr. FADHLI (Democratic Yemen) (interpretation
from Arabic): On behalf of the Arab group of States we
have the honour of bidding welcome to a new Member of
the international Organization, namely, the Independent
State of Western Samoa. The admission of Samoa to the
United Nations is sincere proof that this Organization is
increasingly recognizing the right of States to admission,
and we hope that Viet Nam also will soon become a
Member of this Organization. The independence of the
State of Samoa similarly represents a further victory for the
aspirations of those States which continue to be subject to
colonialism.

81. We hope that the Independent State of Western Samoa
will be able to play its role in the building of a world that
will enjoy peace and this will benefit the people of Samoa
as weU as all peoples of the world. We hope that this
Organization will provide all necessary assistance to bring
about the consummation of the aspirations of the people of
Samoa. The Arab States will follow the same course in
order to reaffirm their full co-operation with the Independent State of Western Samoa with a view to applying the
previously mentioned principles which are enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.
82. Mr. SCRANTON (United States of America): My
country has been especially happy to have joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution supporting the admission of
the Independent State of Westem Samoa, which has
become the one hundred and forty-seventh Member of the
United Nations. Since it became a sovereign State, Western
Samoa has played a very positive role among the community of nations in the Pacific Ocean area. We welcome
Western Samoa's decision to join us here in the search for a
peaceful and more stable world. The nations of the Pacific
have a unique perspective to give us !1l!. Those which are
island States understand particularly well the problems of
isolation and the need for co-operation among nations. We
welcome this perspective and its valuable contribution to
the work of this Organization. We extc::nd warm greetings to
Tupua Tamasese and his delegation.

8

a
a
9

tl
r

tl
a
a

83. The people of Polynesia have a long tradition of
courage-deep and abiding courage. Our own state of
Hawaii and the neighbouring people of American Samoa are
part of the greater Polynesian world. We value highly the
elements of common language, culture and history which
we share. We deeply respect the strong commitments of the
people of Polynesia to their own traditions and culture. Our
country has been enriched by these traditions, and we
know that the United Nations, too, will be the richer
through the membership of Samoa.

b
r

a
tl
tl
d

p
f

84. The United States has worked closely with Western
Samoa in the South Pacific Commission and recognizes
Western Samoa's valuable contributions in the South Pacific
Forum. One of the hallmarks of those bodies has been the
talent of the island peoples of the Pacific in working out
mutually agreeable solutions. We hope that in this larger
forum all of us here may also profit from this talent.

9

85. May I close in saying to our newest Member: 'Talofa
1(J)l,J".

P

S
t

d
ti
o

9

86. Mr. BARTON (Callada): The Canadian delegation had
the honour of joining in sponsoring the draft resolution
which has just been adopted welcoming the Independent
State of Western Samoa as' the one hundred and fortyseventh Member of the United Nations. This occasion gives
us particular pleasure, since Samoa, like Canada, is a
member of that growing fraternity of free and independent
nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, and of course we
are also both Pacific nations.

a
P

f(

C

87. Western Samoa's political evolution is of special
interest, since it was nurtured towards independence
through the United Nations Trusteeship System by New
Zealand, a fellow pioneer member of the Commonwealth of

o

..lli.ii'-_lIIIIJ!l!I!!!IIIII.._.III]IIIlI._.•IIJ• • • • • • •IIII!• • • • • • • • • •~. . . ._---_._-----• • !1'J~

-~

!JISii.. . • •- - - - - - . . . ,

T'

:- ....

-~

,

lOOth meeting - 15 December 1976

Nations. In this connexion, we recall that one of the first
international conferences attended by a Samoan delegation
after Samoa achieved its independence in 1962 was that of
the Third Commonwealth Education Conference held in
Ottawa in 1964. We look forward to continuing cooperation with Samoa in the fields of educational and
technical assistance under the aegis of the Commonwealth
scholarship and fellowship plan and other forms of mutual
assistance. We also anticipate developing close ties with
Samoa in the United Nations forum and working in full
co·operation with delegations from Apia sent to New York
by the Samoan Government.
88. For all these reasons, we join with the many other
friends of this independent State in welcoming this new
Member into our world-wide fellowship.
89. Mr. HARRY (Australia): The Australian delegation, as
a close neighbour of Samoa in the Pacific, would like to
address a special welcome to the Samoan delegation.
90. When Samoa gained its independence in 1962, it was
the first of the South Pacific nations to do so. It has in this
regard shown the way for others as they have moved along
the path to self-determination. Samoa has come to play an
active and important role in the affairs of the Pacific region
as a whole, and Australia warmly welcomes the Samoan
Government's decision to carry its intemationai role
beyond its immediate region. United Nations membership
represents a significant step forward for the Government
and people of Samoa. We wish to congratulate them and
their leaders on their decision. In particular, we commend
the able leadership of Prime Minister Tupuola Efi and his
deep concern to improve the well-being of the Samoan
people while at the same time maintaining the traditional
fabric of Samoan culture and society.
91. Australia welcomes Samoa's growing influence and
increased role in international affairs, especially in the
South Pacific region. Australia and Samoa, together with
the other countries of the Pacific region, are engaged in
developing a number of organizations for closer consultation and collaboration for the advancement of the interests
of the Pacific peoples. Australia and Samoa are both
members of the South Pacific Commission and the South
Pacific Forum.
92. As an example of Samoa's close involvement in the
activities of thJse bodies, I would mention that the South
Pacific Forum is co-ordinating planning for a shipping line
for the region, and its headquarters will be in Apia, the
capital of Samoa.
)3. Samoa has already played an active role in one very
important United Nations enterprise-the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea-as one of the
leading members of the Oceania group. The existence of
that group reflects the importance of the resources of the
ocean and of the preservation of the marine environment
for the peoples of the South Pacific. South Pacific leaders
meeting recently in Suva, Fiji, made a common declaration
on questions relating to the law of the sea.

1497

94. Australia looks forward to cQntinued co-operation
with the Independent State of Western Samoa as a fellow
member of the Commonwealth and a Pacific neighbour. We
see tlns co-operation being enhanced by Samoa's decision
to join the United Nations and to increase its involvement
in international bodies outside the region. We are very
happy indeed to join our fellow neighbours in the Pacific
-Fiji, New Zealand and Papua New Guinea-in welcoming
Samoa today to the United Nations.
95. Mr. OAISA (Papua New GUinea): This is indeed a
great and joyous occasion for the Government and people
of Western Samoa. It gives my delegation, and indeed my
Government, great pleasure to welcome a sister nation tr
the family of nations, of which my country had the
pleasure of becoming a Member over a year ago. Although
Samoa has just become a Member of this world Organization today, it is no stranger to the United Nations and its
agencies: it has participated actively in numerous conferences of United Nations agencies as a full member.
96. Samoa has today, as it were, cleared a piece of land for
a garden. It is, no doubt, a happy occasion. However, while
one takes pride in such an achievement, one also knows
that one does not stop there. Those of us who are familiar
with subsistence farming, and indeed farming in general,
will no doubt know that crops have to be planted: fences
ha"e to be put up and maintained, in order to prevent wild
animals from destroying the .;rops; the garden has to be
weeded and looked after. These tasks, tedious as they may
be, have to be performed before a good and rewarding
harvest can be reaped.
97. The United Nations is like that garden, and the
Charter and its principles are the crops of this world
Organization. We as Members have to uphold the Charter
and principles of the United Nations in order that we may
reap a good and rewarding harvest and that is peace and
security in this turbulent world. It is this noble task that
the Government and people of Samoa have undertaken
today to perform, together with us, members of this family
of nations.
98. I therefore, on behalf of my Government and delegation, offer our warmest congratulations to the Government,
people and delegation of Samoa on their great achievement
and undertaking.
99. Mr. ABE (Japan): On behalf of a nation that also is
located in the Pacific area, and hence harbors a particular
sentiment of sympathy and friendship towards Samoa, my
delegation wishes to add a few words of welcome to the
brilliant address given by the Chairman of the Asian group
of States, Ambassador Vunibobo of Fiji, who has expressed
our feelings amply enough.
100. Tupuo1a Efi, the Prime Minister of Western Samoa, in
his letter dated 29 November 1976 addressed to the
Secretary·General of the United Nations, submitting the
application by his country for membe ..ship in the United
Nations, declared: ..... Western Samea accepts the obliga-

~-

--~-

1498

General Aslembly - ThIrty·fInt SOIIion - PIeDI!)' Meetinp

tiolls contained in the Charter of the United Nations and
solemnly oodertakes to fulfil them. "3
101. My delegation has full confidence in Western Samoa's
determination and ability to carry out the obligations
incumbent upon Member States ooder the Charter.
102. In the view of my delegation and, I trust, of other
delegations, Western Samoa is eminently qualified for
membership in this Organization ooder Article 4 of the
Charter. When the application of Western Samoa for
membership was submHted to the Security CooocH for
consideration on 1 December 1976, my delegation, as a
member of that body, spoke most emphatically for the
admission of Western Samoa and joined in the unanimous
decision of the Security Council recommending that the
General Assembly admit Western Samoa to membership in
the United Nations. It was, therefore, a great pleasure and
honour for my delegation to join 45 other States as a
sponsor of draft resolution A/31/L,32 and Add.l, which
proposed that the General Assembly decide to admit
Western Samoa to membership in the United Nations. This
draft resolution has just been adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly.
103. Indeed, I would recall that in resolution 1626 (XVI),
concerning the future of Western Samoa, the General
Assembly expressed the hope that "Western Samoa, on the
attainment of independence, will be admitted to membership in the United Nations, should it so desire."
104. Fifteen years ago, when the United Nations recognized the independence of Western Samoa in the resolution
that I have just quoted, my delegation particularly welcomed the fact that the process leading to independence
had been very smooth- thankc to the mutual goodwill and
the cooperation of Western Samoa and New Zealand, the
administering Power.
105. Today's auspicious occasion-on which the Deputy
Prime Minister of Samoa has given a memorable address to
the Assembly-refreshes my delegation's gratified memory
of those circumstances.
106. I should like to take this opportunity to express my
delegation's desire to strengthen still further the friendly
and co·operative relations between Japan and Samoa within
and outside the United Nations.
3 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty·first Year.
Supplement for October, November and December 1976. document S/12245, annex.

AGENDA ITEM S4
Comprehensi7e review of the whole question of peacekeeping opemtions in all their aspects: report of tbe
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Opemtions
REPORT OF THE SPECIAL POLITICAL COMMITTEE
(A/31/419)
107. Mr. HAYNES (Guyana), Rapporteur of the Special
Political Committee: I have the honour to present to the
General Assembly the report of the Special Political
Committee on agenda item 54 [A/31/4 19/.
108. During its consideration of the item at five meetings,
the Committee heard 28 stateme!}.ts which generally reflected the progress towards the completion of agreed
guidelines for United Nations peace-keeping operations
indicated in this year's report of the Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Opemtions [A/31/3 37/.
109. At its 35th meeting, on 9 December, the Special
Political Committee adopted by consensus draft resolution
A/SPC/31/L.l5, which is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the
report. That draft resolution, among other things, requests
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations and its
Working Group to renew efforts and to intensify negotia·
tions for an early completion of agreed guidelines for
peace-keeping operations, in conformity with the Charter,
before the thirty·second session of the General Assembly. It
also requests the Special Committee to give further attention to the consideration of specific questions related to the
practical implementation of peace-keeping operations. In its
report, the Special Political Committee has recommended
to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft
resolution that has resulted from its work.

Pursuant to rule 66 of the rules of procedure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of the Special Political
Committee.
II O. The PRESIDENT: In paragraph 7 of its report
[A/31/4 19/, the Special Political Committee has recom·
mended to the General Assembly the adoption of the draft
resolution. The report of the Fifth Committee on the
administrative and financial implications of that draft
resolution is contained in document A/31/445. The Geneml
Assembly will now take a decision on the draft resohaiun.
Since the Special Political Committee adopted the draft
resolution by consensus, may I take it that th;l General
Assembly wishes to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 31/105).
The meeting rose at 4.55 p.m.
