46

General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

Noting the increasing needs of countries, especially
developing countries, for information, advice and assis­
tance in the implementation of the Convention and in
their developmental process for the full realization of the
benefits of the comprehensive legal regime established by
the Convention, as also recognized by the Economic and
Social Council in its resolution 1983/48 of 28 July 1983,
Noting also that the Preparatory Commission for the
International Sea-Bed Authority and for the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea has decided to hold its
third regular session at Kingston from 11 March to 4 April
1985 and its summer meeting in 1985 at Geneva, King­
ston or New York as it may decide, 104
Taking note also of activities carried out in 1984 under
the major programme on marine affairs, set forth in chap­
ter 25 of the medium-term plan for the period I 9841989, 105 in accordance with the report of the Secretary­
Generat 1°6 as approved in General Assembly resolution
38/59 A,
Recalling its approval of the financing of the expenses of
the Preparatory Commission from the regular budget of
the United Nations,
Taking special note of the report of the Secretary-Gen­
eral 107 prepared in response to paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 38/59 A,
I. Recalls the historic significance of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as an important
contribution to the maintenance of peace, justice and pro­
gress for all peoples of the world;
2. Expresses its satisfaction at the large number of sig­
natures affixed to the Convention as well as at the number
of ratifications deposited with the Secretary-General;
3. Calls upon all States that have not done so to con­
sider ratifying or acceding to the Convention at the earliest
possible date to allow the effective entry into force of the
new legal regime for the uses of the sea and its resources;
4. Calls upon all States to safeguard the unified charac­
ter of the Convention and related resolutions adopted
therewith;
5. Calls upon States to desist from taking actions
which undermine the Convention or defeat its object and
purpose;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the effective execution
by the Secretary-General of the central programme in law
of the sea affairs under chapter 25 of the medium-term
plan for the period 1984-1989;
7. Further expresses its appreciation for the report of
the Secretary-General 1°7 in response to General Assembly
resolution 38/59 A and requests the Secretary-General to
continue the activities outlined therein, special emphasis
being placed on the work of the Preparatory Commission
for the International Sea-Bed Authority and for the Inter­
national Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, including the
implementation of resolution II of the Third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea; w3
8. Approves the programme of meetings of the Prepara­
tory Commission for 1985; 104
9. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to
assist States in the implementation of the Convention and
in the development of a consistent and uniform approach
to the new legal regime thereunder, as well as in their
national, subregional and regional efforts towards the full
realization of the benefits therefrom and invites the agen104See A/39/647 and Corr.I, para. 130.
105 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session, Sup­
plement No. 6A, (A/37/6/Add.l), annex II.
106 A/38/570 and Corr. I and Add. I and Add. I !Corr. I

cies and bodies within the United Nations system to co­
operate and lend assistance in these endeavours;
I O. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on developments
relating to the Convention and on the implementation of
the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Law of the sea".
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/74.

United Nations Conference for the Promotion
of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the principles and provisions of its resolu­
tion 32/50 of 8 December 1977,
Recalling its subsequent resolutions 33/4 of 2 Nov­
ember I 978, 34/63 of 29 November 1979, 35/112 of 5
December I 980, 36/78 of 9 December I 981, 37/167 of 17
December 1982 and 38/60 of 14 December 1983,
Noting that the pending issues related to the United
Nations Conference for the Promotion of International
Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy were
successfully resolved at the fifth session of the Preparatory
Committee for the Conference as reflected in its report to
the General Assembly, 108
Noting that the Preparatory Committee once again
emphasized the importance of adequate preparations for
the Conference and agreed on the importance of inter-ses­
sional intergovernmental consultations and contacts,
Noting also that the Preparatory Committee agreed to
begin formal/official inter-sessional intergovernmental
work with its sixth session,
Noting further the decision of the Preparatory Commit­
tee relating to the convening of a meeting of a group of
internationally eminent experts to provide advice on
major issues of concern to the Conference,
I. Approves the recommendations and decisions con­
tained in the report of the Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference for the Promotion of Interna­
tional Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear
Energy on its fifth session; 108
2. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
Chairman of the Preparatory Committee and the Secre­
tary-General of the Conference in pursuance of paragraph
2 of General Assembly resolution 38/60;
3. Requests the Chairman of the Preparatory Commit­
tee and the Secretary-General of the Conference, on the
basis of the practice successfully used before the fifth ses­
sion of the Committee, to continue informal individual
and group consultations, as necessary, in order to assist the
Committee in expediting the necessary procedural and
substantive preparations for the Conference;
4. Notes with appreciation the progress made in the
preparations for the Conference and requests the Secre­
tary-General of the Conference to continue with the prepa­
rations as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
to the Preparatory Committee at its fifth session; 109
5. Decides that the Preparatory Committee shall hold
its sixth session at Vienna from 21 October to I Nov­
ember 1985 to consider, inter alia, the mechanism for forI 07 A/39/647 and Corr. I and Add. I.

I 08 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 47 (A/39/47).

I 09 NCONF.108/PC/ I I and Add. I.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

mal/official inter-sessional intergovernmental work and
the commencement of preparation of the concluding docu­
ment or documents of the Conference, as well as the man­
date and composition of the group of internationally emi­
nent experts;
6. Decides that the United Nations Conference for the
Promotion of International Co-operation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy shall be held at Geneva from l Oto
28 November 1986;
7. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
specialized agencies and other relevant organizations of
the United Nations system to ensure that their contribu­
tions to the input documents for the Conference, including
reports of the regional expert group meetings, should be
concise and comprehensive and specifically related to the
purpose, aims and objectives of the Conference, including
in particular suggestions regarding practical and effective
ways and means for the promotion of international co­
operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, so as to
achieve meaningful results from the Conference in accor­
dance with the objectives of General Assembly resolution
32/50;
8. Invites all States to co-operate actively in the prepa­
ration of the Conference and to make available, as soon as
possible, the information requested in paragraph 9 of Gen­
eral Assembly resolution 36/78 and in the broad question­
naire circulated by the Secretary-General of the Confer­
ence in March 1984;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "United Nations Confer­
ence for the Promotion of International Co-operation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy".
99th plenary meeting
13 December 1984
39/91. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Coun­
tries and Peoples' 10
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,111
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Inde­
pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 2621 (XXV)
of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action
for the full implementation of the Declaration, and 35/118
of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declara­
tion,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolu­
tion 38/54 of 7 December 1983, as well as the relevant res­
olutions of the Security Council,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Bangkok Decla­
ration and Programme of Action on Namibia, 112 adopted
by the United Nations Council for Namibia on 25 May
1984 at its extraordinary plenary meetings held at Bang­
kok,
Condemning the continued colonialist and racist repres­
sion of millions of Africans, particularly in Namibia, by
the Government of South Africa through its persistent,
l lOSee also sect. I, footnote 5.
111 Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-ninth Session, Supple­
ment No. 23 (A/39/23).
112 Jbid., Supplement No. 24 (A/39124), part. two, chap. III, sect. B.

47

illegal occupation of the international Territory and its
intransigent attitude towards all efforts being made to
bring about an internationally acceptable solution to the
situation obtaining in the Territory,
Deeply conscious of the urgent need to take all necessary
measures to eliminate forthwith the remaining vestiges of
colonialism, particularly in respect of Namibia where des­
perate attempts by South Africa to perpetuate its illegal
occupation have brought untold suffering and bloodshed
to the people,
Strongly condemning the policies of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations, have continued to collaborate with the Govern­
ment of South Africa in its domination of the people of
Namibia,
Conscious that the success of the national liberation
struggle and the resultant international situation have pro­
vided the international community with a unique opportu­
nity to make a decisive contribution towards the total
elimination of colonialism in all its forms and manifesta­
tions in Africa,
Welcoming the accession to independence by Brunei
Darussalam on l January 1984 and its admission to mem­
bership in the United Nations on 21 September 1984, 113
Noting with satisfaction the work accomplished by the
Special Committee with a view to securing the effective
and complete implementation of the Declaration and the
other relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Noting also with satisfaction the co-operation and active
participation of the administering Powers concerned in the
relevant work of the Special Committee, as well as the
continued readiness of the Governments concerned to
receive United Nations visiting missions in the Territories
under their administration,
Reiterating its conviction that the total eradication of
racial discrimination, apartheid and violations of the basic
human rights of the peoples of colonial Territories will be
achieved most expeditiously by the faithful and complete
implementation of the Declaration, particularly in
Namibia, and by the speediest possible complete elimina­
tion of the presence of the illegal occupying regime there­
from,
Keenly aware of the pressing needs of the newly inde­
pendent and emerging States for assistance from the
United Nations and its system of organizations in the eco­
nomic, social and other fields,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 1514 (XV), 2621 (XXV)
and 38/54 and all other resolutions on decolonization and
calls upon the administering Powers, in accordance with
those resolutions, to take all necessary steps to enable the
dependent peoples of the Territories concerned to exercise
fully and without further delay their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence;
2. Affirms once again that the continuation of colonial­
ism in all its forms and manifestations - including
racism, apartheid, the exploitation by foreign and other
interests of economic and human resources and the waging
of colonial wars to suppress national liberation move­
ments - is incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights114
and the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and poses a serious threat
to international peace and security;
I 13 See resolution 39/1.
114 Resolution 217 A (III).
