VIII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON U!E REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
RESOLUTIONS ADOPil:ES SUR LES RAPPORTS DE LA PREMIERE
COMMISSION
108 (II). Admission of Yemen and Pakistan
to membership in the United Nations

108 (II). Admission du Yenien et du Pakistan a l'Organisaticn des Nations
Unies

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the applications for membership submitted to the United Nations by Pakistan
and Ycmen, and of the recommendation of the
Security Council that the Assembly admit
Pakistan and Yemcn to membership,

L'Assemblee ginerale,
Prenant acte des demandes d'admission a
!'Organisation des Nations Unies presentees par
le Pakistan et le Yemen, et de la decision prise
par le Conseil de securite de recommander a
l' Assemblee generale d'admettre le Pakistan et le
Yemen comme Membres des Nations Unics,
]uge que le Pakistan et le Yemen sont des
Etats pacifiques au sens de l' Article 4 de la
Charte, qu'ils sont capables de remplir lcs obligations de la Charte et disposes a le faire, et
pour ces motifs
Decide d'admcttre le Pakistan et le Yemen en
qualite de Membrcs des Nations Unies.
Quatre-vingt-douzieme seance pleniere,
le 30 septembre 1947.

Determines that Pakistan and Yemen arc, in
its judgment, peace-loving States, within the
meaning of Article 4- of the Charter, and arc
able and willing to carry out their obligations
under the Charter, ,md consequently
Decides to admit Pakistan and Yemen as
Members of the United Nations.
Ninety-second ;blenary meeting,
30 Sej1tember 1947.

109 (II). Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of
Greece

109 (II>. Menaces a l'independance politique et a l'integrite de la Grece

l. Whereas the peoples of the United Nations
have expressed in the Charter of the United Nations their dctcnnination to practise tolerance
and to live togetl;er in peace with one another as
good neighbom;; :rnd lo ii;1itc their strength tc,
maintain international pew,: and security; and to
that end the tkmhcr:; of tl-i.r' United Nations have
obligated themseh-e.s t,, ,·,lrry out t 1,c purposes and
principles of the Charter,
2. The Cenerril "Lsnnh 1r of the Umted Nations,
II aving 1,on,idercd the record of the Security
Council proceedings in conncxi(Jn with the complaint of the Greek Covernmc11t of 3 December
1946, 1 including the report submitted by thc.
Commission of Investigation 2 established by the
Security Council resolution of 1CJ December
1946 " and information supplied by the Subsidiary Group of the Commission of Investigation subsequent to the report nf the Commission;•
3. Taking account of the report of the Commission of Investigation which fonnd by a majority vote that Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia
had given assistance and support to the guerrillas
fighting against the (;r;Tk Covemrncnt,

1. Considerant que les peuples des Nations
Unies se sont, clans la Charte des Nations Unies,
declares rcsolus a pratiquer la tolfrance, a vivre
en paix les uns avec les autres dans un esprit de
bon voisinage, et unir !curs forces pour maintenir la paix et la securite internationales, et qu'a
ces fins les Membres des Nations Unies se sont engages a realiser les buts de la Charte et a agir
,·onformemcnt aux principes qu'elle enonce,
2. L' Assemblee generate des Nat ions U nies,

'See Official RecDrdr of the Security Council, First
Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 10, Annex 16, and
Supplement No. 11, Annex 20.
Ibid., Second Year, Special Supplement No. 1
'Ibid., First Ye,n, 'irrnnd S,•cies, No. 7.H, pages 700-701

'See documents S1367, S/31i7/Add.l, S/388, S/388/
Corr.l, S/402, S/405 S/419, S/420, S/42'.i, S/428, S/432,
S/431, S/435, S/441, S/441/Corr.l, S/443, S/445, S/457,
S/509, S/515, S/515/Corr.l, S/527, S/531, S/534, S/539
and S/554.

a

Ayant etudie les actes du Conseil de sccurite
relatifs a la plainte deposce le 3 dccembre 1946 1
par le Gouvcrnement de la Grccc, notamment le
rapport presentc par la Commission d'enquetc 2
qu'a crccc le Conseil de securite par sa resolution
du 19 decembre 1946 •, et les rcnseignements
fournis par le Groupe subsidiaire de la Commission d'cnquete apres le depot du rapport de cctte
Commission',
3. Prenant acte du rapport de la Commission
d'enqucte qui a conclu a la majorite que l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie ont prete leur
assistance et leur soutien aux francs-tircurs qui
rnmbattent le Gonvernement hellenique,
'Voir le• Procls-v«rbaux officiels du Cons.ii d- slcu,itl,
Premiere Annee, Seconde Serie, Supplement No 10,
Annexe 16, et Supplement No 11, Annexe 20.
'Ibid., Deuxicme Annee, Supplement ,pecial No 2.
'Ibid., Prem1ere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, No 28, pages
700-701.
'Voir Jes documents S/367, S/367/Add.l, S/388,
S/388/Corr.l, S/402, S/405, S/419, S/420, S/423, S/428,
S/432, S/434, S/435, S/441, S/441/Corr.l, S/443, S/445,
S/457, S/509, S/509/Corr.l, S/515, S/527, S/531, S/534,
1
1 S '>39 et S/554.

12

4. Calls upon Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia to do nothing which could furnish aid and
alGStance to the said guerrillas;
5. Calls upon Albania, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia on the one hand and Greece on the other
to co-operate in the settlement of their disputes
by peaceful means, and to that end recommends:
( 1) That they establish normal diplomatic
and good neighbourly relations among themselves as soon as possible;
(2) That they establish frontier conventions
providing for effective machinery for the regulation and control of their common frontiers
and for the pacific settlement of frontier incidents and disputes;
( 3) That they co-operate in the settlement of
the problems arising out of the presence of
refugees in the four States concerned through
voluntary repatriation wherever possible and
that they take effective measures to prevent the
participation of such refugees in political or
military activity ;
( 4) That they study the practicability of concluding agreements for the voluntary transfer

'L fovite l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie a ne ricn faire qui puisse constitucr une
assistance et un soutien a ccs franc~-tircurs;
5. Invite l'Albanie, la Bulgarie et la Yougoslavie d'une part, et la Grcce d'autre part, a
collaborer au rcglement pacifique de !curs differends, et a cette fin recommande a ces pays:
1) D'etablir entrc eux, aussitot que possible,
des relations diplomatiques normalcs et des
rapports de bon voisinage;
2) De conclure des accords de fronticre instituant un systeme efficace de reglement et de
controle pour leurs fronticrcs communes qui
permette de rcgler par des moycns pacifiques
les incidents et diffcrends concernant les frontieres;
3 ) De reglcr en cornmun les problernes resultant de la presence de refugies dans les quatre Etat<; intcresscs, en procedant, chaque fois
quc cela scra possible, au rapatriement volontaire et de prendre des mesures cfficaces pour
empecher ces refugies d'avoir une activite politiquc ou militaire;
4) D'etudier la possibilite d'accords sur le
transfert volontairc de minorites;

of minorities;

6. Establishes a Special Committee:
( 1 ) To observe the compliance by the four
Governments concerned with the foregoing
recommendations;
( 2) To be available to assist the four Govern-

ments concerned in the implementation of such
recommendations;
7. Recommends that the four Governments

concerned co-operate with the Special Committee
in enabling it to carry out these functions;
8. Authori.:es the Special Committee, if in its
opinion further consideration of the subject matter of this re,olution by the General A~~embly
prior to its next regular session is necessary for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
to recommend to the 1-1cmbcr:; of the United
Nations th2t a spefr1I se~f.ion of the Gt>ncral As~emhly be convoked as a matter o( urgency;
9. Decidts that the Special Committee
( 1) Shall consist cf representatives uf Australia, Brazil, China, France, Mexico, 1:1c
]'.icth~rlands, Pakistan, the U nitcd I<: inµ;ck,m
and the United State,; of America, ~cats hl'ing
held open for Pflland and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics;
( 2) Shall !ia,;e its principal headquarters in
Salonika and with the co-operation of the hu;·
Governments concerned shall perform its functions in such places and in the territories of the
four States concerned a$ it may deem appropri-

6. Cree une Commission spcciale chargce:
1) D'observer clans quclle m::'.Sure les quatre
Gouvcrncment-; intcresses sc conforment aux
recommandations ci-dessus;
2) D'aider, le cas cchcant, les quatre
Gouvernements interesscs a donner effet a ccs
recommandations;
7. Rci:ommande aux quatre Gouvemements
i~tcrcss(:~,_d'aider cette C~mmission speciale dans
l accomplls.<cP1cnt de sa tache;
B. ,1utorise la Commission speciale, au cas ou
ccllc-ci c'·timcrait qnc le mainticn de la paix et de
la sccuritc intcrnatioruks ncccssite un nouvel
exar.1cn de la q ucst io!l par \'.\!;:cmblcc gencrale
avant .,a prochaine se:-~:ion ordinaire, a recommanckr aiix ,\lcmlirt's des Nations Unics la convn ·ati, m rJ urgcnrc d'unc session cxtranrdinaire
de l'As,cmblfr gcneralc;

'.). lHcide que la Commission spcciale
l I Scrn rnmJ1os11e de representants de l'Australic, du Brcsil, de la Chine, de la France, du
\fcxique, des Pays-Bas, du Pakistan, du
Roya'.~mc-l,:11i et (~es E~at~-Unis d'Amcrique,
des sieges ctant reserves a la Pologne et a
I' U11ion des Republiques socialistes sovictiques;
'.2 I ,turn son siege principal a Salonique et,
en cu!hboration avcc Jes quatre Gouverncmcnts intcresscs, s'acquittera de sa tache dans
ks lieux et parties du territoire des quatre
Etats intfr,·sscs OLI die jugera utile de se rendre;

ate;

3) Present era un rapport a l'Assemblee
gcncralc !ors de sa prochaine session ordinaire
nu !ors Jc toute session extraordinaire qui
pourrait etre convoquee anterieurement pour
ctudier la question qui fait l'objet de la prescnte
resolution; presentera au Secretaire general,
aux fins de transmission aux Membres de l'Or~anisation, tous rapports qu'elle, jugera bon de

( 3) Shall render a report to the next regular
session of the General A%embly and to any
prior special session which might be called to
consider the subject matter of this resolution,
and shall render such interim reports a~ it may
deem appropriate to the Secretary-General for
transmission to the Members of the Organization; in any reports to the General Assembly
13

the Special Committee may make such recommendations to the General Assembly as it deem~
fit;
( 4) Shall determine its own procedure, and !
may establish such sub-committees as it deemf1 !
necessary;
(5) Shall commence its work within thirty
days after the final decision of the General Assembly on this resolution, and shall remain in
existence pending a new decision of the General
Assembly.

I 0. The General Assembly
Requests the Secretary-General to assign to the
Special Committee staff adequate to enable it
to perform its duties, and to enter into a standing arrangement with each of the four Gov-ernments concerned to assure the Special Committee, so far as it may find it necessary to exercise
its functions within their territories, of full freedom of movement and all necessary facilities for
the performance of il'l functions.
Hundredth plenary meeting.
21 October 1947.

110 (II). Measures to be taken against
propaganda and the inciters of a new
war
Whereas in the Charter of the United Nations
the peoples express their determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which twice in our lifetime has brought untold
sorrow to mankind, and to practice tolerance and
live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours, and
Where as the Charter aL'lo calls for the promotion of universal respect for, and observance of,
fundamental freedoms which include freedom of
expression, all Members having pledged themselves in Article 56 to take joint and separate action for such observance of fundamental freedom~.

presenter entre temps; dans les rapports qu'elle
pourra presenter a l' Assemblee generale, la
Commission speciale pourra formuler toute
recommandation qn'elle jugera utile;
4) Fixer a sa propre procedure et pourra
creer des sous-commissions si elle le juge necessaire;
5) Commencera ses travaux dans les trente
jours apres la decision definitive de I' Assemblee
gencrale sur cette resolution et restera en fonctions jusqu'a nouvelle decision de l'Assemblee
gcnerale.

10. L' Assemblee generale
Invite le Secretaire general a mettre a la disposition de la Commission speciale le personnel
nccessaire a l'accomplissement de sa tache, a prcndre une fois pour toutes des dispositions avec
chacun des quatre Gouvernements interesses pour
qu'ils assurent a la Commission speciale, dans la
mesure ou elle aura a. exercer ses fonctions sur leur
territoire, une entiere liberte de mouvement et
toutes les facilites necessaires a l'accomplissement
de sa tache.
Centieme seance pleniere,
le 21 octobre 1947.

110 (II). Mesures a prendre contre la propagande en faveur d'une nouvelle
guerre et contre ceux qui y incitent

Considerant que les peuples ont exprime dans la
Charte des Nations Unies leur resolution de preserver les generations futures du fleau de la guerre
qui, dcux fois en l'espacc d'une vie humaine, a
inflige a l'humanite d'indicibles souffrances, de
pratiquer la tolerance et de vivre en paix l'un avec
l'autre dans un esprit de bon voisinage; et
Considerant que la Charte exige aussi de favoriser le respect universe! et cffectif des libertes
fondamcntales, qui comprennent notamment la
liberte d'expression, tousles Etats s'etant engages,
en vertu de !'Article 56, a agir, tant conjointement
quc- separement, pour assurer !'observance des
obligations nccs de ces libertes fondamentales,
The General Assembly
L' Assemblee glnerale
1. Condemns all fonm of propaganda, in what- '
1. Condamne toute propagande, dans quelque
soever country conducted, which is either de-- pays qu'clle soit mence, qui est destinee ou qui est
signed or likely to provoke or encourage an) de nature a provoquer ou a encourager toute
threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of menace a la paix, rupture de la paix ou tout acte
aggression ;
d'agrcssion;
2. Requests the Government of each Member
2. Invite les Gouvernements de tous les Etats
to take ap_propriate steps within its constitutional Membres a prcndre, dans le cadre de leur conslimits:
titution, des mesures appropriees:
(a) To promote, by all means of publicity and
a) Pour favoriser, par tous moyens de publicitc
propaganda available to them, friendly relatiorn; et de propagande a leur disposition, lcs relations
among nations based upon the Purposes and Prin
amicales entre les nat1ons fondet.-s sur lcs Buts et
ciplcs of the Charter;
Principes de la Chartc;
( b) To encourage the dissemination of all inh I Pour encourager la diffusion de toute inforformation designed to give expn:ssion to the un- mation destincc a cxprimer le desir incontestable
doubted desire of all peoples for peace;
de paix de tous lcs pcuples;
3. Dire<ils that this resolution be comrmmicated
·3_ lJnnande quc la presente resolution soit
to the forthcoming Conference on Freedom of cnmm11niquce it la prochaine Conference sur la
Information.
libert,' de l'information.
Hundred and eighth plenary meeting,
Cent-huitieme seance pleniere,
3 November 1947.
le 3 novembre 1947.
