S/PV.7652

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7652

nd meeting
Friday, 18 March 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Barro
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-07624 (E)
*1607624*

S/PV.7652

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi and the United Republic of
Tanzania to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, Minister for External
Relations and International Cooperation of Burundi.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Zeid Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I warmly welcome the Secretary-General to the
Security Council and I now give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I am pleased to have this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on my visit to
Burundi late last month, which came on the heels of the
Council’s own travel to the country. After a devastating
civil war that claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands
of people, the signing of the Arusha Agreement in
August 2000 put Burundi on the path towards peace
and reconciliation. The effort that ended the civil
war hinged on the willingness of former battlefield
adversaries to sit at the same table and become partners
in Burundi’s common future. During my recent visit
to the country, I urged all Burundian stakeholders to
remember that lesson from their past and show genuine
commitment to an inclusive political dialogue as the
only means to peacefully resolve the crisis.
In order to promote confidence-building, the
Government announced, prior to my visit, the annulment
of the arrest warrants against 15 opposition figures. The
Government also decided to reopen two media outlets
that had previously been banned. Following my meeting
with him in Bujumbura, President Nkurunziza agreed
to release up to 2,000 detainees. We now look forward
2/11

18/03/2016

to the full implementation of those measures and expect
further steps in the same direction, including the release
of all political prisoners and an end to restrictions on
civil society and media organizations. At my invitation,
key political actors from the Government, the ruling
party and opposition parties sat together with me to
discuss the future of the country. Nothing prevents
Burundian political actors from continuing on that
essential course.
Burundi’s political leaders must summon the
necessary courage and confidence to launch a
credible political process and build a future where
the people of Burundi can once again live in peace
and enjoy their fundamental rights. As I reiterated to
President Nkurunziza, the international community
stands ready to support Burundi in advancing a
credible and inclusive dialogue process. The East
African Community, the African Union and the United
Nations must work together to provide the dedicated
and professional mediation support that Burundi
needs and deserves during this challenging time. The
appointment of former President of Tanzania Benjamin
Mkapa as East African Community facilitator is an
encouraging development.
During my visit, I underlined my deep concern
about the volatile situation in the country. I expressed
my profound worry at the potential for the violence
spiralling outward, ending in civil war. I urged the
Government to take measures to address the continued
violence and the impunity that fuels it. The Government
sought to assure me that the situation was gradually
stabilizing. However, in my meetings with civil-society
organizations and opposition parties, I was presented
with a very different picture. I heard deeply disturbing
allegations of continuing violence and human rights
violations, including acts targeting women and
children. Clearly, that is an unacceptable situation, one
that requires the utmost attention to ensure that those
responsible are held accountable for their acts. The
High Commissioner for Human Rights will provide a
more detailed briefing on the human rights situation.
I cannot stress enough the profound humanitarian
consequences that political unrest, violence and
impunity carry for the population. Recent humanitarian
assessments suggest that harvests in crisis-affected
areas have fallen short, and that nearly 700,000 people
now suffer from severe food insecurity in Burundi.
Since the beginning of the crisis, more than a quarter
of a million people have fled Burundi and sought
16-07624

18/03/2016

The situation in Burundi

refuge in neighbouring countries, which have shown
commendable hospitality and solidarity. Despite
the assurances provided by Burundian officials that
refugees are eager to return and that some have already
started doing so, the current number of refugees is
indicative of the distress felt by Burundians over the
continuation of violence and intimidation in their
country. During my meeting, President Nkurunziza
asked for United Nations assistance in securing the safe
and unhindered return of the refugees.
Pursuant to resolution 2248 (2015), my Special
Adviser, Mr. Jamal Benomar, has deployed a team
to Burundi. I would like to thank the Burundian
authorities for the cooperation and access extended to
my Special Adviser and his team. I also welcome the
letter of President Nkurunziza to the Security Council
of 24 January, expressing the willingness of the
Government to work closer with my Special Adviser and
his team on issues of dialogue, security, disarmament,
human rights and development. This is a complex set
of issues and challenges, one on which we stand ready
to fully support Burundi and for which we will require
adequate capacities. The United Nations will continue
to work with the Government to ensure that more
concrete steps are taken to improve the human rights
situation and that all stakeholders are willing to engage
in a genuine and inclusive dialogue in good faith.
There is no alternative to a political settlement of
the Burundian crisis. The international community
must shift its approach from a focus on crisis response
to a culture of early action and prevention. That can
be achieved only if regional and international actors
jointly focus their energy, attention and resources, and
work together without delay to support a nationally
owned inclusive political process in Burundi.

S/PV.7652

Rights, Mr. Ivan Šimonović, and the most recent visit
of independent experts at the request of the Human
Rights Council, those signals have yet to be followed up
with strong and consequential action aimed at engaging
real reconciliation.
After a court hearing of their case, 47 detainees
who had been arrested almost a year ago were been
provisionally freed this week. Those 47 were on the list
of 125 detainees suggested by my Office for immediate
release. We see that as an indication that some effort is
being made to re-establish the rule of law. I strongly
urge the release of all of the others on the list, especially
political prisoners. As just mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral, the Government has further pledged to release
approximately 2,000 prisoners.
The Government has also taken steps to ensure
that one fully independent radio station can operate.
A second radio station, which has also reopened, is
not independent from the Government. That gesture
is encouraging, but falls well short of full freedom
of expression and information. The Government
cooperated with the team of independent experts
mandated by the Human Rights Council during its first
visit to Burundi earlier this month. The experts met with
military, police and intelligence officials, in addition
to victims and several representatives of civil society.
The secretariat of the independent expert team is due
to arrive in April for a four-month deployment, but the
Government’s approval is still pending. It is crucial that
the investigative team be permitted to operate.

Mr. Al Hussein: I thank those present for this
opportunity to discuss my continuing and grave
concerns regarding the human rights situation
in Burundi.

Despite indications of limited progress in some
areas, serious human rights violations continue. My
Office, which has presences in Bujumbura, Gitega,
Makamba and Ngozi, has detected no indication of any
decline in reports of arbitrary arrests and detention.
Indeed, 140 such cases have been recorded this month
so far, most of which were arbitrary. Moreover,
although the numbers are clearly imprecise, we have
seen increased reports of torture and ill-treatment
since the beginning of January. During a recent visit
by my staff to some detention centres in Bujumbura,
it appeared that almost half of the detainees had been
tortured or ill-treated — some of them seriously.

Despite some positive signals by the Government
in recent weeks following visits by a delegation from
the Council, by the Secretary-General and by five
African Heads of State and Government, as well as two
visits by the Assistant Secretary-General for Human

Despite the recent initial steps towards allowing the
operation of a few independent media outlets, critical or
independent voices remain severely restricted. Political
opponents continue to be subjected to intimidation
and arrest. Six days ago, 16 leading members of the

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.

16-076243/11

S/PV.7652

The situation in Burundi

opposition party, the Forces nationales de libération,
were arrested in Kirundo province by police assisted
by Imbonerakure militia members associated with the
ruling party. On 9 March, Hugo Haramategeko, one
of the few national opposition figures remaining in
the country, also was arrested. Civil society continues
to operate within an extremely limited space, with
activists suffering judicial harassment, arrests and
torture, as well as violence and intimidation by agents
of the State or militia associated with the Government.
Since the violent events of December — involving
an armed attack against three military camps around
Bujumba, followed by reports of particularly brutal
crackdowns by security forces in a number of
neighbourhoods — two separate armed groups opposed
to the Government have emerged. Two members of the
ruling party, the Conseil national pour la défense de
la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie,
were killed by gunmen on Monday.
Grenade attacks are an almost daily occurrence,
with grenades being thrown at police or military targets
or indiscriminately tossed into crowds of people. Last
month, Médecins sans Frontières treated more than 115
people who had been wounded by grenades over the
course of just four days. I am very deeply concerned by
the lack of progress in investigating the multiple serious
human rights violations that have been reported over
the past year. I take note of the recently released report
of the commission of inquiry set up by the Ministry of
Justice and led by the Prosecutor-General to investigate
allegations of extrajudicial killings during the events of
11 December 2015. However, I urge further and much
more credible investigations into the alleged multiple
mass graves in the country, the torture, sexual violence
and killings that were reported in December and many
other serious allegations.
Continued human rights violations and impunity
for perpetrators mean that many of Burundi’s people
live in terror. The country remains on the brink of a
sudden escalation of violence of even more massive
proportions. We have already seen hundreds of people
killed, thousands detained and over a quarter of a million
Burundians fleeing to neighbouring countries. The
crisis has devastated Burundi’s economy, compounding
the human rights violations suffered by the people, and
UNICEF reports that the number of children admitted
for severe acute malnutrition in Bujumbura has doubled
between October and December 2015. The crisis has
also created a major humanitarian emergency and
4/11

18/03/2016

contributes to destabilizing the Great Lakes region,
with major implications for regional peace and security.
I note that the European Union (EU), which is
Burundi’s largest aid donor, announced earlier this
week that it would no longer issue funds through or
to the Government. That action was taken in line with
article 96 of the EU-African, Caribbean and Pacific
trade agreement, which calls for the suspension of
development cooperation when essential elements,
such as respect for human rights and the rule of law,
are violated.
The Council has clearly recognized the urgency of
the situation in Burundi. I encourage it to continue to
work to persuade the Government to take significant
steps towards real reconciliation and inclusive national
dialogue. Half-measures will not heal the wounds that
Burundi’s people have suffered. There must be an end to
disappearances, arbitrary arrests, extrajudicial killings
and torture, and there must be clear and public moves
to hold perpetrators to account, including agents of the
State and members of armed groups associated with
the ruling party. Such steps are vital to restoring public
confidence and to placing Burundi on the path towards
development, security, and respect for human rights.
The President: I thank Mr. Al Hussein for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: I am grateful to have this opportunity
to brief the Security Council today on my recent visit
to Burundi, Rwanda and Ethiopia and on the latest
discussions within the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I am also pleased that
His Excellency Mr. Alain Aimé Nyamitwe, Burundi’s
Minister for External Relations and International
Cooperation, is participating in today’s debate, and
I would like to use this opportunity to express my
gratitude to him for the cooperation that the PBC enjoys
with the Government of Burundi in its peacebuilding
engagement. The following remarks were discussed
and agreed on by the member countries of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
including the country concerned, Burundi.
From 15 to 20 February, I undertook my second
regional visit as Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I held consultations
in Bujumbura, Kigali and Addis Ababa. The main
objective of my visit was to pursue the policy dialogue
16-07624

18/03/2016

The situation in Burundi

with the Government of Burundi and other national
and international stakeholders in order to complement
ongoing peacebuilding efforts by the United Nations,
the African Union and the East African Community
(EAC). In Bujumbura I met with the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
and members of his Government, representatives of
political parties, religious leaders, representatives
of the opposition, the Commission for Truth and
Reconciliation, the National Commission for the
Inter-Burundian Dialogue, civil-society organizations,
international and regional financial institutions, human
rights and military observers of the African Union (AU)
and representatives of the international community and
the United Nations family.
From Bujumbura I travelled to Kigali, where I
focused on the humanitarian and regional dimension
of the crisis in my discussions with the Minister for
Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs of Rwanda
and with the country representative of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
In Addis Ababa I held consultations with high-ranking
officials of the African Union, including His Excellency
Mr. Smaïl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, representatives of AU
member States and partners and the United Nations
Special Representative to the African Union. The
special focus of my discussions in Addis Ababa was the
AU engagement in Burundi and cooperation between
the AU and the United Nations.
I have shared the detailed written report of my
visit with members of the Security Council through the
established channel. Today, I would like to share with it
the main takeaway points of my visit and reflect on the
PBC’s continued engagement with Burundi, including
recent contacts with the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank.
After my departure, and prior to the visit of
the Secretary-General and the high-level AU visit
of five African Heads of States and Government,
the Government of Burundi announced a series of
decisions, which included the release of prisoners, the
reopening of two radio stations and the revocation of the
arrest warrants against approximately 15 members of
the opposition, to which the Secretary-General referred
earlier. The members of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission welcome those
steps and encourage their rapid implementation, as
well as additional steps to reinforce the momentum

S/PV.7652

created by those measures and the recent high-level
political engagement.
The urgent need for a viable, inclusive and
intensified dialogue process was underlined by most
interlocutors in Bujumbura, Kigali and Addis Ababa.
Diverging views on the specifics of an inclusive
dialogue persist, however. In Bujumbura, I had an
opportunity to meet with the National Commission
for the Inter-Burundian Dialogue. The Commission
depicted the dialogue as a series of large gatherings
in which participants elaborate their views on how
to create democratic conditions for the Burundian
elections in 2020. Preliminary findings by the National
Commission seem to indicate that a key request of the
population is to amend the Constitution and to revise
the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for
Burdundi, including with regard to ethnic quotas, term
limits for the President and dual citizenship. Some
national and many international observers I met with
expressed concerns that tensions in Burundi could rise
if the current process evolved into a campaign to revise
the Arusha Agreement.
My discussions in Bujumbura also showed that
there was a considerable risk that the economic
downturn could become an additional driver of the
crisis. After 10 years of steady economic growth, the
country experienced negative growth of 4 per cent in
2015. The Government of Burundi expressed its regret
about the fact that some partners had reduced their
cooperation with Burundi. The suspension of direct
budgetary support will have an immediate impact on
public expenditures, which will decrease by 22 per
cent in 2016. I was told by development partners that
the political crisis had slowed the implementation of
strategic programmes, such as those on infrastructure,
roads and electricity. Furthermore, I was informed
that the cycle of cooperation strategies and key
assistance mechanisms used by the main financial and
development partners of Burundi would end in 2016.
Negotiations on a new cycle might take place in a context
of uncertainty, if the current political crisis continues.
Consequently, envelopes allocated to Burundi might be
affected, or the disbursement of funds further delayed.
On the other hand, international donors appeared to be
ready to re-engage if they saw clear sigs towards the
resolution of the current crisis and a more conducive
environment being established. In parallel to a political
dialogue process, the Government of Burundi and
international donors might therefore want to intensify

16-076245/11

S/PV.7652

The situation in Burundi

their conversation on the socioeconomic impact of
the crisis.
I share the assessment of previous briefers that the
ongoing political crisis and insecurity persists, while
the patterns of violent acts committed by elements
of the security forces and armed opposition seem to
change. The use of grenades in public places appears
to be a new trend. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the human rights observers of the African Union,
whom I met with in Bujumbura, confirmed that current
incidents might be less visible than those that took
place after the events of 11 December, but they reported
allegations of forced disappearances, killings, torture,
ill-treatment, hate speech and sexual violence.
On 9 March, I briefed members of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission on my
mission. In a subsequent discussion, the PBC members
reiterated their rejection of violence committed by
either side. Many members expressed grave concern
about the ongoing violence and human rights violations.
Members welcomed the work being done by the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General, Mr. Benomar, and
the deployment of his team in Burundi. They also
expressed support for the Special Adviser, particularly
for his efforts aimed at ensuring coherence between
the different actors. The members of the configuration
further welcomed the recent appointment of the former
President of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, to
facilitate the dialogue process under the East African
Community mediator, President Museveni of Uganda.
EAC members considered the AU decision to deploy
an additional 100 human rights monitors and 100
military experts a positive step towards achieving
general stabilization and an improvement in the human
rights situation. The Peacebuilding Fund is planning
to support the 32 AU human rights observers, who are
already in the country and are cooperating closely with
OHCHR. Other partners are encouraged to consider
contributions to the deployment of additional observers.
With regard to the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), the
joint steering committee that oversees PBF activities in
Burundi decided, on 9 March, to launch new initiatives
in various areas of dialogue, including support for
women’s roles in the dialogue process, the promotion
and protection of human rights, and support for
victims, youth engagement, community security and
social cohesion.
6/11

18/03/2016

From my discussions in the region and within the
Burundi configuration of the PBC, I have drawn the
following conclusions.
First, the resolution of the current crisis in Burundi
will require maximum coherence among international
and regional organizations, in particular among the
United Nations, the AU and the EAC. Coordinated
efforts will be crucial for establishing a viable, inclusive
and intensified political dialogue. Such a process can
only benefit from the accumulated experience of those
three organizations, if the three join their efforts. In
that regard, the Security Council’s overall guidance and
support will be critical.
Secondly, the increased international presence
in Burundi can considerably help to improve the
security and human rights situation and to reduce
violence. It therefore remains crucial that the Security
Council continue its discussion in consultation with
the Government of Burundi on the options for United
Nations engagement. I am glad that the African
Union and the Government of Burundi have agreed
to increase the number of human rights and military
observers. I also welcome the recent visit to Burundi
by three independent experts mandated by the Human
Rights Council, which will be followed by additional
visits between now and July. That sort of impartial
monitoring and engagement can also help to clarify
allegations and ease tensions within Burundian society.
Thirdly, there is a need to draw attention to the
possible regional implications of the crisis.
Fourthly, the socioeconomic dimension of the
current crisis must not be overlooked. In line with
the holistic approach to peacebuilding, the Burundi
configuration can continue to serve as a platform
for including the socioeconomic dimensions in the
international debate on Burundi. For my part, I will
continue the configuration’s engagement with the main
development partners of Burundi. A systematic dialogue
between the Government of Burundi and international
donors would help to clarify mutual expectations. In
that regard, the next cycle of the Burundi povertyreduction strategy paper provides a crucial opportunity
to redefine the Government’s vision and to reset
cooperation with international partners.
The President: I thank Mr. Lauber for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United Republic of Tanzania.
16-07624

18/03/2016

The situation in Burundi

Mr. Manongi (United Republid of Tanzania):
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
briefing on the situation in Burundi.
The President of Tanzania, His Excellency
Mr. John Pombe Magufuli, is acutely aware that the
state of affairs in Burundi is of great concern to the
subregion, and indeed to the international community.
That is not only because Burundi is a State member of
the community, but also because, as a region, we all
stand to suffer adverse consequences resulting from
the insecurity and instability in Burundi. We therefore
commend the Secretary-General’s efforts to promote
cooperation with Burundi and the region. We also
ask that those welcome efforts be balanced by equal
measures to enhance support for the socioeconomic
needs of the people of Burundi, as well as to assist
the country in its efforts to strengthen its institutions
of governance. Obviously, there are a number of push
factors driving the current state of play that need to
be approached and resolved in an open, inclusive and
comprehensive manner. We thank those who have
supported our efforts. Nonetheless, there is no doubt
that more support is required in order to sustain a
credible and inclusive dialogue in Burundi.
The East African Community will continue to exert
all efforts in support of peace and security in Burundi.
The region is conscious that, if left unchecked, the
political situation there has the potential to degenerate
further, with far-reaching humanitarian implications.
The East African Community is ready to play its part.
We welcome the engagement of the United Nations
and look forward to its playing a complementary
and mutually supportive role. We are encouraged
by, and indeed grateful for, the confidence that has
been expressed in connection with the appointment
of Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa, former President
of the United Republic of Tanzania, as a facilitator
in support of the mediator for the Burundi peace
process, Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of
the Republic of Uganda. In his efforts to assist Burundi
and its people during the Arusha peace process in 2000,
President Mkapa had this to say:
“A sustainable solution to the Burundi conflict
has to come out of negotiations in which all who
have a stake in Burundi can freely participate. A
sustainable solution has to be owned and respected
by all participants in the peace process. The outside
world cannot impose a durable solution.”

S/PV.7652

We believe that that admonition remains true for the
circumstances that we are dealing with today in Burundi.
It is therefore encouraging that President Mkapa is
currently making a preliminary visit to the region in
order to ensure that there is a shared understanding of
his new mandate. He has assured community leaders
of his mission’s dedication, openness and inclusiveness.
He needs, and deserves, the genuine support and
cooperation of all parties in Burundi, the region and the
international community. We expect all stakeholders to
be forthcoming and to commit to a speedy, genuine and
successful outcome. The subregion will not hesitate to
seek and call for the imposition of stern measures on
any individuals or groups that attempt to act as spoilers
of the undertaking. In the meantime, we call for unity
of purpose and action as we promote the process for
a journey of great hope and expectations embodied in
the legitimate aspirations of the people of Burundi,
the East African Community, the African Union and,
indeed, the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for External Relations and International Cooperation
of Burundi.
Mr. Nyamitwe (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Angola on
your leadership of the Security Council for the month
of March, and to thank you for organizing today’s
briefing on the situation in Burundi. I am grateful to
the Secretary-General for his presence today and would
like to thank him, personally and on behalf of President
Nkurunziza and the people of Burundi, for his recent
visit to our country. I must also not fail to thank the
Security Council for its visit to Burundi in January. I
am also grateful to the other speakers for the quality of
their contributions to today’s meeting, even while I am
sure they will understand if I cannot fully agree with the
statement by Mr. Al Hussein. One sometimes wonders
whether he understands the situation in our country,
since his statement has so many gaps, so many troubling
facts and, frankly speaking, so many contradictions. In
my statement, I would like to emphasize some essential
aspects of the political, security and human rights
situations in Burundi.
With regard to the political dialogue, we are aware
that the current political problems facing Burundians
can be solved only through an inclusive, open and
sincere dialogue among Burundians themselves, both
inside and outside the country, conducted correctly

16-076247/11

S/PV.7652

The situation in Burundi

and holistically. The Head of State has already
committed to undertaking that dialogue, and he already
communicated his willingness in that regard to the
Secretary-General during his visit on 3 February, and
to the high-level delegation of the African Union, led
by President Jacob Zuma of South Africa, which visited
Bujumbura in the wake of the unfortunate hearing of
25 February.
We are in complete agreement that it is clear that
a political solution must be preferred to a military one.
It is true that there are still parties in Burundi who
believe in a military solution, but we believe that they
are mistaken. One of the recommendations made at the
meeting of the Ministers of Defence of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region held on
10 February in Luanda called on all stakeholders to
engage in the inter-Burundian dialogue, which is the
best way to build peace and unity for the Burundian
people. Yes, the dialogue we want should be inclusive,
but we should nonetheless be able to express our oftrepeated position that those who joined in the attempt
to overthrow our legitimate institutions on 13 May 2015
can obviously not be granted an opportunity to achieve
through dialogue what they failed to achieve through a
coup d’état.
It is therefore understandable that the dialogue
cannot be used as a way to disguise or reinforce a culture
of impunity in Burundi or to trample on universally
recognized principles of democracy. Rather, dialogue
should be a way to consolidate peace and social justice.
We have therefore committed in good faith to such
a political dialogue, whose internal momentum is
well under way under the leadership of the National
Commission on the Inter-Burundian Dialogue, which
is working hard throughout the country to ensure that
no one is left out. In any case, all Burundian citizens
are invited to contribute to our national reconstruction.
With regard to national reconciliation, the President
of the Republic announced a week ago the official start
of the operational phase of the National Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in the presence of several
of our international, technical and financial partners.
As the Council is aware, the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, which is chaired by a cleric, consists
of 11 members, of whom six are Hutu, four Tutsi and
one Twa, which corresponds to the quotas recognized
by the Arusha accord and confirmed by the 2005
Constitution. The Commission therefore symbolizes
political, ethnic, regional and gender inclusiveness.
8/11

18/03/2016

It is tasked with preparing a programme for pardons,
reconciliation and reparation to be submitted to the
Government and Parliament of Burundi. Burundi must
take advantage of such an opportunity to work calmly
to build their country’s future in order to ensure that the
events of the past can never be repeated. We are talking
about a huge work in progress — as the Arusha accord
foresaw — to which Burundi’s Head of State attaches
enormous importance, and we will of course be very
happy if the international community would lend us
its assistance.
On the regional front, consultations are ongoing with
subregional facilitation in order to arrive at agreement
on important points for the next dialogue session with
those members of the diaspora who desire peace, with
full inclusivity, as was outlined in resolution 2248
(2015), adopted by the Security Council on 12 November
of last year. Among other things, those points concern
the effective identification of participants as well as the
items on the agenda, in accordance with the proposed
methodology, with which Burundi is in full agreement.
We are grateful to the former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, the new
facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, who is, as
the representative of Tanzania just mentioned, fully
involved in consultations in the region. The day before
yesterday he was received by President Museveni of
Uganda, yesterday he was received in President Kagame
of Rwanda and today he was received by President
Pierre Nkurunziza of Burundi. As I speak, I think he is
on his return journey.
With regard to security, I can confirm that overall
it is good. It is true that there are still some challenges
here and there, but overall the situation is good at the
national level and citizens see peaceful activities.
However, there are still some elements of the opposition
who are throwing grenades at peaceful citizens; I think
others have referred to that. Contrary to the information
provided by the opposition to the foreign press and
associated or supportive media, Burundi is not guilty
of those crimes. If you come to Burundi you will see
that the image that is being put out by the media is
not true at all. The good news is that the few cases of
criminality and local terrorism aimed at drawing the
attention of the international community are being
brought under control.
Several young people who were manipulated and
recruited into criminal groups gave themselves up to the
security services with weapons, ammunition and other
16-07624

18/03/2016

The situation in Burundi

military paraphernalia, and this movement to renounce
violence continues. The criminal elements who turned
themselves in were turned over to the National Human
Rights Commission for their reintegration into their
communities of origin. They are cooperating and have
indicated certain locations where these opposition
groups have killed and buried citizens in common
graves. Today another common grave was found in a
zone that was under the control of the opposition for a
long time.
For us and for the Council it is clear that throwing
grenades into crowds is terrorism, which must be
treated and condemned as such. No ideology, no
political fight can justify such senseless acts that take
the lives of children and women, who have nothing to
do with the political situation in the country. We ask the
Security Council to condemn the opposition’s violence
and terrorism, which contravenes the provisions of
resolution 2248 (2015).
In order to restore sustainable peace to our country,
we have placed the civilian population at the heart of
the Government’s concerns. The process is under way
and the results have been satisfactory. Because of the
cooperation among the population, the police, the
justice sector and the administration, many weapons
have been seized from citizens.
In order to continue with the disarmament
process in transparency and cooperation, as the Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission said earlier, there is a need for an
international presence. That is the reality with the
presence of African Union human rights and military
observers, whose numbers have now been increased to
100 in each of the two categories. Although we will
soon sign the memorandum of understanding, that has
already been agreed; of course, we now have to wait for
the personnel to be identified and sent to the country.
My country Burundi cannot remain silent. We will
never be able to remain silent while we are subject to
aggression. This clearly represents an existential threat.
This has to do with acts of aggression coming from
Rwanda, a neighbouring country with which Burundi
has much in common in terms of culture. Our languages
are not that dissimilar. Several credible reports have
already confirmed that Rwanda is facilitating the
recuitment, the training and the arming of Burundian
refugees in order to destabilize Burundi. I cannot give
the Council the full list, but if one wants to know more

S/PV.7652

you can read the report of the United Nations Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the reports of Refugees International and Human
Rights Watch. There is irrefutable proof available to
us going back to the beginning of the insurrection in
2015, as well as the testimonials of children who were
recuited and trained by Rwanda into the movement.
They refer to specific military sites.
We have also provided similar information to
institutions. The Head of State in Burundi took the
opportunity to mention that clearly to the SecretaryGeneral when he visited Burundi. It is something we
take very seriously. We cannot remain silent in that
regard. Let no one be under any illusions about that.
As long as the situation persists, we must talk about
it so that these activities stop. It is difficult today
to know who is behind these acts — with so much
information, proof and details available to Burundi
as well as to the international community. On several
occasions, Burundi has asked for an expanded joint
verification mission from the Conference on the Great
Lakes Region be sent to Burundi to clarify matters and
determine whether those allegations are well-founded
or not. That has not been the case; nevertheless, that has
not discouraged us in the least.
Through our Permanent Mission in New York,
Burundi has officially asked the President of the Security
Council to address the issue urgently, as it seriously
threatens international peace and security — not just
in Burundi and Rwanda, but also the whole region.
The time to act is now, as tomorrow will be too late.
Today our Government once again launches an appeal
to the Security Council to remind Rwanda that it has
international obligations in terms of refugees as well as
in terms of good neighbourliness. There are resolutions
and instruments to which it freely adhered that call
for respect for the peaceful coexistance of States in
accordance with international law. Its recruitment
activities must stop; the training and arming of negative
forces that are attacking Burundi must also stop. We
hope that that Council will accede to our request.
With regard to human rights, my delegation recalls
that Burundi attaches great importance to human
rights. We have adopted a zero-tolerance policy in
this area. We acknowledger that there are still cases
of human rights violations, as there are elsewhere. We
have established a judicial investigation commission
to shed light into certain allegations of human rights
violations from the beginning of the insurrection up

16-076249/11

S/PV.7652

The situation in Burundi

until today. The human rights path in Burundi is not a
rocky one; there are challenges, yes, but we have faith
that we can overcome them. The willingness is there. It
is palpable. The support of partners is needed to move
forward together on the path towards democracy.
We also recall that our Government has placed the
fight against impunity at the heart of its priorities. That
is done without concern for political affiliations. We
cooperate closely with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. He knows that
well, as does his office in Burundi. We have given them
free access to our services regarding transparency
issues. The same goes for the human rights observers
of the African Union, the number of which, as I just
mentioned, has just been increased. Of course, we regret
the fact that certain reports do not necessarily reflect
the situation on the ground. We can say that this is more
or less to be expected, within certain limitations.
We have been just as cooperative with the human
rights experts of the United Nations who have just spent
time in our country. At the end of their mission a few
days ago, the experts held a press conference during
which they declared:
“We have observed a relative calm in Burundi.
We should point out that we have not noted a
disturbance. We have noticed a glimmer of hope,
a clear and shared will to engage and to move
forward to improve peace and security in Burundi.
Within the framework of our mission, we cannot
say that the situation in Burundi is an explosive
one — absolutely not.”
With regard to the freedom of expression and of civil
society, I wish to inform all present that Burundi has a
good tradition of freedom of expression and very active
civil society that we wish to maintain. In that regard,
we have just authorized the re-opening of two private
radio stations that had been destroyed in the wake of the
attempted coup of 13 May 2015. I am speaking of Radio
Isanganiro and Rema Television and Radio, which have
already begun to broadcast. In addition to those two
radio stations, which have resumed their activities, the
National Communications Directorate has also just
authorized a private radio station, Izere FM.
With regard to socioeconomic development, my
delegation has the impression that the political concerns
of our partners have eclipsed the economic and social
needs of our population. Clearly, placing political
aspects before socioeconomic concerns is a factor that
10/11

18/03/2016

could lead to increased stability in our country. The
two dimensions should receive equal attention from our
partners, whom we ask to resume cooperation with our
Government, which seeks to do the proper thing. We
ask our partners to seriously consider the appeal made
the President of South Africa, Jacob Zuma, on behalf
of the African Union high-level delegation to Burundi,
with regard to the importance of resuming cooperation
as a factor for strengthening peace.
With regard to cooperation with the European
Union, my Government takes note of its recent
declaration relating to the suspencion of direct aid
of the European Union to Burundi. Contrary to what
Mr. Zeid said just now, we do not have the impression
that this decision is in accordance with article 96 of the
Cotonou Agreement. There are clearly two parties to
any agreement. No party cannot take advantage of its
greater strength, be it numeric or qualitative, to impose
on the other party its vision of the situation or, quite
frankly, its political preference. This is indeed a clear
violation of the Cotonou Agreement, which the African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries will at some
point have to review to ensure improved fairness, even
if there is no real equality, between the ACP countries
and the European Union. As I said, the Agreement is
not a one-way street.
The Burundian Government regrets the fact that
European Union has not taken into account positive
developments in the ongoing inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue or recently adopted human rights measures,
including the pardoning of more than 2,000 prisoners
and the cancellation of arrest warrants against certain
politicians, the liberation of a number of people who
had been detained with respect to the insurrection, and
the the re-opening of a number of private radio stations.
Despite this hasty and unfair decision, my Government
will continue wholeheartedly to redress the political
and security situations in the interests of the wellbeing of the Burundian people, while bearing in mind
our sovereignty, territorial integrity and good relations
with our partners.
Regarding cooperation with the United Nations,
Burundi offers —
I repeat, offers — its full
cooperation with the country team, the team of the
Special Adviser of the Secretary-General, as well
as the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Burundi remains available to the
Secretary-General to discuss and agree on the size
16-07624

18/03/2016

The situation in Burundi

and mission of the Special Adviser’s team provided for
under resolution 2248 (2016).
My delegation recalls that African Heads of State,
members of the African Union Peace and Security
Council (AUPSC), the high-level delegation of the
African Union led by South African President Jacob Zuma
and the Burundian people, through their Parliament,
rejected the option of an armed international presence
in Burundi, favouring the option of the inter-Burundian
political dialogue and observation missions. We clearly
reiterate our unequivocal position. The Head of State
reiterated this position to the Secretary-General during
their talks of 23 February in Bujumbura.
I would like to conclude my remarks with two
or three words. When the Council receives reports
on Burundi in New York, it gets the impression that
the country is on the precipice, as has often repeated
Mr. Zeid. This perception of the country has led some
institutions to make decisions that, in our opinion, were
unfortunate — such the as AUPSC decision to deploy
5,000 men. This decision was not based on realities on
the ground.
We do not at all feel that we have closed the door to
initiatives that would be willing to take the reality on
the ground into account. Whenever the Peacebuilding
Commission has sought to visit and see Burundi, it
has been able to do so without problem. The Security
Council has come and it has seen that Burundi was not

S/PV.7652

on the brink of genocide. I very sincerely and solemnly
urge those who would understand the reality on the
ground to come themselves to see it rather than rely on
reports that are sometimes not necessarily a reflection
of reality on the ground and seek or serve other
interests that are certainly contrary to the interests of
the Burundian people and the region in general.
My country, Burundi, my people, the people
of Burundi — Hutus, Tutsis and Twas together —
aspire to peace. Burundi absolutely aspires to peace.
The Burundian people have suffered in the past and
certainly would not wish to find themselves today or
in the coming years in the same conditions in which
they found themselves in 1965, 1969, 1972, 1993 and
beyond. That is why we invite not only members of
the Security Council, but also all the countries of the
region to work for the country to remain stable, so that
the institutions are stable and not disrupted, and to
help the Burundian people to realize their aspirations
to participate legitimately, like all other peoples of
the world, in all that globalization can offer today in
material terms, and to cushion the shocks that this same
globalization can bring to the peoples of the South.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

16-0762411/11
