S/2007/695

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 November 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 30 November 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to the exchange of letters between my predecessor and the
President of the Security Council, dated 29 September 2006 (S/2006/778) and
17 October 2006 (S/2006/819), on the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission and with respect to the continuation of the activities of the
United Nations team supporting the work of the Mixed Commission, with funding
from the regular budget. In the same spirit, by the present letter, I would like to
inform you of the latest achievements and activities undertaken by the Mixed
Commission as it continues to support and facilitate the peaceful implementation of
the 12 October 2002 ruling of the International Court of Justice on the
Cameroon/Nigeria border dispute.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and the maritime boundary, facilitating the withdrawal and
transfer of authority along the boundary, addressing the situation of affected
populations and making recommendations on confidence-building measures. With
the final appropriation of $14,338,400 from the regular budget for the biennium
2006-2007 and the appropriation of $6,856,900 for 2007, the Mixed Commission
has been able to move the process forward in a smooth and peaceful manner, and to
promote dialogue and communication between the two countries. The following are
some of the activities for which the United Nations support team has provided
substantive, technical and logistical support to the Mixed Commission.
The four sections of the ruling of the International Court of Justice, comprising
the withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area in December 2003,
along the land boundary in July 2004, the agreement on the modalities of
withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Bakassi peninsula in June 2006 and the
delineation of the maritime boundary, agreed upon in May 2007, have been
resolved. In addition, United Nations civilian observers have concluded that the
prevailing situation concerning the rights of affected populations is satisfactory.
Concerning the demarcation of the 1,950-kilometre land boundary, so far more than
700 kilometres have been demarcated. Around 900 kilometres of land boundary will
be assessed before the end of 2007. Progress has also been achieved in the
implementation of confidence-building measures. A transborder multinational
highway project is being formulated. Initiatives on social amenities within the Lake
Chad area are being promoted, and support for resource mobilization for the Lake
Chad Basin Commission has been provided. Additional confidence-building projects
to be submitted to partners for extrabudgetary funding and covering sections of the
07-62246 (E) 041207

*0762246*

S/2007/695

boundary in the Lake Chad area, the land boundary and the Bakassi peninsula, are
being formulated.
The follow-up Committee established to monitor the implementation of the
Greentree Agreement of 12 June 2006, concerning the modalities of withdrawal and
transfer of authority in the Bakassi peninsula, has continued to hold regular
meetings preceded by field visits to the peninsula. In 2007, the Committee held
three meetings (19 March, 2-5 May and 25-27 July). To facilitate the monitoring of
the prevailing situation in the Bakassi peninsula, the Mixed Commission opened an
outstation in Calabar, Nigeria, in October 2007, which works in liaison with the
office of the United Nations civilian observers team based in Yaoundé.
In 2008, the Mixed Commission will focus on accelerating the land
demarcation exercise and on enhancing confidence-building activities. Regarding
the demarcation exercise, the Mixed Commission expects to complete the field
assessment of the land boundary by the end of 2008 and intends to contract the first
phase of the pillar emplacement by the beginning of 2008. Other activities related to
demarcation (quality assurance of geodetic stations, and the ground control points
measurement) are expected to be contracted by the end of 2008. Furthermore, the
Mixed Commission is fully committed to contributing to a consultative and
transparent approach towards minimizing the impact of demarcation on the affected
populations and preventing the occurrence of serious disputes. The use of a United
Nations civilian observer team responds to the need to safeguard the rights of the
affected populations.
In particular, consultations between the Chairman of the Mixed Commission
and United Nations agencies in Cameroon have led to the formulation of a United
Nations joint programme on humanitarian and development issues in support of
affected populations in the boundary areas in Cameroon.
With regard to confidence-building measures, the Mixed Commission will, in
2008, continue to support efforts aimed at ensuring the security and welfare of the
affected populations, as well as promoting initiatives in order to enhance trust
between the two Governments and their peoples. Key areas identified for action by
Governments and their partners entail assistance in food security, education, health,
water and basic infrastructure, including the rehabilitation of the Mutengene-Abakiliki
highway. The Mixed Commission further wishes to encourage environmental
projects, as well as the revitalization of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
Concerning the Bakassi peninsula, the transfer of authority in the Zone is
expected to be completed by August 2008, in compliance with the terms of the
Greentree Agreement of 12 June 2006. In addition, further to the conclusion in May
2007 of the implementation of the International Court of Justice judgment of
10 October 2002 concerning the maritime boundary between the two countries, the
Mixed Commission will contribute to the reaching of an agreement on oil and gas
fields straddling the maritime boundary between the two countries. The Mixed
Commission plans to further contribute to determining the maritime tripoint
between Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria.
I would like to recall that up to 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period 2004-2007, the activities of
the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular budget. The
Governments of Austria, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan, Sweden and

2

07-62246

S/2007/695

Uruguay have provided in kind support for the substantive and technical work of the
Mixed Commission, including military and legal experts. In addition, logistical
support was provided by the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria, while the two
countries, as well as Canada, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the European Union made voluntary financial contributions to the trust
fund for demarcation activities.
Given the cost-effective nature of this mission and the important tasks
remaining at this juncture in the work of the Mixed Commission, and taking into
account that the Presidents of Cameroon and Nigeria, at Greentree in June 2006,
renewed once again their commitment to pursue the peaceful implementation of the
ruling of the International Court of Justice and to work together to move the process
forward until its completion, it is my intention to ask for additional resources from
the regular budget for 2008 for the support team of the Mixed Commission to help
advance the peaceful implementation of the ruling of the International Court of
Justice.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-62246

3
